 Paul Antonio, Russel Ikin, Tom Broda, Kim Bryan, Mary Lindsay, Ferdie McDonald, Sue Nicholson, Paula Regan, Nigel Ritchie, Carey Scott, Giles Sparrow, Steve Setford, Alison Sturgeon, Claire Tennant-Scull, Miezan Van
 A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress . The book was published in 1916 .
 The book is published in Singapore by Star Standard PTE Ltd. Color reproduction by Media Development Printing Ltd.
 Simon Adams, Lindsay Allen, Robin Archer, Emma Flatt, Abbie Gometz, Reg Grant, Alwyn Harrison, Lan Harrison, James Harrison, Michael Jordan, Ann Kay, Paul Kriwaczek, Keith Laidler .
 Dr. lain Morley and Dr. Angus Lockyer, Department of History SOAS, UK; How We Know Dr. Morley . Dr. Lockyer: "How We Know Morley is a great story of American history"
 The human family tree from our earliest relatives to the dominance of Homo sapiens . MYA— 5000 BCE: 5000 BCE . My family tree includes our remote ancestors, our remote relatives .
 The Art of Communication 20: The emergence of speech, language, and artistic ability in early humans . The first language, art, art and culture emerged from early human origins .
 The Ice Age 22 Climate changes that began about 1. million years ago and how they affected humans . Climate changes began 1.million years ago . Ice Age was the most intense period of ice age .
 Out of Africa 24 The migrations from Africa that resulted in human colonization of Earth . The migration of Africa resulted in the creation of Earth's first humans .
 Hunters and Gatherers 50 The prehistoric way of life . Foraging and hunting for food . Prehistoric way of living .
 Early rituals and beliefs in the afterlife . The Spirit World . The development of societies based on agriculture and the domestication of animals .
 Village Life 58: The cultivation of domestic crops and livestock brought about the first settled communities . Village Life is the first Village Life Village in the world .
 Rites and Rituals 40: Unraveling the mysteries of megalithic structures such as Stonehenge .
 Precious Metal 42: From copperworking to the Bronze Age, the impact of the discovery of metalworking has been on the rise . Precious metal 42: The impact of copperworking will be seen on the ground for the first time in the world .
 Town Planning 44: The development of increasingly complex and expanding communities . Town planning 44: Developing increasingly complex, expanding communities. Developing an increasingly complex community.
 The rise of complex societies between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers in Mesopotamia . The Cradle of Civilization 54: Mesopotamian culture is the cradle of civilization .
 The Divine Pharaohs were part of Egypt's Old Kingdom, which flourished on the banks of the Nile River, over 2000 years BCE, and saw the construction of the pyramids . They were the first to build the Egyptian pyramids on the Nile .
 The cities and civilization that developed in the Indian subcontinent's Indus Valley are known as the Indusas Valley .
 The independent development of writing systems throughout the world, including cuneiform and hieroglyphs . The Writing on the Wall: The Independent Development of Writing Systems .
 Egypt in Order and Chaos 64 The rise and fall of ancient Egypt from the order of the Middle and New Kingdoms to the chaotic Intermediate Periods . The film is based on the work of Egypt's first Egyptian king .
 E RAMESES Il 66 The Realm of Osiris 68 The cult of the god Osiris, and the extensive rituals surrounding death and the afterlife in ancient Egypt . ll EGYPTIAN ARTIFACTS 70 Building for Eternity 72 The architecture of ancient empires, including the monumental tombs of
 The Olmecs and the Chavins were the first great civilizations of Mesoamerica and South America . They were the two most ancient civilizations of the region . People of the Jaguar lived in the region of Mexico .
 Minoans flourished on the Mediterranean island of Crete during the Bronze Age . Europe’s First Civilization 76 The Minoan .
 The diplomatic and trading community of civilizations that existed in the Middle East, and the mysterious collapse of the Bronze Age system . Bronze Age Collapse is a mystery .
 The complex network of trade routes that developed over the Mediterranean Sea and across the deserts of Arabia and Africa . Conquering Sea and Desert 82 .
 The Achaemenid empire of Persia stretched across Asia to the Mediterranean . The Persian Empire was on an unprecedented scale, stretching across the world .
 The Greek City-States are the great city-states of ancient Greece, including Athens, Sparta, and Corinth . The Greeks in Asia is the aftermath of Alexander the Great's conquests in the Middle East and Asia, and the cultures that adopted Greek ideas .
 The ""Warring States"" period gave rise to the Qin state . The Unification of China was the first Chinese state of Qin . The Qin state became the state of China .
 The Centralized State of Han Dynasty China and the development of its highly efficient civil service . China's civil service was highly efficient .
 The trading centers and empires of Africa include Great Zimbabwe, Songhay, and Mali . South of the Sahara 18: Africa .
 The 30 Years War was the most devastating and costly war the world had yet seen . The 30 years war was one of the most costly and costly wars ever seen .
 Total War War in the Atlantic, North Africa, and the turning tide against Nazi Germany . Total War in North Africa and turning tide of WWII in North America .
 The assertion of independent rule by the former colonies in Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia . The end of the Colonial Era is marked by the end of colonial rule .
 The Sixties were the decade that changed attitudes in Germany . Sexual equality, radical politics, and pop music were key issues .
 As a result, I hated it, and never saw the connections between the various strands of the subject and the subject . As a writer, I was never able to see the connections in the story of the book .
 "I now realize that history is important and that we can all learn from the triumphs and mistakes of our ancestors," she says .
 History is a reference book that teases out the sparks of wars and revolutions, and uncovers the deep roots of great civilizations . Both utterly fascinating and hugely informative, History is .
 It brings the subject to life, painting broad pictures of history’s great sweep . It aims to excite and enthuse the reader by focusing on the most interesting, exciting, and dynamic people, events, and ideas .
 The photographs, maps, and graphics throughout History are spectacular, compelling you to dip in and discover what each page will reveal . The photographs and maps throughout History will be spectacular .
 20 stone circles jut out from the bare, peaty landscape at Callanish, Scotland . The ancient standing stones are thought to date back to the Bronze Age .
 The stones have weathered through 4,000 years of human history . The primary purpose of these stones seems to have been to mark a curious lunar event that happens only once every 18.61 years .
 Most subjects, however vast in scale, are presented within self-contained spreads . One of the joys of this book is that most subjects are presented in self contained spreads .
 Some describe hundreds of years of ancient Egyptian civilization . Others describe momentous periods of upheaval like the religious Reformation in 17th-century Europe or the Industrial Revolution of the 19th century .
 Others take as their theme much shorter periods of history, such as the English Civil War, or the Russian Revolution .
 There are also spreads devoted to ‘Decisive Moments’, key events that proved to be historical turning points, for example the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand, which triggered World War I . The 1755 Lisbon earthquake shook Europe to its foundations .
 A key strand in the book focuses on the ideas that have changed the world . The book explores concepts such as democracy, evolution, and globalization .
 It also features biographies of some of history’s most important and influential individuals from Alexander the Great to Adolf Hitler . The book is available on Amazon.com .
 As an enthusiast of science and technology, I am delighted to see coverage of the crucial innovations, inventions, scientific discoveries, and theories that have had an impact on the human story .
 Evidence of the earliest hominins, the ancestors of modern humans, has been found in Central and East Africa, and dates back millions of years . Evidence of homininins is found in central and east Africa .
 Discoveries of early human remains reveal remarkable ability to adapt to Earth’s changing environment that has been so significant in the evolution of our species . Discoveries reveal the remarkable ability of adapting to Earth's changing environment .
 Ardipithecus ramidus, an early ancestor of modern humans, was found in Ethiopia . It is believed to be the first known human ancestor to have lived in the region of Ethiopia .
 A Homo sapiens skull 30,000 va 150,000 YA Emergence of first Homo Sapiens, Africa; subsequently coexists with Homo erectus in Asia and Homo neanderthalensis in Europe and Middle East . Cro-Magnon cave art and decorated artifacts in Western
 Rising temperatures, retreating ice sheets, rising sea levels . Mammoth-bone v house -a 20,000 YA -a 10,000 scc .
 Evidence of early sheep and goat 1 domestication in | northern Mesopotamia . Sheep domestication was likely to have occurred in Mesopotamian times .
 Ice Age populations live by hunting and gathering, building shelters from available resources . Ice Age population lived by hunting, gathering and building shelters . Ice age populations lived in Ice Age times when they gathered food and shelter .
 Measured against the estimated 4.5-billion-year-old age of Earth itself, the Neanderthals . Jomon pottery p has been found in Jomon, Japan, Japan .
 By about 24,000 years ago, Homo sapiens, socially humans, had become the sole human species . Homo sapien evolved remarkably more sophisticated, having evolved remarkably sophisticated .
 Modern man—Homo sapiens—appeared only about 150,000 in the Middle East, about 6,000 years ago . Man first appeared in the region about 150K years ago and settled and increasingly years ago.
 With them came the first cities and the first species—Homo erectus in Asia and, across Europe and the Middle East, states . With them, the first city cities and first species of Homo erectus were born .
 First use of plow in Mesopotamia was the birth of civilization as we know it today .
 Early town cultures, such as the Halafian in southwest Asia, flourish . I 1 6000 BCE . Early city cultures flourish .
 5500 BCE World's earliest irrigation system, Mesopotamia. Mesopotamian vase, Uruk ih .
 W Domesticated cattle Nekhen ivory > 5500-4500 BCE 4500 BCE Linearbandkeramik Js Introduction of ~ 4 farming culture J irrigation techniques flourishes, Central E in Indus valley . 4500-5000 BCE Linear bandkeramak .
 Stone circles and rows of standing stones built in north and west Europe . Stone circles were built in northern and west European .
 No one knows when human beings first appeared . Halaf figurine figurine was created by Halaf in the ancient world .
 Humans are classified as primates, a group that includes apes and monkeys . The family of humans is one of the world's largest primates .
 Our closest living relatives are chimpanzees, with whom we share almost 99 percent of our genes, but this tiny genetic difference is what makes us so far SM n removed from apes .
 Sahelanthropus tchadensis 18, found at the southern edge of the Sahara in Chad, dating to between 6 and 7 mya .
 Although very early, this skull seems more advanced in some ways than later species . It is unclear how it fits into the evolutionary story .
 Other very early ancestors about whom very little is known include Orrorin tugenensis and Ardipithecus ramidus . Other early ancestors include Ororororititithecus tugenenensis .
 Evolutionary biologists have developed a way of dating the evolution of more than 60 primate species . The clock has been used to date evolution of over 60 species .
 The clock starts with the last common ancestor of all primates about 63 mya . It dates the split between chimpanzees and humans to about 6. mya. The split between humans and chimpanzees is 6.Mya .
 Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania is the most important prehistoric site in the world . Many finds that have furthered our knowledge of early human evolution have been made .
 The oldest artifacts found at the gorge are 2 million years old . Stone flakes and tools were found in the gorge at the time .
 Early humans tamed fire by taking branches from a blazing tree caused by a lightning strike . Possibly around 1. million years ago and certainly by 500,000 years ago—the date is uncertain—tamed fire .
 The control of fire enabled humans to live in cold environments, and in deep caves, and provided protection against predators . It enabled people to live with cold environments and protected against predators, experts say .
 Use of fire to cook also led to a greater variety of foods in the diet . The use of fire led to the use of a wider variety of food choices .
 Evolution of modern humans extends back millions of years . The evolution of modern human beings is the result of the discovery of our remote ancestors .
 Charles Darwin identified tropical Africa as the cradle of humankind . It is not easy to trace, as our evidence comes from scattered, unrelated finds, making it difficult to form a cohesive picture .
 A wide range of fossil finds provide evidence of a remarkable diversity of early hominins that flourished in this area . Early homininins flourished in the area of this area.
 The term used to refer to all early humans and their ancestors, including Homo erectus, Homo ergaster, Homo neanderthalis and Homo sapiens . The term is also used in reference to the early human ancestors of Homo Homo Homo .
 Also includes all the Australopithecines, Paranthropus boisei, and Ardipithecus . Also includes Paranthropi, Ardiphithecus, and other ancient homenas .
 Ardipithecus anamensis, a small forest-living primate, flourished in Afar, Ethiopia, some 4. mya. It is one of the earliest known human ancestors . Ardithecus lived in the forests of Afar and lived in Ethiopia .
 Ardipithecus was probably the ancestor of the T va f Australopithecines—highly diverse hominins that appeared for the first time one million years later . The first homininins appeared in the first million years of human life .
 Australopithecus afarensis was famously nicknamed “Lucy” by the archaeologists who found her in 1974 . The earliest found, Australophethetcus, was nicknamed ‘Lucy,’ by archaeologists .
 ‘Lucy’ is an important link between us and our treedwelling ancestors . As such, Lucy is important to us, as well as our ancestors . Lucy is a vital link between our ancestors and our human ancestors .
 By 3 mya, the Australopithecines had diversified into many forms . The next generation was the next generation .
 They flourished throughout much of sub-Saharan Africa, especially in more open grasslands . They flourished in much of the continent's grasslands, especially open grasses .
 Australopithecus africanus were skilled at scavenging meat from predator kills . They were skilled hunters who scavenged meat from predators .
 Ancestors of modern humans appeared about 2 mya in eastern Africa, quickly spreading to the west . The first humans appeared around 2.5 mya .
 Tools dating from 1. mya have been found in a dry stream bed at Koobi Fora on the shore of Lake Turkana, Kenya . Tools dating back to 1.1 mya were found in the dry streambed on the shores of the lake .
 It is not known who the tool users were, but they may have been some of the earliest humans, possibly a group who paused here and butchered antelope . The tool users are thought to be the earliest human tool users .
 Clearer evidence of the earliest toolmakers and their descendants has been found on the ancient lake beds in Tanzania .
 A period covering the time from the first use of stone tools about 2. mya to the beginning of agriculture in about 10,000 BCE . The dominance of Homo sapiens is a comparatively recent development .
 Homo habilis used the simplest stone technology, which was refined by Homo erectus into stone axes and cleaving tools for particular tasks such as butchering animals .
 The Neanderthals were the first to mount scrapers, spearpoints, and knives in wooden handles . Neanderthalals mounted scrapers and spearpoints in wooden handle handles .
 Modern humans punched off parallel-sided blanks from carefully prepared flint nodules . Modern humans developed more sophisticated technology, punching off parallel sides from flint .
 They turned these blades into scrapers, chisels, and borers to work antlers, bone, and leather . The blades were used to cut antlers and bone .
 Homo habilis left what could be the remains of a camp by a lake, including a scatter of stone tools and broken animal bones .
 Homo habilis probably slept in trees, in relative safety from lions and other dangerous animals . It is thought to be the only species to survive in the wild .
 In this predator-rich environment, humans were both the hunters and the hunted . Humans were both hunters and hunted in the wild .
 Evidence from the Olduvai camp suggests that Homo habilis was breaking up parts of animal carcasses scavenged from predator kills . The evidence suggests that the species scavenged on predator kills from prey .
 At about the same time, what could be termed the first true human had appeared . The first truly human appeared .
 Homo ergaster had strong limbs similar to those of modern humans . Large-brained, with a receding forehead, and prominent brow ridges . Homo ergasters were likely to have strong limbs like modern humans.
 Homo ergaster was closely related to Homo erectus, the first humans to spread out of tropical Africa into Europe and Asia as part of a general radiation of mammals and their predators some 1. mya. MYA— 5000 BCE ) Homo ergasters were closely related .
 Homo erectus was a skilled hunter and a brilliant opportunist, quick to take advantage of different environments . The species was a key factor in the success of the human species, says the author .
 They were well established in Western Europe by at least 800,000 years ago . They are thought to have been in existence in Europe by about 1,500 years ago.
 Warmer conditions than today may have attracted Homo heidelbergensis to Northern Europe by 400,000 years ago .
 Early humans used long-shafted, aerodynamic wooden spears to hunt wild horses and larger game at Schóningen, Germany, and Boxgrove in southern England .
 New discoveries of fossils that add to our knowledge of human evolution are being made all the time . Fossils of human ancestors have been discovered all over the world .
 The size and shape of the skulls help us understand the abilities of our ancestors . The size of our skulls helps us understand our ancestors' abilities .
 The average modern human brain is 1,400 cc . Brain size is measured in cubic centimeters . Average human brain size is 1.400 cc.
 Little is known about the species, except that it may have been bipedal . The species is believed to be a bipedated species .
 Ardipithecus kadabba was one of the earliest species to be placed on the human tree . It is thought to be the first species to have been placed on a human tree and was placed in the early stages of the human life .
 Fragmentary remains include large canine teeth found in Ethiopia, which are similar to those of the australopithecines .
 The remarkable finds at Schóningen are the earliest preserved wooden tools yet discovered . The discovery was made at the beginning of the century .
 Each group returned to the same locations to hunt and forage at different times of the year . Each group probably returned to same locations for hunting and foraging .
 By 500,000, early humans had adapted successfully to a wide variety of tropical and temperate environments, moving as far north as China . Fragments of Homo erectus have come to light in Zhoukoudian Cave, near Beijing .
 Australopithecus anamensis 4.3-4 mya is little known as few remains have been found . The ability to use fire was crucial in making settlement possible .
 The jawbone from Kenya resembles that of a chimpanzee, while the teeth are closer to human teeth . It was found in Kenya, where the jawbone was found to resemble that of an ape .
 They were identified as those of a young adult who walked on two feet with a rolling gait, slower than modern humans . The gait was slower than that of modern humans, researchers say .
 This bipedal posture was an important human anatomical feature that appeared before 4 mya . It allowed our ancestors to live away from forests in open terrain . Our ancestors may have lived in the open terrain in the past .
 Its facial features appear to have been more human than earlier australopithecines . It is believed to have lived in the form of Homo Homo Homo-Australopithecus .
 The species may descend from the australopithecines during the climatic swings of the Ice Age, but population levels remained very low . Survival of early humans must have been precarious at times .
 By 200,000 years ago, Homo neanderthalensis had evolved in Europe and Eurasia . The Neanderthals had evolved from Neanderthalans to humans .
 Neanderthals had large brains and more rounded heads than their predecessors . Neanderths have large brains, rounded heads and large brains . Neanderthalans had large heads and rounded heads .
 Their reasoning power and speech were not as developed as those of Homo sapiens . Their body shape was also more recognizably ‘human,’ but it is believed that their reasoning power wasn't as developed .
 Boiser flourished in the dry savanna areas that existed in Africa at that time and may have died out after climate change . Boiser is thought to have thrived in dry savannah areas in Africa .
 The skull was thick and the face long, with a ""modern"" projecting nose, a massive jawbone, and large teeth . Skull was thick with a projecting nose and a large jawbone .
 They pursued animals such as bison with wooden and stone-tipped spears . They were, however, expert hunters, who pursued animals with wooden spears .
 "They made sophisticated tools and dwelt in caves, rock shelters, and open camps," they wrote . They lived in caves and rock shelters .
 Theirs was a tough life in savage environments, and they probably lived for 30-40 years . Theirs were probably living for 30—40 years. They probably lived in tough environments .
 Most experts agree that Neanderthals were not the ancestors of modern humans . Most experts say Neanderthalts were not ancestors of humans . Neanderthalans were not our ancestors .
 Intense controversy surrounds the origins of Homo sapiens—ourselves . The appearance of modern humans is subject of controversy .
 Geneticists use DNA evidence to argue that modern humans first appeared in tropical Africa by about 180,000 years ago . Most geneticists say modern humans began to appear in tropical regions 180,00 years ago, but that date is not accurate .
 The earliest fully modern human fossils come from Huerto, Ethiopia, and date to about 160,000 years ago . They are found in the Ethiopian city of Huerto .
 From Africa, Homo sapiens spread across the Sahara and into southwestern Asia by 100,000 years ago . Homo sapien spread from Africa to southwestern Asia and into the Sahara . Homo Sapiens spread into the region from Africa and spread into Asia by about 100,00 years ago.
 No one knows when humans developed the abilities that set them apart from their earlier ancestors . They were fully developed by 45,000 years ago, when the first modern humans settled in Europe alongside the Neanderthals .
 The skull had a large brow ridge like Homo ergaster and Homo erectus but its brain was larger . The skull was larger than its brain and had a larger brow ridge .
 The arrival of Homo sapiens may have spelled the end for the Neanderthals . From 150,000 years ago, the Neanderthalans may have been wiped out of existence . Homo sapien may have wiped out Neanderthalan species .
 Neanderthals and Homo sapiens lived alongside one another, but DNA evidence suggests they did not interbreed . DNA evidence shows Neanderthalts did not have interbred . Neanderths lived alongside each other but not interbred, according to DNA evidence .
 Neanderthals died out, perhaps at the hands of Homo sapiens . Homo sapien were successful in adapting to every corner of the globe . Neanderthalans died out .
 More than any other species, humans have used their skills to their own advantage . Humans have always been able to use their skills for their own benefit .
 The species had a large brain and short robust build with powerful limbs . It was found in the wild in the early 1900s .
 Homo neanderthalensis may have lived alongside modern Homo sapiens after Pu 19 . Little is known about the development of human speech and conscious thought .
 The brain size of our early ancestors grew gradually over millions of years . It allowed increasing levels of sophistication in communication and culture .
 The simple signs and grunts of our ancestors became increasingly sophisticated communication . They turned the simple grunts into increasingly sophisticated language .
 Archaeology and studies of human anatomy help to indicate when these important traits evolved . Archaeology helps to explain when important traits of human life evolved .
 The hyoid bone is found in the neck and is required for speech to occur . The bone is required to be part of the speech .
 Fossilized pieces of 400,000-year-old Homo heidelbergensis hyoid bone from Atapuerca, Spain, help date the first human speech . When and how speech evolved remains a controversial area in the study of early human history .
 Articulate speech is an important threshold in human evolution because it opened up new vistas of cooperative behavior and the enrichment of human life . Articulates speech is a key part of the evolution of human evolution, says the author .
 From archaeological evidence alone, it is difficult to know accurately when speech first developed . Speech first developed in the 19th century .
 Homo habilis had a slightly more humanlike frontal lobe than earlier australopithecines . It is thought to have been a more primitive form of form of a hominoid .
 The position of the larynx of Homo sapiens is positioned low, permitting a wide variety of vocal sounds . Other clues are found in the position of a low-larynx, allowing a wide range of sounds .
 Homo erectus, from around 1. million years ago, was the first human with a lower larynx . Homo heidelbergensis had developed a hyoid bone, a small, U-shaped bone that lies at the root of the tongue .
 It was only about 300,000 years ago that the base of the skull evolved, physically allowing fully articulate speech to develop . The base of a skull evolved about three hundred thousand years ago .
 Neanderthals may have had some capacity for speech and communication, and were apparently capable of considerable intellectual reasoning . Neanderthal may have been able to communicate with their ancestors .
 The discovery of a hyoid bone in Kebara Cave, Israel, has intensified the debate about Neanderthal linguistic abilities . The bone dates to about 60,000 years ago .
 Some anthropologists claim that Neanderthals were capable of fully articulate speech . The Kebara hyoid is almost identical to that of modern humans .
 Others disagree, pointing to the high position of the larynx, which would limit the sounds they could make . Others say it would be impossible to hear if they were able to talk .
 Some believe that Neanderthals had the communication skills of modern infants . Neanderthalic infants may have been able to communicate with each other .
 Most scientists agree Neanderthals did not have the advanced linguistic and communication skills of Homo sapiens . The controversy is unresolved, but most scientists agree that Neanderthal did not .
 75,000-year-old perforated shell beads from Blombos Cave, South Africa, are perhaps the oldest known human ornaments in the world . The beads may have evolved because of the need to handle increasingly complex social information .
 As group sizes increased, so did an ability to learn language that could be used to articulate social relationships . As group size increased, as did the ability to communicate with others .
 It was only later, perhaps around 40,000 years ago during a time that has been referred to as the “Great Leap Forward," that modern humans developed language .
 Connected to the development of speech is the arrival of cognitive cognitive skills . This includes perception of our place in the world, intelligence, and moral codes that come with elaborate societies .
 None of these advances would have been possible without sophisticated speech, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 We don't know when Homo sapiens acquired the conscious thought and the abilities we have today, but it was at least 40,000 years ago, and most likely in tropical thought .
 Homo sapiens flourished in tropical Africa at least 160,000 years ago, long before the appearance of the elaborate art traditions of the late Ice Age .
 The creation of art requires reasoning and an ability to express intangible feelings . Art requires reasoning, planning ahead and expressing intangible feelings, the artist says .
 Some of the earliest known decorated artifacts were found in Blombos Cave in South Africa . They are about 75,000 years old and are very basic .
 The great bulls at Lascaux cave in France, and the polychrome bison at Altamira, in Spain, reflect human societies with complex religious beliefs and relationships with the spirit world .
 Although we do not know exactly what these paintings mean, it is clear that they had great symbolism for those who painted them . The paintings are thought to have great symbolism .
 This knowledge would have been passed down through the generations by speech and song . It was passed down to the generations through speech, song and song by generations .
 Art has remained an important way of expressing our beliefs and knowledge of the world . For all later human societies, art has remained important way to express our beliefs . Art has been an important part of society for centuries .
 Research into the brain can reveal some evidence about the development of speech .
 Soft brain tissues do not fossilize, and are only preserved in casts of the inside of the skull case . Soft brain tissue is not fossilized, and is preserved only in casts from inside of skull cases . Soft soft brain tissues are preserved only by casts of inside skull case, casts
 The earliest signs of development of Broca's area, the part of the brain that controls speech, occur in Homo habilis about two million years ago .
 Homo erectus also shows signs of development in Broca's area . This is perhaps an indication of slowly evolving speech . It is thought to be the first sign of language evolution .
 Unless a well-preserved hominin brain is discovered, the amount that we are able to discover from Broca's area is limited . tangible evidence will still be needed to learn about fluent speech .
 Sophisticated levels of speech developed as society became more complex . Afterwards, speech was more sophisticated and more sophisticated .
 Speech and language enhanced cooperation between hunters, which led to the greater success of human societies around the world . Speech, language enhances cooperation between hunter-hunter hunters .
 Groups could plan game drives, negotiate exchanges of toolmaking stone, and share intelligence about food and water supplies . Groups could also plan games drives and share information about food supplies .
 Speech and writing allowed knowledge and cumulative experience to be passed on from generation to generation . Speech, writing was passed on to generations of generations .
 Today, symbols such as road signs are part of an internationally understood language we use every day . Road signs are a symbol of the language used to communicate with people .
 As our knowledge of the human brain grows, so does our understanding of how speech developed . The art of communication is the subject of the Art of Communication . E E 4.
 Earth has experienced a range of temperatures and climatic conditions that have played a part in the extinction or survival of whole groups of species, and changed the face of the planet . Over millions of years, Earth's temperatures and conditions have changed the world's climate .
 There is geological evidence (seen in rock surfaces and textures) for four major ices ages in Earth's history . There is also geological evidence for the four major ice ages in history .
 The earliest of these are believed to have occurred around 2. to 2. billion years ago during the Proterozoic period . This is believed to be the earliest of this type of fossils dating back to around 2 billion years .
 Temperatures in the past were generally far higher than today . Today's weather is expected to be warmer than today's .
 The abrupt cooling about 1. million years ago that led to the last Ice Age, known as the Pleistocene epoch, probably resulted from small shifts in Earth’s tilt toward the Sun . The abrupt Cooling probably caused by shifts in the tilt of the Earth's tilt toward
 Much of human history unfolded during the dramatic climatic shifts of the most recent Ice Age . The Ice Age began about 1. million years ago .
 E Ice Age is not a continual deep freeze, but a period of constantly fluctuating climate conditions punctuated by periods of intense cold . Our ability to adapt to changes in climate has been crucial to the development of civilization but, adversely, may be the cause of future global warming .
 The earliest millennia of the last ice age are little known . The critical period when our remote ancestors first colonized Africa is little known. The first ice age was the critical period of the first time we colonized .
 Earth's magnetic field, generated deep inside our planet, abruptly reversed some 780,000 years ago . The information gleaned from deep-sea cores and ice borings gives us a much clearer picture of ice-age climate after the magnetic field abruptly reversed .
 Deep-sea cores from the Pacific Ocean reveal at least nine major glacial periods that have come and gone over the past 780,000 years . The most recent of them ending in abrupt and irregular global warming between the last two decades . Layers of sediment build up over time on ocean
 By extracting cores of ice or deep sea sediment, scientists can build a picture of climate change . Scientists can look at the composition of the cores and build a climate change picture .
 Increases in atmospheric CO, and CH, — both greenhouse gases — can be detected in the ice and indicate warming . Increases in CO, CH, can also be detected by the ice in the Arctic .
 The ratios of oxygen isotopes in the shells of microscopic marine animals reflect changes in sea temperature . Similarly, the ratios of . oxygen isotope in . microscopic marine . animals reflect . changes in . sea temperature.
 The Vostok ice core from Antarctica provides evidence for the last 420,000 years . Major shifts in temperature occur about every 100,000-year-old .
 Sea cores give only a general impression of Ice Age climate change . As a rule, cooling proceeds relatively slowly and warming unfolds rapidly, as was the case at the end of last cold period .
 Glacial periods in the past have been longer than interglacials, which are brief intervals of warmer conditions during the Ice Age when the climate was as warm today . Glacial period periods in past were longer than those of today's, scientists say .
 Increases in temperature are caused by changes in Earth's path around the Sun and its rotation on its axis . These increases in temperature have been caused by the changes in the path of the Sun around Earth .
 We are currently experiencing an interglacial period caused by natural phenomena . Interglacial periods began about 10,000 years ago . We are now experiencing a period of inter-glacial activity .
 Ice Age witnessed dramatic shifts in global climate and major changes in natural environments . Ice Age was the period of the Ice Age when it was the most intense period of ice age .
 During glacial periods, huge ice sheets formed over Scandinavia, and covered most of Canada and parts of the U.S. as far south as modern Seattle and the Great Lakes .
 Years before present the Pyrenees, on the Andes, and on Central Asian mountains and highaltitude plateaus . Low 150,000 100,000 50,000 0 years ago .
 South of the Scandinavian ice sheets, huge expanses of barren landscape extended from the Atlantic to Siberia . The barren landscape was created from the Arctic Ocean to Siberia in the 1930s .
 These environments suffered nine-month winters and were uninhabitable by ancestors of Homo sapiens . They lacked technology and clothing to adapt to the extremes of temperature .
 It is no coincidence that Homo erectus settled in temperate and tropical environments . Sea levels around the world dropped at the beginning of the last Ice Age as water froze .
 The cold caused sea levels to fall dramatically as more water was converted into ice . Sea levels have fallen dramatically since the start of the Cold War .
 Huge expanses of what are now continental shelves were exposed, linking land masses . Siberia was part of Alaska, Alaska, and Britain was joined to Europe .
 Only a few stretches of open water separated mainland Southeast Asia from Australia and New Guinea .
 During interglacials, sea levels rose, ice sheets shrank, and forests moved northward as the steppe-tundra vanished . Sea levels rose and sea levels increased during interglacial periods .
 Humans moved north, following animals they hunted and plants they foraged, and adapting to a broad range of forested and grassland environments as well as arid lands .
 The Ice Age climate was volatile and the world's environments changed constantly . The opportunism and adaptive ability of humans was continuously challenged from one millennium to the next . The number of meters meters is the largest meter meter .
 Temperature variations up to 10,000 years ago meant that humans could only survive by adapting to the changing conditions . These challenges may even have been A harsh world .
 The levels of CO, in the atmosphere have also been recorded and are linked to temperature rises, as can be seen here . CO is a factor in human evolution, and is linked to climate rises .
 Our ancestors originated in tropical Africa and were basically tropical animals . Our earliest ancestors originated from tropical Africa . Our ancestors were basically animals .
 During long periods of ice ages, Sahara was slightly wetter than today . Sahara was wetter during periods of the ice ages when it was less wetter .
 The desert can almost be seen as a pump, drawing in animals and early humans during wet periods, then pushing them out to the margins when the climate became drier . The desert draws in animals, early humans, then pushes them out when it is dry .
 Homo erectus and the animals they preyed on crossed the desert and spread into more temperate environments some 1. million years ago . This was the ecological effect that allowed the species to cross the desert . Homo erects and preyed animals to cross deserts and spread 1.1 million
 A major interglacial raised temperatures, peaking around 400,000 years ago . A global warming period is thought to have peaked 400,00 years ago, scientists say . Scientists say the temperature rise in the mid-2000s was due to a cooling trend .
 By that time, Homo erectus was thriving in north Europe, but they could not adapt to the extreme cold of the glaciation that followed around 350,000 years ago . They could not cope with the extreme temperatures that followed .
 The few hunting bands living there probably moved southward to more temperate regions . The hunting bands have probably moved to warmer regions .
 By around 250,000 years ago, there are traces of early human settlement in Europe and parts of East Asia .
 The final interglacial peaked about 128,000 years ago, when Neanderthals were thriving in Europe . The final Interglacial peak in Europe was 128,00 years ago .
 After 50,000 years ago, modern humans had mastered all the global environments . They were living in even the coldest and most extreme parts of the world .
 Based on past shifts, this warmer phase could last 100,000 years, although the influence of humans may affect this . This warmer phase of climate change could last around 100,00 years .
 Earth is currently experiencing a warmer phase but is still affected by fluctuations in temperature and natural phenomena such as El Niño . Earth is experiencing a warm phase, but is affected by fluctuating temperature and El Niño phenomena .
 Short-term events were a factor in the rise and collapse of early civilizations . Such short-term incidents were a key factor in early civilizations' collapse .
 El Niño is a reversal in the flow of water in the Pacific Ocean that causes dramatic changes in the weather every two to seven years . El Niño reverses flow of the Pacific ocean and changes the weather .
 El Niño is one of the most powerful influences on climate after the seasons . El Niño has been a powerful influence on the climate in recent years . The Niño is a powerful force in climate change .
 The phenomenon originates in the Southwest Pacific and results from interactions between the ocean and the atmosphere . The phenomenon is caused by interactions between ocean and atmosphere .
 Major El Nifios have powerful global effects, causing monsoon failures, and drought or flooding elsewhere . The El Niño has powerful global effect on global monsoon weather .
 As temperatures rose after the Ice Age, humans adapted to a rapidly changing world of shrinking ice sheets and rising sea levels . Humans adapted to the rapidly changing climate of the 20th century .
 After 5,000 years of irregular warming and cooling, the world entered a warming period that has lasted into modern times . The world entered an irregular warming period of irregular cooling and cooling in the early 2000s .
 Vostok ice core tells us this period is among the most warm and stable of the past 420,000 years . Ice core is thought to be among the warmest and stable periods in the history of ice ages .
 The overuse of fossil fuels has increased global warming, says CNN.com's Climate Change Tracker . Overuse has increased the use of fossil fuel to fuel the world's energy systems . The over-use of the fossil fuels is responsible for global warming .
 Last glaciation of the Ice Age lasted from 100,000 to 50,000 years ago . The last glaciation was when many areas were covered in ice, and many areas remained ice .
 During this period, sea levels were far below modern levels and Siberia and Alaska were linked by land . Alaska and Siberia were connected by land.
 This was followed by a slightly warmer period before a return to extreme cold about 18,000 ICY LANDSCAPE years ago . This was after a period of warmer periods before the return of extreme cold . The current cold spell is believed to be the first since 1998 .
 The original ancestors of modern humans evolved south of the Sahara Desert in tropical Africa . They evolved in the desert south of Africa's Sahara Desert .
 The scattered human population was very small, and groups developed in isolation from each other . The scattered humans were very small and isolated .
 Early Homo erectus fossils indicate they had settled in western Europe by 800,000 years ago . Fossils show they lived in eastern Europe 800,00 years before they died .
 Neanderthals spread into Europe and western Asia by 200,000 years ago . Neanderthalans are thought to have lived in Europe, Asia and Europe since 2000 . Neanderthropals are now thought to be among the world's oldest species .
 This technology, developed in Africa 2. million years ago, was used for millions of years . It was used by millions of people around the world .
 The number of years I since small groups of humans began to leave Africa has been the longest since humans began leaving Africa .
 By 60,000 years ago genetically modern Homo sapiens were colonizing the Earth . Homo sapien were colonized the Earth by 60,00 years ago .
 The walls of Lascaux Cave in France are alive with bison, mammoth, wild oxen, and stag . The walls are filled with images of mammoth and bison .
 Every human today is the descendant of a small group of modern humans who left Africa around 60,000 years ago to explore the planet . A group of small groups of humans left Africa about 60,00 years ago .
 ixty thousand years ago, modern humans were confined to tropical Africa and a small part of southwestern Asia . We can see the legacy of these journeys today in the diversity of cultures around the world .
 These were people with the same physical and mental abilities as ourselves, hunter-gatherers . They were people capable of adapting to any environment on Earth, be it one with nine-month winters and subzero temperatures .
 During the last cold period of the last Ice Age, the most significant of all human migrations out of Africa began . The most significant migration out of the continent began during the last few years of Ice Age .
 Toward the end of the Ice Age 15,000 years ago, this vast population movement was complete . The population was complete at the time of the last Ice Age, when it was the peak .
 Late Ice Age hunting bands had settled all of mainland Africa and Eurasia and had crossed, or were about to cross, into the Americas . They had settled mainland Africa, Eurasia, and had . crossed or were . about to . cross, or was about to, in the Americas
 Homo sapiens had mastered tropical waters with canoes or rafts . They drifted or paddled to New Guinea and Australia, and penetrated as far south as Tasmania .
 Homo habilis and Homo erectus had long vanished from Earth, forced into extinction on marginal lands where food was not plentiful, or killed by the newcomers . Earlier forms of humans such as Homo hailis and . erectus were forced to . extinction .
 Colonizing the planet was not a deliberate project, undertaken by men and women set on occupying new lands or exploring the world that lay beyond their hunting territories . Colonization was not an attempt to colonize the planet .
 The complex population movements that took modern humans to the limits of the harsh late Ice Age world came about as a result of hunting and plant collecting in a great diversity of natural environments .
 In more northern climates, meat was the staple food, while tropical and temperate groups made considerable use of wild plant foods . In temperate and tropical climates, wild plants were also important food sources .
 The secrets to survival were adaptability, adaptability and adaptability by adapting to sudden changes in climatic conditions by technological innovation, and sheer ingenuity, mobility, and opportunism .
 World's total global population was perhaps no more than five million people, scattered in small groups over hunting territories . People responded to food shortages, drought, or extreme cold by moving elsewhere .
 Many people may not have encountered more than a few dozen fellow humans during their lives . We can only speculate about this, as we can only be educated guesses .
 Dozens of archaeological sites document the great journeys made as humans spread around the globe . Caves, rock shelters, open camps, and huge garbage heaps, or “middens,” of seashells and freshwater mollusks .
 The techniques of molecular biology are another way in which we can learn more about the movement of these early humans .
 The estimated l human population of Earth 500,000 years ago. work out how Earth was colonized by Homo sapiens, and when splits in the population occurred. By comparing certain strands of DNA (the substance found in every human cell that determines the characteristics we inherit) we can.
 This was a complex process involving constant movement by small numbers of people . It was a 'complex process' involving constant movements by small groups of people. This was the work of a small group of people in the process .
 All people alive today have their ultimate roots in the so-called ‘African Eve’ of some 150,000 years ago . People alive today can trace their roots back to the 'African Eve' of 150,00 years ago, says historian .
 MtDNA was passed from mother to offspring through every generation since the first Homo sapiens . This name stems from the fact that MtDNA has been passed through generations of generations . MtDNA is passed through each generation of humans through the generations of each generation .
 Map shows key sites for our early ancestors, as well as routes that Homo sapiens is thought to have taken from Africa around the world . It also shows the routes Homo sapien took from Africa .
 The earliest known settlement in South America dates from about 13,000 years ago . It is believed to be the earliest known South American settlement .
 Finds from the site, at Monte Verde in Chile, include stone tools for chopping, scraping, and pounding . The people associated with Clovis hunted big game .
 Their presence in America about 12,000 years ago coincides with the extinction of several large species, including mammoths, ‘mastodons (a mammothlike species), and giant sloths .
 Remains of Homo erectus, which dates from about 1 million years ago, were found on this site . Site of early Homo sapiens find J Site of Hominin find found on SS Beringia Land Bridge .
 The first modern humans in China occupied this site by about 40,000 . Carving found at Dolni Vestonice was made by ; wo hunters between 28,000 A and 22,000 years ago .
 This area of northeastern Africa is rich with early hominin remains and continues to yield finds that provoke new theories about our evolution .
 Tourists today visit a landscape of strange formations where over 20,000 years ago there was a lake and much human activity . Tourist today visit the landscape of this landscape, which is thought to have been a lake .
 Stone tools and animal bones found in the area have shown us much about the first Australians . Stone tools, animal bones and stone tools have been found around the area . The first Australians were likely to have lived in the region .
 Klasies River Mouth Caves in South Africa were occupied by hunter-gatherers 120,000 years ago . Caves have revealed some clues about how they lived .
 Sometime after about 50,000 years ago, when glacial conditions in the north had improved and the climate was more temperate, modern humans moved .
 By 45,000 years ago they were well established in the eastern European plains and in the Don Valley, now in Ukraine, and moving rapidly across Central and Western Europe . Tiny numbers of people were involved—in the hundreds -- in the hundreds of thousands of years ago .
 Homo sapiens had settled alongside Neanderthal bands that had already been in Europe for about 200,000 years ago . The first Homo sapien left Africa to colonize the planet about 60,000 ago .
 By the end of the Ice Age 10,000 years ago, they had reached all the continents except Antarctica, adapting to different conditions wherever they went. years. years ago .
 DNA research on Neanderthal bones suggests that the newcomers did not interbreed with them, as had previously been believed . DNA research also suggests that Neanderthals were not interbred with them as had been thought .
 One theory is that Europe's indigenous inhabitants died out because they lacked adaptability, mental abilities, and technology of modern humans . One theory says they died out due to lack adaptability and mental abilities .
 They survived in some parts of southeastern Europe until as late as 24,000 years ago before becoming extinct . They were extinct in some areas of Europe between 24,500 and 25,500 years ago .
 From about 40,000 to 10,000 years ago, a remarkable array of sophisticated, cold-adapted hunter-gatherer societies flourished in Central and Western Europe .
 It demonstrates the ingenuity and adaptability of early humans to local conditions and resources, it says .
 Cro-Magnon people were named after a rock shelter near Les Eyzies in southwestern France . They were opportunists, but were also opportunists . They lived in the same rock shelter as their ancestors .
 They relied for their subsistence on a range of plant foods and fish . They took advantage of salmon runs, for example, when the climate of the late Ice Age allowed .
 Their success came not only from their superior mental abilities, but also from their ingenious multipurpose flint tools, which worked almost like a modern Swiss Army knife . Their success was due to their ingenious multi-purpose tools .
 They used carefully shaped flint nodules to produce standardized, parallel-sided blanks . They then turned them into points, scrapers, and other tools .
 One of these artifacts allowed them to cut grooves in reindeer antlers, thereby “unlocking’t a new technology for manufacturing harpoon heads, spear points, and other hunting weapons .
 Barbed, ant-ertipped spears were especially effective on reindeer and other game . Barbed spears were used in the early days of hunting in Sweden .
 Cro-Magnons produced other revolutionary items, including the spear thrower . The CroMagnons also produced a hooked stick that vastly increased the distance a spear could be thrown . The spear-thrower was the first weapon produced by the CroMagnon .
 Ice Age hunters successfully hunted bison, mammoth, mammoth and woolly rhinoceros . They successfully used this new technology to hunt a wide range of Ice Age animals .
 These people were also skilled artists and developed a distinctive visual tradition, which amplified their elaborate rituals and beliefs . These people also developed a distinct visual tradition and were skilled artists .
 Cave paintings of Lascaux in southwestern France are renowned for their skill . One of the most famous examples of their art comes from the cave paintings .
 As early as 30,000 years ago, late Ice Age people in Europe and Asia made needles from polished bone and ivory slivers . They perforated with sharppointed flints with sharp flints .
 They sewed tailored, layered garments that enabled them to work outside in freezing temperatures . The women sewed the garments to protect themselves from the cold .
 It is believed that, like modern Inuits, they used cured and softened animal pelts, sewing the seams with fine thread made of animal and plant fiber . The seam is believed to have been sewn with fine threads made of fiber .
 For the first time, people had the skills to live in harsh environments like the Eurasian steppes, where there is little rainfall and dramatic changes in temperature with hot summers and very cold winters .
 Cro-Magnons appear to have moved south into sheltered locations, only moving north again as temperatures rose . Despite these skills, they appear to be moving south again, only to move north as temperatures rise .
 Some of the mammoth bone houses at Mezhirich in modern Ukraine were built partially into the ground and roofed with hides and sod . Some of them constructed elaborate dwellings, like the elaborate mammoth bone dwellings at Mezirich .
 Toward the end of the Ice Age, about 12,000 years ago, human society became more elaborate, as populations grew larger and new areas were colonized . Toward end of Ice Age: Human society grew more elaborate .
 Homo sapiens migrated north from southwestern Asia and colonized the river valleys of Central Asia around 45,000 years ago . Homo sapien migrated north .
 The steppe-tundra was a windswept landscape featuring low-growing vegetation . It extended from central Europe all the way to Siberia far to the northeast .
 Enduring long winters, each band anchored itself on shallow river valleys like those of the Don and Dnieper in Russia . Sublying for the most part on animals such as the saiga antelope and large game, including the arctic elephant and mammoth .
 Study of the genes of modern populations can help to show how early humans colonized the planet . Study of genes can help show how the early human colonized planet .
 Mitochondrial DNA, inherited through the maternal line back to a fictional ""Eve"" , can be traced from an ancestral tropical African population to today . DNA can also be traced back to an ancestor of Eve Eve .
 From this evidence we know that 99. percent of the genetic code of modern humans is identical throughout the world . The genetic code is identical everywhere around the world, according to the study .
 Between 35,000 and 18,000 years ago, hunting bands moved northeastward across the steppetundra into the Lake Baikal region of Siberia and farther to the northeast .
 Some moved to, or formed, new groups, while others moved to find new hunting grounds or natural resources . Others moved to or formed new groups while others found new hunting areas .
 A variety of circumstances linked to hunting and survival contributed to the movement of tiny numbers of Ice Age bands . Minor genetic mutations have taken place over the last 150,000 years .
 The world's population outside Africa can trace their genetic history back to perhaps as few as 1,000 individuals who made the journey out of that continent .
 Chromosome mutations can be used to show when groups arrived in different parts of the world and to construct a genetic family tree that goes back to the Ice Age across an extremely inhospitable landscape .
 Such natural population movements led to vast areas of the globe being colonized . Such natural populations led to the creation of the world's first human settlements .
 Around 60,000 years ago, other groups moved east from northeast Africa and southwestern Asia into what is now India and Pakistan, and into tropical forests of Southeast Asia . Even earlier, the groups moved from Africa, southwestern Asia and southwest Asia .
 As humans traveled around the globe and experienced different environments and climates, they adapted their weapons and tools to survive . We know little of these movements—the groups probably skirted the Eurasian Out of aFRICA .
 The bones display a unique mix of primitive and more advanced characteristics, and date to about 18,000 years ago . The bones are believed to date back to about 20,000-years-old .
 Homo floresiensis had slight legs like some early hominins, yet modern teeth . With a small skull , large brow ridge, and a delicate face, Homo flore floresienis had a small . skull . with a small brow ridge .
 Questions have been raised over whether this is a separate species or a small Homo sapiens . Questions have also been raised about whether it is a small species .
 Others suggest this is the remnant of a Homo erectus population, or the descendant of humans who drifted to the island then developed unique anatomical traits in isolation .
 Homo floresiensis settled in northeastern China by 25,000 years ago, after the warmer south part of the continent had been explored . Unless more remains are found, it may remain an intriguing, unsolved mystery .
 During the late Ice Age, a huge continental shelf, known as Sunda extended from mainland Southeast Asia far into the Pacific . Sunda, Sahul, and Asia was a huge area of land connecting continents that is now covered by higher sea levels .
 Only short stretches of open water separated New Guinea and Australia from the now-sunken land .
 Homo sapiens arrived in mainland Southeast Asia before 50,000 years ago . Homo sapien arrived in the region 50,00 years ago, but arrived before that .
 By 45,000 years ago, a few hunting bands had crossed open water to Sahul and colonized what is now Australia . The date of the colonization is controversial .
 Modern humans had settled New Guinea by about 40,000 years ago, and crossed to the Solomon Islands by about 5,500 years later . Modern humans also had crossed to New Guinea about 5.000 years earlier .
 Huntergatherers had settled throughout Australia, including Tasmania, by 30,000 years ago . They had settled in Tasmania, including Tasmanian islands, 30,00 years before .
 Hundreds of human footprints preserved for over 20,000 years have been found at Lake Mungo, Australia . This was the outer limit of human settlement of the offshore Pacific until outrigger canoes and open-water navigation techniques allowed people with domesticated animals and root crops to make
 The evidence of human life at Lake Mungo in Australia reveals details of hunter-gatherer life about 40,000 years ago .
 It is important as it captures a moment in time and a lifestyle that remained largely unchanged for thousands of years . It was important to capture a moment of time and is important to the history of the past .
 Archaeologists dispute the date of the first settlement of the Americas for over a century . Archaeologists have disputed the date for more than 100 years .
 Genetic and dental evidence links the two areas and backs up this theory . Genetic evidence links them to each other .
 There are linguistic ties that hint at population movements from Siberia to Alaska . There are also linguistic ties .
 It is not known when and how the first settlement took place in the area .
 Until about 10,000 years ago, a low-lying land bridge, Beringia, Alaska, joined Siberia to Alaska . Clovis points are flint spearpoints made by hunters over 11,000-years-ago flint hunters .
 Most scientists believe that the first Americans were Siberian hunters who crossed this bridge into Alaska at least 15,000 years ago, toward the end of the Ice Age .
 Controversy surrounds the route by which the first Americans penetrated the heart of North America . It is thought to have taken place at least 13,000 years ago . The first Americans entered North America at a time of 12,500 years old .
 One theory favors a movement south along the continental shelves of southeast Alaska and British Columbia, which was then a landscape of steppe-tundra . One theory is that the movement came from southeast Alaska to British Columbia .
 A common hypothesis claims a rapid movement south along a narrow corridor between two ice sheets . The other is believed to extend east toward the Atlantic . Another common hypothesis is that the ice sheets may have been moving south .
 Small numbers of early American hunter-gatherers were south of the ice sheets, and some as far south as Chile, by at least 13,000 years ago . The controversy is unresolved, but we know that small numbers were south .
 Early Americans are best known from the remains of bison, mammoth, and mastodon in North America . The early Americans were best known for their kills of mammoth, mastodon and bison .
 They are often labeled “biggame"" hunters, which is misleading, as they rely on plant foods and adapted to temperate and tropical areas, as well as the bleak lands at the margins of retreating ice sheets .
 By 10,500 years ago, most of this ‘megafauna’ was extinct, probably as a result of drier climatic conditions, perhaps speeded by some overhunting . They preyed on indigenous species of large mammals, but, by 10,000 years
 Archaeological record of the early Americas is sketchy . Archaeological evidence of the Americas' early human settlements remains sketchy. Archaeological records are sketchy in the region .
 Key sites include a 12,000-year-old rock shelter in Meadowcroft, Pennsylvania, a scatter of stone tools from a site at Cactus Hill, Virginia, and a well-documented foraging camp at Monte Verde, Chile .
 The first well-defined culture is that of the Clovis people, famous for their fine flint tools, who flourished between about 11,200 and 10,900 years ago . The first of well-defined culture was that of Clovi, known for its fine fl
 A 9,500-year-old skull from Kennewick, Washington State, is believed to have caucasian features . It may be an indication that some of the first settlers in America came from Europe .
 By 10,000 years ago humans had spread to every continent and had learned the skills needed to survive in different environments . After b b AFTER b b b by b, humans had learned to survive on every continent .
 Later explorers found their ""new world"" already inhabited by the descendants of those first settlers . The descendants of the first settlers found their new world already inhabited .
 American Indian societies adjusted to warmer conditions by intensifying the search for food, whether it be fish, game, or plant foods .
 Dutch settlers arrived in Manhattan in the 1800s and traded with the native population before establishing a permanent settlement there . The settlement was established by Dutch settlers in the early 1800s .
 The culture of the Australian Aboriginals developed in virtually complete isolation . European settlers in America helped develop a culture that developed in isolation .
 Like other huntergatherer societies, they have a complex relationship with their environment and elaborate spiritual beliefs . They have complex relationship to their environment .
 Atlatls are throwing sticks or spearthrowers, first developed by Cro-Magnon hunters over 20,000 years ago . Atlatlatlatlants are first to use spearthrowsers, or throwing sticks, in prehistoric times .
 Spear throwers increase the range and velocity of a spear, which is useful for hunting . Spear thrower is a key weapon for hunters who rely on stalking to kill their prey .
 Such weights, often called “bannerstones, are often found on native American sites, as they arrived with the first inhabitants of the region .
 Hunting and foraging for food was the only way of life for all humans up until 12,000 years ago . MYA— 5000 BCE hunters and gatherers hunted and foraged for food .
 It was a successful lifestyle that, in some ways, had significant advantages over a life of farming . It was the same lifestyle as a successful life as a farm worker, says the author .
 Only a handful of hunter-gatherer societies survive, in the Amazon Basin and Africa .
 The success of the species depended on their ability to use Earth's resources to their own advantage, scientists say . The success depended on the ability to take advantage of the environment, they say .
 Early humans may have eaten the remains of animals killed by other predators rather than hunting for most of their food . Evidence from bones and flints has shown that early humans ate the remains .
 A process of trial and error would have been necessary while learning what foods were good to eat and what could potentially be harmful to eat . A process would have required trial-and-error to learn what foods are good and harmful .
 Human societies throughout the world had to adapt to radically different environments to survive . Human societies have to adapt .
 Predictability, seasonality, abundance of food resources such as fish and nuts affected their choice to live a nomadic or more settled existence .
 Wooden digging sticks and flint sickle blades show that people dug for tubers and harvested wild grasses . Rare finds of wooden digging sticks show that they were used to harvest tubers, grasses and vegetables .
 Broken animal and fish bones, and fossil plant pollens, reveal details of the hunter-gatherer diet . Deep shell middens crammed with discarded shells of edible mollusks .
 The few surviving hunter-gatherer societies can tell us first-hand about the dynamics of human existence before agriculture and animal domestication .
 Most huntergatherer bands were constantly on the move, camping near lakes and other strategic locations during the times of year when food or game was close by .
 At Dolní Vice, in what is now the Czech Republic, mammoth hunters lived in oval bone-and-timber huts . The earliest weapons were simple flint arrowheads .
 Arrows would have been used about 8,000 years ago for hunting . Wild plant foods, whether grasses, nuts, or tubers, were the dominant staple .
 In most societies, women did the gathering. overlooking a river valley and nearby swamps . The gathering took place in most societies .
 Other carvings of bears, lions, and mammoths indicate a culture of some degree of sophistication . Carvings indicate some level of sophistication at the site of the discovery .
 A similar date has been given to the Venus of Willendorf found in Austria . The Venus was found in the same place as the Venus found in Germany .
 It has been suggested that these figurines represent fertility and the success of the hunter-gatherer group they are associated with . The figurines are believed to represent fertility .
 The line between nomadic hunting and gathering and settled farming is not always clear . Stone age transition was a time when the line between hunting and farming was clear .
 Many communities may have stayed in one place while hunting, or moved around and cultivated crops . People may have moved around while hunting or cultivated crops, or stayed at one place .
 Mesolithic fishers and hunters lived by the Baltic Sea, which at that stage was newly uncovered by retreating ice . Ten thousand years ago, bands of Mesolithic hunter and fisherman lived in the area .
 Their diet mainly consisted of fish, supplemented by birds, plant foods, and game, caught using stone-tipped arrows, antler harpoons and wooden spears .
 Many groups in this area occupied the same settlements for generations, living along shorelines that shifted constantly . Many groups of people lived along the same shorelines .
 Star Carr in northeastern England was a community that was hunting and gathering while on the move throughout the year . Another site that has revealed details about the community has also been revealed .
 In 9000 BCE, Mesolithic people settled on waterlogged ground by a lake there . In 9,000 BCE, a small group of Mesolithic settlers settled by the lake . The lake was a source of water for the first time .
 Wet conditions preserved flint tools, the remains of the elk and red deer they hunted, and the barbed spear points they used to kill them . The wet conditions preserved the remains and tools of the hunters .
 Teeth and seeds tell us that the site was occupied every year from March to June . The site is now a popular tourist attraction in South Wales .
 These people adapted successfully to a rapidly changing post-Ice Age world by maintaining a flexible way of life . These people were able to adapt to the changing environment of the Ice Age .
 Lepenski Vir in modern-day Serbia was also repeatedly used over many generations and has yielded a lot of information about a culture between two lifestyles . Lepensky Vir was also used in many generations of Serbian people .
 The site, used from as early as 6000 BCE, was situated on the banks of the Danube River . The group's reliance on fishing was heavy, and the site was used from 6000 BCE .
 Lepenski Vir provides a portrait of a gradual changeover from nomadic life to more permanent settlement . Revisited for several hundred years, Lepensky Vir provides an account of the gradual change over nomadic lifestyle to more permanently settlement .
 The seminomadic lifestyle of Lepenski Vir meant that people lived there for part of the year while also traveling to other areas . Lepenki Vir was a place where people lived for part the year and also traveled .
 Finds at the site discovered some distance away provide the evidence for this . Finds were found some distance from the site of the site .
 Five thousand years ago, much of East and southern Africa was home to nomadic hunter-gatherer bands . They subsisted on a wide variety of animal and plant foods, subsisting on a variety of animals .
 Some sites, such as Gwisho in Central Africa, have revealed well-preserved wooden arrowheads and digging sticks, as well as traces of brush shelters . Some sites have also revealed well preserved wooded arrowheads .
 Bow and arrows appeared during the late Ice Age and came into widespread use by about 10,000 people . Many of these groups regularly visited rock shelters, including those at Nachikufu in present-day Zambia and Pomongwe in Zimbabwe .
 At first, these would have been simple wooden bows used with stone or bone-tipped arrows . At first they were simple wooden wooden bows .
 The composite bow, made of sinews and bone or wood laminated together, is known from 1500 act, and reached North America in the first millennium ce . The bow is believed to have been made from sinews, bone and wood .
 A modern San San San hunter takes aim with bow and arrow . In the field a modern San hunter aims to hunt in the field .
 His success depends on meticulous stalking to approach his quarry at close range . It is not the first time he has been able to find his quarry .
 Many early hunters used vegetable poisons on their arrows to pursue wounded animals for hours before predators struck . The poisons were used to kill animals in South Africa .
 Modernday San have long been in contact with farmers, but the ancestry of their culture extends back to ancient times . Moderndays San are the descendants of ancient farmers and have long lived with farmers .
 As in other traditional hunter-gather cultures, the women are responsible for much of the food collection and hunting smaller animals . The men hunt large prey while the women hunt smaller prey .
 From about 10,000 &ct there was a general transition from the huntergatherer lifestyle to farming . The first time people were able to farm was when they lived in the region .
 Some groups continued to forage for food, perhaps partly due to conditions in the part of the world they lived in . Conditions in the region made growing crops or staying in one place impossible for them .
 Farming carries a greater risk of starvation if crops fail . Another reason may be that farming needs more time spent devoted to food production .
 Some groups, such as the Haida people of North America and the Aboriginals in Australia, seem to have retained the hunter-gatherer lifestyle .
 In areas of exceptionally rich food resources, much more elaborate hunter-gather societies developed after about 3000 years ago .
 In the Pacific Northwest of North America, rich salmon and coastal fisheries and abundant lumber led to the development of complex societies under powerful chieftains .
 Norton people in North America had developed sophisticated art styles and an elaborate harpoon weaponry for hunting seals . By 2000 years ago, the Norton people had developed a sophisticated art style and harpoon weapons .
 By 1000 ce, the ancestors of the modern-day Inuit had settled in Canada . The ancestors of today's Inuit are believed to have been Inuit .
 There is little evidence that early humans before Neanderthals buried their dead or believed in a higher power . MYA— 5000 BCE BEFORE .
 Neanderthals first buried their dead at least 60,000 years ago . Neanderthalans believed to have buried their bodies at the time of their deaths .
 Homo sapiens is unique in thinking and planning ahead, and in conceptualizing ideas . Homo sapien is a unique thinker and thinker who can anticipate and anticipate ideas .
 Such cognitive abilities first appeared around 50,000 years ago, and perhaps even earlier . Such cognitive abilities first appeared around . 50,00 years ago and perhaps earlier .
 Two 25,000-year-old hunter-gatherers buried in Sungir near Vladimir in Russia . They are surrounded by spears, bracelets, brooches, and thousands of ivory beads .
 Theories about the purpose of our existence and questions about what happens after we die will always be a part of the human experience . The practices surrounding engraved antler tools before the advent of writing are always significant .
 The cave engravings and paintings depict a wide range of animals, some left to us, we can piece together some and on bone carvings are indications of them long extinct, such as the of the ideas of the particular culture of their beliefs .
 From about 40,000 years ago, the bison, and reindeer are more familiar religion today are from images painted Cro-Magnons of western Europe today . The main ways everyday existence. others, like wild horses, European in which we know about prehistoric .
 Death is often tradition that survives on cave walls environment where people survived I t is difficult to know what thought of as a link to another and on beautifully carved and beautifully carved . pU Y S THE SPIRIT WORLD [im for much of the year on meat].
 This reliance on hunting may have inspired rituals that became the focus of cave art . The cave art is thought to have been used in cave rituals .
 Human figures in cave paintings are rare, and when they do occur are highly stylized or masked . By contrast, human figures in caves are rare and often masked .
 Impressions of human hands and undecipherable signs do appear on the walls of caves including Altamira in Spain and Chauvet, Niaux, and Lascaux in France .
 CroMagnon cave art flourished until about 14,000 years ago . Archaeologists have argued over the meaning of the cave art .
 In many huntergatherer societies, shamans were believed to act as intermediaries with the spiritual world . Shamans believed to have used trances and hallucinogenic substances to pass into the realm of the supernatural .
 They were thought to communicate with ancestors, as well as retelling stories, and legends . It is thought to have been used as a way of communicating with ancestors .
 Late Ice Age shamans may have conducted ceremonies in caves, often painted with murals, where the acoustics lend themselves to chanting and singing .
 In cultures that have survived up to more recent times, we may find further clues to past beliefs . Surviving clues may be found in cultures that survived up until recent times .
 The American Indians and Australian Aboriginals live in a world where the living and supernatural realms are treated as a continuation of one another . The two cultures live in different worlds, including the American Indians .
 Shamans—doctors, priests, or medicine men-still exist in some cultures . Shamans are believed to possess supernatural powers . Both enjoyed elaborate ceremonial lives that included initiation ceremonies .
 By observing their practices and rituals, it is possible to draw some useful parallels with early societies . By observing the practices of early societies, it can be drawn to them .
 Archaeologist David Lewis-Williams argues that much of the cave art of the San huntergatherers of southern Africa was painted in hallucinogenic trances .
 These types of drugor trance-induced experiences are still seen today in a few societies. commemorations of ancestral spirits are still .
 Hunter-gatherer societies that we know about today are almost universal in possessing complex beliefs and world views that are intimately connected to the natural world around them . Hunter-gathering societies have complex beliefs, world views .
 We do not know that people in ancient cultures shared these rituals and beliefs, some of the artifacts and clues we have indicate this as a possibility .
 The female figurines of hunter-gatherer societies may have been made as objects of worship, and related to a fertility cult . The figurines are believed to have been created by hunter-gathering societies .
 Carved antlers and bones similarly may have been connected with religious belief . Carved bones and antlers may also be connected to religious beliefs .
 One of the earliest and most lavish burials found was in Sungir, Russia . The most lavish burial was found in the city of Sungir .
 Australian Aboriginals enjoy a complex relationship with the supernatural realm that permeates their living world . The sheer richness and diversity of the artifacts accompanying the bodies of Aboriginal dreamtime are documented . Aboriginal dreamtime is a formative form of spiritual contact .
 Their art, such as this example from a cave wall, depicts mythic animals and humans and forms an important part of their spiritual beliefs—known as the Dreamtime . It shows that these people lived in a complex society with a strong hierarchical structure .
 One of the individuals, a girl of about eight years old, was found with the remains of over 5,000 ivory beads . The beads, which, it is estimated, each took over one hour to carve, are estimated to have been carved .
 The fact that such wealth accompanied the burials may indicate a religion in which these objects were needed to accompany the dead on a journey to another life .
 In other cultures food was left with the dead, suggesting a belief in an afterlife in which sustenance is required . Food left with food suggests a belief that sustenance must be given to the dead .
 Some of the earliest buildings relating to religious belief may come from Catalhuyok in Turkey from 7000 BCE . Murals are indications that the spaces were used for ritual purposes .
 The grave goods placed in the pyramids of the Pharaohs to help them in the afterlife are further indication of a strong belief in another life . Pharaohs believed to have placed grave goods in pyramids to help with afterlife .
 Gundestrup cauldron dates from 2nd-centuryBCE Denmark . Deities connected with death, fertility, and birth are shown on Gundestru cauldron . Cauldron is believed to be a symbol of Christianity .
 The shift from a hunter-gather lifestyle is revealed by the number of farming tools and pottery objects that were made at this time .
 Flint hand-ax made by Homo heidelbergensis in Europe about 500,000-300,000 years ago . It was found in the region of Europe about 300,000 to 500,00 years ago, and was made in Flint .
 Carved rock from approximately 75,000 years ago, discovered in Blombos cave near Stilbaai, South Africa, was discovered by scientists .
 The piece is made from red ocher with a deliberately engraved design . Considered to be one of the first examples of art, it was made from ocher red .
 Cro-Magnon flute, C 45,000 years old, discovered in a cave at Divje Babe, in the Idrijca valley in western Slovenia . Thought to be one of the earliest musical instruments .
 Arrowheads such as this were created by skilled artisans by pressing a bone or antler tool against the edges to create a finely flaked thin artifact . Arrowheads are created by pressing the edges of an antler or bone to create the edge .
 Carved pillar, c 9000 CE, from the Góbekli Tepe archaeological site in southeastern Turkey, is carved on the site . Carved pillars were found in the area .
 Stone sculpture, 6000 BcE, showing both fish and human characteristics, is from Lepenski Vir, Yugoslavia . It was created in the 1950s and is thought to be a work of art by Vladimir Putin .
 Quernstone, a simple hand mill to grind cereal crops, was built in the 1920s in Egypt . Quernstones are used to grind cereals and other cereals .
 Serrated flint, antler harpoon, and flint point mounted on a wooden shaft, made by modern humans during and after the late Ice Age, 18,000-10,000 years ago . Modern humans made the harpoon 18,00 years ago, and 10,
 Egyptian dagger, 3500-3100 BCE, from Gebel el-Arak, Egypt, with scenes of battle and hunting carved on the handle, made from hippopotamus ivory, and a blade of the highest quality knapping .
 This is an example of one of the earliest three-dimensional representations of humans from ancient Egypt . It was found in graves of the predynastic period .
 Goddess figurine, from El’ Ma'mariya, Egypt, 36003500 BCE, made from painted terra-cotta . It is made from terra cotta made from .
 Pottery was often painted and engraved and engraved as well as being useful, pottery was painted and engraved .
 Carved spearthrower in shape of a mammoth, from the rock shelter of Montastruc, Tarn-etGaronne, France .
 Approximately 12,500 years old, this tool is carved from reindeer antler . The tool was carved from the antler and is believed to date back to 12,000 years .
 Foundation stone engraved with cuneiform writing from the famous Sumerian city of Ur . Founded in Ur, the foundation stone is believed to have been found in the city .
 A 4,000-year-old brick cone was placed in a mud-brick wall to record the foundation of a building . The cone was used to record a building's foundation .
 Carved from ivory, the animals indude elephants and snakes; wading birds and a giraffe; hyenas and cattle . The animals are carved from ivory and carved from the ivory .
 As the glacial period of the Ice Age came to an end, conditions around the world improved for human life and the hunter-gatherer lifestyle began to die out .
 Many of the advances in civilization were spurred on by global warming, which gave new opportunities to humankind . The advances were made in response to global warming .
 Human populations increased and spread as areas that had been glacial became temperate . Human populations grew as glacial areas were temperate and became temperated .
 Everyone in the world lived by hunting and gathering 12,000 years ago . After the Ice Age, large game animals died out in many areas, and people turned to smaller animals and wild plant foods .
 Following a drought about 15,000 years ago, hunting bands in southwest Asia began planting wild wheat, barley, and other grasses to supplement strains of what grew in the wild . Hunting bands planted wild wheat and barley to supplement strain strains of the wild.
 By 12,000 years ago some groups had begun to exploit their own food supplies . People still lived as hunter-gatherers, moving around seasonally in search of food .
 Only 6,000 years later, virtually every human society with the ability to farm and herd animals produced its own food . griculture was not ""invented"" by one person in a sudden flash of genius .
 Hunting groups would have been aware seeds germinated when they were planted in the soil . Hunting groups were aware that seeds would germinate when planted in soil .
 The switch from the huntergatherer lifestyle to one of agriculture and animal domestication was one that happened independently in various cultures around the world .
 civilization as we know it today stems from the changes that took place from about 12,000 years ago . It was partly prompted by climate change and was a momentous step forward for humankind . The changes were prompted by the effects of climate change .
 The remains of domestic and wild animals can tell us a lot about the diet and lifestyle growth patterns in teeth . In the area known as ""the Fertile Crescent,"" which includes Turkey, Syria, and Iraq, people began to domesticate goats, sheep, and pigs by living
 The teeth of people from Abu Hureyra show heavy wear associated with eating ground cereals . For example, the teeth of residents of the region are showing heavy wear .
 The last part of the Stone Age period, beginning 10,000 BCE in the Middle East and 5,500 BCE in central Europe, and 4,500 BC in northern Europe . The Stone Age era is known as the Middle Ages .
 Introduction of farming is a key characteristic of the Neolithic of our ancestors . The introduction of farming was a key feature of our Neolithic .
 Plants were adapted from their wild varieties into crops that were tended and harvested . Plants were gradually adapted from wild varieties to crops that had to be tended .
 Einkorn, a variety of wheat, was the first domesticated cereal . It was grown in the Fertile Crescent . It is now known as the first type of cereal .
 The genetic changes to cereal grasses and animals that resulted from domestication occurred over a relatively short time . Cereal grasses were domesticated by humans in a relatively small time .
 Key sites for early farming include Gobekli Tepe, Jericho, Gatalhüyók, and ‘Ain Ghazal . Key sites of early farming are Gobekl Tepe .
 Abu Hureyra in the Euphrates Valley became a compact farming community of mud-brick houses separated by courtyards and narrow alleyways .
 As the plants they had sought out became harder to find due to the drier climate, tae people there began to cultivate the cereal rye .
 Corn, domesticated in central America by 5000 &cE, developed from a wild grass, teosinte, and is still found in Mexico . They (9 1E b b Corn) developed from the wild grass teosine and are still found on Mexican soil .
 As farming spread throughout much of the Americas, farmers developed strains that adapted to local conditions such as arid environments . Llamas were the only pack animal in the Americas used by Andean traders for carrying textiles, fishmeal and other commodities .
 Analysis of bones reveals the number of domesticated sheep gradually outnumbered wild animals . Ground cereals became part of the diet in the early 20th century . The number of sheep in the UK rose to 10,000 years ago .
 At Gobekli Tepe in Turkey, examples of what may be the earliest stone temples, dating from 9000 BCE, have been discovered . The earliest stone temple dates back to the 9th century .
 This was a community on the verge of becoming a permanent village with structured belief systems . This was the first time a village had been built up to a permanent community with structured beliefs systems .
 Farmers in the Andes grew numerous potato varieties, adapted to different microenvironments high in the mountains . The Andes are famous for their potato varieties .
 Farmers in the Yangtze Valley in southern China had domesticated wild rice by at least 8000 BCE . This is probably at about the same time as along the Ganges River in India, India .
 Chinese agriculture became highly organized and intensive over later centuries, especially in the south . Agriculture became more intensive in China's south .
 Northern Chinese farmers had to contend with frequent droughts and floods . Northern China farmers have been hit hard by frequent drought and floods in recent years .
 People may have first planted cereals as a way of preserving their plant-gathering way of life . People may now plant cereals instead of cereals in order to preserve their plants .
 Sheep domesticated early, by 10,000 gce, probably as a result of close association between hunters and wild herds . Sheep were domesticated, probably due to close association with hunters and herds .
 Goats provided flesh, skins, milk, and other by-products for their owners . Goat meat, skins and milk were among the goat's by-product .
 It expanded across the Mediterranean, then northward, developing with slight variations in the associated crafts and architectural style as it spread . It spread from the Mediterranean to the northward .
 The ancient native American population developed an expertise with wild plants . Farming the Americas is an important part of the history of the Americas .
 Around 10,000 BCE cultures began to live by farming . By 4000 BCE, many hunter-gatherer groups in the Americas were farming .
 It seems to have occurred in isolation in other parts of the world over the next 8,000 years . The discovery is thought to have happened in isolation over the course of that time . It is believed to be the first time the discovery has been found in the world .
 In the Andes Mountains in South America, hunters experimented with the cultivation of potatoes and other indigenous root vegetables . The Andes are the most mountainous region in the world .
 Corn domesticated from teosinte, a grass native to Central America, was domesticated . Corn was first domesticated by humans from a grass that is native to the region .
 They were tamed in several locations, including the Sahara and southwest Asia . They were later found in areas such as southwest Asia and the Sahara .
 Not everyone is needed in order to produce enough food to feed the community . Not everyone was needed to produce food, but the community needed to feed it .
 This was stored for times of need or traded, creating new trading possibilities . This is stored in the hope of finding a buyer for the goods .
 Farming fed more people within smaller areas, promoting growth in population . Farming helped feed more people in smaller areas and fed more than half of the population .
 As populations increased, so did the pressure on the land . The land has been under pressure since the early 1900s . The area has been heavily affected by climate change .
 If favorable areas could not be sought out, new techniques had to be developed, such as irrigation systems used in Egypt . Egypt is one of the world's most populous countries .
 People in the first permanent village settlements lived on the meat and produce from their domesticated herds . They supplemented their diet with wild game and wild plant foods .
 One of the key features of early hunter-gatherer sites is the existence of storage facilities for food . The settlements were likely to have been found in the early days of hunting .
 Communities were planning for the season ahead and storing grain over the winter . This indicates that communities were planning to store grain in advance of the season .
 Early farmers would have lived from harvest to harvest, and the danger of starvation was always present . These early farmers would not have been able to rely on food from harvest .
 Hunter-gatherer sites, such as hunting camps, were seasonal and impermanent . In TEMPORARY SETTLEMENTS hunter-gathere sites were seasonal, impermanent and permanent .
 "This lack of material objects means that our evidence of this lifestyle is meager," says the author of the book .
 Early human populations were nomadic, moving around in search of food, as it became available . Early humans moved around looking for food, moving to find it available .
 Up to about 10,000 years ago, life revolved around the constant search for food . Life on the move was a constant struggle to find food .
 New areas were colonized as groups sought to exploit new sources of food . New areas gradually colonized by groups of people .
 Tools, such as the digging tool, were developed as part of this transition . Tools such as digging tools were developed in the 1970s and '80s .
 The way of life of the hunter-gatherers was highly successful and adaptable . It was highly adaptable and highly successful .
 At Abu Hureyra, Syria, several hundred farmers lived in close proximity to their fields and each other . Hundreds of farmers lived close to each other in the area .
 In another early settlement, 'Ain Ghazal, in modern Jordan, herds of goats were kept and wild animals were hunted . In other early settlements, goats were also kept .
 By 8000 BCE it had become a small walled town, whose inhabitants lived in ININENTION for grave goods or ceremonial purposes .
 Fired clay vessels are a feature of all early farming cultures around the world . Fired clay pots are a form of clay vessels used in early farming .
 Bowls were used for cooking and eating; large jars and round-bottomed pots held liquids or stored grain . Bowls and jars were used to hold liquids and stored grain in jars .
 Most early vessels were made by joining clay coils, or by shaping a pot from a clay lump . Most early pot pots were made from clay coils or by joining a lump .
 Pots, such as this particularly sophisticated example, first appeared among the Jomon people of Japan before 10,000 8c, and in Mali, West Africa, at about the same time . Pots are thought to have been found in Japan and Mali .
 Most pottery was for strictly utilitarian purposes, but skilled potters also made fine-walled, elaborately decorated vessels beehive-shaped houses with stone foundations and plastered floors . Many of these houses had private courtyards and ovens, many of which were private cour
 Catalhoyuk in Turkey thrived from 7000 BCE and was inhabited for over 1,000 years . Another highly successful, long-lived, and large settlement in Turkey was Catalyuk in the 7th century BC . Catalyoyuk was the largest settlement in the world,
 The population lived in rectangular houses, built very close together, which were entered through the roof . The population of the town was mainly white and white .
 Black volcanic glass, obsidian, used to make cutting tools, is highly-prized black volcanic glass . One reason for the site's success may have been its trade in obsidian glass .
 Cereal grains were the staple diet in all early farming communities across southwest Asia . Cereal grain was the main source of food for many of the world's early farmers . Early farming communities in southwest Asia ate cereal grains .
 Apart from bread or gruel (commonly oatmeal boiled in some ways, they had been better off as hunter-gatherers . Gathering food is less labor-intensive than producing it .
 The benefits of farming allowed populations to grow and society as we know it today to flourish . However, the benefits were limited to the small amount of people from a smaller area .
 People now lived in crowded villages, with the same neighbors for generations . Specialization is the focus of the village's specialization .
 Men were probably responsible for herding animals, perhaps some of the work in the fields, and hunting, while women prepared food, and were responsible for foraging and food storage .
 Within such communities specific roles developed, as not everyone was required to find food .
 Some people became part-time specialists such as shamans and spirit mediums, canoe builders, and potters . At the same time, some people became shamanists and spirits mediums .
 A network of family members would have helped each other in times of crop failure, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The network of relatives would have been able to help each other, he says .
 Ancestors were associated with the fertility of the land and were worshipped . Ancestors are associated with fertility, were worshipped. Ancestors believed to have been associated with their fertility .
 Some of the dead at Jericho were decapitated and buried beneath the floors of their houses . Some of them were beheaded and buried in their homes .
 Their relatives modeled the revered ancestor’s features in clay on the skulls and buried them in pits . Their relatives then modeled them in clay .
 At 'Ain Ghazal, collections of clay figurines were also buried in a deliberate fashion . At ‘Ain Gazal’, the collection of figurines was also buried .
 In the first villages, people would have lived in close communities like this modern-day Tuareg village in Mali, Africa, on an island in the Niger River . The rise of community life in Mali has led to the rise of the first village .
 Domesticated animals including goats and sheep would have been corralled and kept in areas between the houses . Animals would have had to be kept in separate areas between houses .
 Shrine figure from ‘Ain Ghazal, dating from 7250 BCE, seems to stare into eternity . Shrine figure is an ancestral figure from 'Ain Gazal'
 It was probably dressed in robes or costumes commemorating a revered ancestor . It stood on a house platform and was likely to have been dressed in costumes .
 The establishment of villages and farming communities led to population growth and new challenges for those who lived in them . After PE the establishment of village villages led to the creation of farming communities .
 Growing population densities led to unsanitary conditions in the area . Health risks include a lack of food and water in the region .
 Higher populations led to greater intensification of farming methods, such as irrigation . Farming methods were also intensified by greater numbers of people .
 As human mental abilities developed, so did beliefs in powers greater than humankind and some kind of afterlife . Beliefs in the afterlife grew as humans became more aware of their abilities .
 Farming communities such as Catalhóyük, Turkey, had rooms for ritual associated with the dead . Farming communities had rooms where ritual was performed .
 The most visible mark of Neolithic beliefs are the spectacular megalithic structures built after 4500 BCE in much of the Mediterranean and in Western Europe .
 These include chambered tombs, “menhirs” , stone rows, and stone circles . Stone circles are a popular form of burial practices in the Middle Ages .
 Henges consist of a circular or oval area enclosed by a bank, but usually have their associated ditch on the inside rather than the outside of the bank . Henges usually have fewer entrances and fewer entrances to their banks .
 Woodhenge in Wiltshire, England, is perhaps the most famous example of a wooden circle . Some contained wood or stone circles, some contained wood .
 Stone passageway in the West Kennet long barrow leads from a small forecourt to chambers for the dead .
 Neolithic megalithic structures of the Neolithic period are awe-inspiring even today . Their mystery adds to their appeal .
 Frequently associated with burials and seeming to follow lunar, solar, or cosmic alignments, they are strongly tied to rituals linking humans to the wider landscape they inhabit . They are strongly associated with rituals linked to burials .
 An earlier phase of Stonehenge consisted of a low circular bank with a ditch running along its inside and a row of timber posts along the inner side of that . remaining evidence of the wooden structure is the post holes into which the timber posts were set .
 Stone circles are most commonly found in southwestern England, western Scotland, and northwestern France . Stone circles may be found in those areas, perhaps due to the supply of stone blocks .
 The stone circle at Avebury, in Britain, is among the largest that survive .
 The stones may have indicated astronomical alignments and had religious significance . The stones were believed to have been found in the early 1900s .
 Similar purposes have been suggested for sites of standing stones and rows, such as the rows at Carnac in France .
 Barrows contained a number of bodies, which may have been exposed before final burial . The barrows were thought to contain a large number of corpses .
 Some were built with internal stone chambers and used over several generations . Some, such as the one at West Kennet, in England, were built in stone chambers . Others were used by generations of generations .
 Newgrange in Ireland and Gavrinis in Brittany are other examples of chambered tombs . The tomb was built in the 18th century .
 Cigar-shaped ritual enclosures with empty interiors are often associated with barrow sites . Barrow sites are thought to have been used as ritual sites .
 Stonehenge, England, was developed, altered, and used over hundreds of years . The most famous of all the megalithic sites is Stonehenges, which was developed and altered .
 Like other Neolithic monuments from 3000 BCE in northern Europe, it was part of a large sacred landscape that included sites of celebration and worship . The monument is part of the sacred landscape of northern Europe .
 Hills, lakes, mountains, rivers, and trees were all considered a part of the landscape that defined human existence . Hills and lakes were considered a key part of human existence in the world .
 The entrance to the burial mound in Ireland's Boyne Valley is blocked by a curb stone decorated with the concentric patterns that are common to megalithic art in northwest France and Ireland . When newly dug, mounds in chalkland areas would have been quite conspicuous .
 Stonehenge is close to Durrington Walls, as well as Woodhenge, and a number of burial mounds, including those in Amesbury .
 In 2950BCE, a simple earthwork enclosure was dug containing a circle of wooden posts . Then, in about 2950 BCE, an earthwork enclosures were dug containing wooden posts.
 Burials have been found around Stonehenge, along with finds that include amber and bone beads, showing that it was a site central to rituals of life and death .
 Those who performed the rituals that took place here were thought to be able to communicate with the dead and would have been important members of the community . The rituals are thought to have been performed by those who performed them in the belief they could communicate with spirits .
 Stonehenge may have been built to mark the summer and winter solstices in farming societies . These structures reflect developed beliefs and indicate an awareness of the natural world .
 The world's tallest tallest building in the U.S. is the tallest in the world's history . It's also striking feats of engineering and organizational ability, including engineering and organization .
 The megalithic structures in Europe were echoed around the world in later cultures . The structures were found in Europe and around Europe .
 They can be seen at sites in many countries, including the U.S. and Japan, including Japan .
 Elaborate funerary cults grew in North America after 1000 act act. Elaborately funerarycults grew after 1000 acts of act.
 Public ceremonies marked the solstices, and the first harvest was celebrated in plazas surrounded by temples on top of earthen mounds .
 Elsewhere around the world, funerary customs also played an important role in society . Funeral customs are important in many cultures .
 Japan's Kofun culture of the 3rd century ce and later is remarkable for its keyhole-shaped burial mounds . Japan's keyhole mounds are remarkable for their keyhole shape .
 The tradition of building elaborate sacred sites is still common today in cultures around the world in the form of Christian cathedrals, Islamic mosques, Buddhist temples, and even in the monuments erected to commemorate American presidents .
 As settlements became more complex, trade and ties between communities grew . Material culture became more developed in 5000 BCE .
 Flint was used to make the hardest and sharpest tools and weapons for thousands of years . Flint is now being used in Flint, Michigan, for the first time in its history . Flint has been used in the making of tools, weapons and weapons in the past .
 From simple chopping devices, humans went on to produce tools for particular tasks, including scrapers, cutters, and hand-axes . The tools were created by humans in the 1800s .
 As agriculture spread throughout southwestern Asia after 8000 BcE, settlements became more permanent . Agricultural settlements in southwestern Asia became permanent .
 With permanent settlement came closer ties to the land and to a specific territory and its resources . The settlement came with permanent settlement . With permanent settlements came closer .
 Most communities exchanged commodities such as grain, building materials, and toolmaking stone .
 The village of Catalhóyük in Turkey specialized in trading obsidian, a highly prized volcanic glass used for making tools, particularly sharp knives .
 Both ritual and social life soon became more elaborate . Rituals were more elaborate. Rituals began to be more elaborate in the 1930s .
 At Catalhóyük, what appear to be family shrines, have been excavated, revealing distinctive goddess figurines made of clay . People commemorated their ancestors and worshipped a fertility goddess .
 The advent of copperworking around 8,000 years ago was the beginning of a long association with metals . It was a significant watershed in human history, which led to even further innovation .
 Nebras th NO Aa 1 Pu I C A ORE . A rock containing naturally occurring mineral from which valuable metals or other constituents may be extracted .
 Those found in surface outcrops are easy to identify by their distinctive green color . The distinctive green colour is a sign of life in the desert .
 F to extract the metal from the metal that opened the door to a world of innovation, and the development of stronger and more practical items . It is the first time the metal has been extracted from the body of a metal .
 They are made from bronze with copper nails and ivory detail on the handle . They are also made of bronze with . copper nails . They were made from . bronze . with copper . nails .
 They soon began to use holes lined with clay, then crucibles (containers designed to withstand the heat of the fire) to produce the metal more efficiently .
 The use of copper led to significant cultural developments . It stimulated technological advances, but also led to cultural changes . Copper was first discovered in 18th century .
 As copper ore outcrops are patchily distributed, copper items and metal ingots became valued as tradable items . Copper items and copper ingots were valued as a tradable item in the 1970s .
 Copper and gold were imported from Anatolia (modern Turkey) and the Iranian Plateau . Mesopotamia had no native metal or ore, meaning copper and gold was imported .
 Growing lowland Mesopotamian towns began to exchange grain and other commodities for imported artifacts and ornaments . The traffic in these materials grew quickly, and growing lowland towns began exchanging grain for artifacts .
 The finds represent the oldest known gold artifacts in the world . They date from the end of the 5th millennium sce. The finds are believed to be the oldest of the world's oldest gold artifacts .
 The grave of one individual contained almost 1,000 gold objects, including beads and rings . The grave was filled with beads, rings, beads, and other items .
 Complex levels of social organization arose, with specialty roles developing within the community . Specialty roles developed in the community, from baker to potter, to metalworker .
 Many of the innovations in copperworking came about as an indirect result of improved agricultural methods . Copper tools and ornaments came about in the same way as agricultural techniques .
 Efficient arable farming in the Nile valley enabled villages to develop and thrive, maintained by a surplus of food . The Nile valley is now the heart of the Nile Valley .
 The first copper-tin alloy—bronze— was produced in around 2500 BCE . More efficient farming methods meant that not everyone was needed for food production, and so more .
 Bronze is harder than copper and therefore more suitable for practical applications, such as weapons, armor, and tools . Copper was traded all over southeastern Europe, and objects made from copper were traded .
 Rich graves have been discovered at Varna, on the Black Sea coast of Bulgaria . Rich graves were discovered at the city of Varna in the 1990s .
 He was nicknamed Ötzi, after the unfinished bow and arrows, and a flint knife Otztal Valley of the Alps where he was found .
 Many of the tattoos found on his body may have details about his life and violent death preserved in his intestines . Scientific analysis has revealed many containing the primitive wheat einkorn, was the tattooed man .
 Otzi parried a dagger attack with his hands before dying . Otzi was fleeing attackers—a flint arrowhead lies in one shoulder and he parried an arrowhead . He died of his injuries in a battle with attackers .
 The use of metal, from bronze to iron and steel, has transformed human civilization . Otzi's pre-discovery of the world's most precious metal is at the center of the most precious and most valuable discoveries .
 Between 2800 and 1900 Bce, at the beginning of the Bronze Age, people of the Beaker Culture (so named for the distinctive shape of the pottery) lived across northern Europe .
 Copper needed to be transported in increasingly large quantities . Copper was one of the raw materials for bronze .
 Handles on each end for carrying, and a uniform size, made ingots of the metal easier to transport, and trade and quantities easier to control .
 copper ingot found in a hoard from Cyprus dates from about 1200 act . Copper ingot was found in the hoard from the island of Cyprus .
 A period defined by the use of bronze as the most important material for making tools and weapons . Bronze was used in the early 1900s .
 Iron was introduced in around 1200 &cE in the Middle East . It eventually became used more than bronze, as it was tougher and more suitable for use in tools and weapons . Iron became more popular as a tool and weapon in the region .
 Iron can be smelted only at about 2,900°F , though the metal can be worked at lower temperatures . Iron can also be worked as early as 2,800°F .
 In January of 1848 a work crew camped on the American River at Coloma near Sacramento, CA found a few tiny nuggets of gold .
 Half a million people from around the world descended on California in search of instant wealth . This discovery set off a mass of migration as half a million arrived in California to find wealth .
 First settlements that developed from villages to towns were in modern-day Iraq . MYA—5000 BCE BEFORE The first settlements developed in the region of modern Iraq .
 Longdistance trade of volcanic glass and brightly painted pots was one of the factors that led to larger villages and towns . The trade led to greater contact between settlements and villages .
 Female figurines, like the one shown here, are characteristic of this society . The society is characterized by female figurines like this .
 Mesopotamia, which was also part of Iraq, was settled by village farmers as early as 6000 ct. Mesopotamians were settled by villagers as well as 6,000 ct .
 The wheel originated in Mesopotamia in the 5th century sce and is believed to have developed from the potter's wheel . The communities living in the INVENTION communities live in the communities .
 It is one of the most important inventions in human history as it revolutionized transport . The invention of the wheeled wheeled wheels revolutionized transportation .
 By the 5rd millennium the use of wheels had spread east, where burials with wheeled carts took place . The use of wheeled wheels spread east of the 5th century .
 Chariots pulled by domesticated horses came into use in the Black Sea region of Europe and northern Mesopotamia after 5000 Bce and became valued by armies on move .
 The scene below shows wagons with solid wheels and is taken from the Sumerian Royal Standard of Ur dating to c 2600 act. south relied on long-distance trade for many commodities, and on irrigation and wetland agriculture .
 By 4000 8ce, village life in southwestern and east Asia was firmly established . Village life in southwest Asia was established by 4000 8c .
 Society became more . stratified, with a growing social chasm between the rulers and the ruled . Society became . more ` stratified . Society . became more socially .
 Naked men bearing offerings of fruit and vegetables approach the shrine of the goddess Innin . Carved stone vase of 5000 BCE found in her temple at Uruk .
 In 2003, looters stole the vase from the Iraq Museum in Baghdad; it was later recovered . The vase was stolen by looters in 2003 .
 Village markets with their visiting traders were a major part of community life at a time when all information was exchanged by word of mouth, and merchants brought news of the outside world . Village markets are now a popular tourist attraction in Egypt .
 Modern-day Egyptian village is little different from the first villages thousands of years ago . Egyptian villages are little different today than thousands of centuries ago .
 Many farming villages in southwest Asia had grown into towns with over a thousand inhabitants . Four thousand years after agriculture began, many farming villages had grown to towns with more than a thousand people .
 In southern Iraq, Egypt, and elsewhere, a few strategically placed communities became towns with neighborhoods, public buildings, and sacred precincts . The world's earliest towns developed in Mesopotamia, perhaps as a need to organize the construction of irrigation channels and canals .
 At first, towns were little more than agglomerations of villages and related families . They soon became centers of trade and vast irrigation works that transformed countryside .
 Each clustered around temples and sacred precincts built on top of mud brick pyramids called ziggurats . The pyramids were built on the pyramids and are clustered around sacred precincts .
 Its rulers governed satellite villages extending at least 6 miles from the temple . Most people lived in the town, partly for protection, and also for protection . Everything was governed from the center .
 The growing town was the hub of major trade networks that brought metals, lumber, and other commodities from the highlands . In exchange for grain from the south's fertile soils, the town brought in grain .
 Uruk may even have maintained outlying colonies as far as the Zagros Mountains, several hundred miles away .
 Mesopotamian legends called Eridu the dwelling place of Enki, God of the Abyss, the fountain of human wisdom . Enki was the god of wisdom, according to legends .
 The people believed that Enki had created order from the chaos of primordial waters . Enki was believed to have created order out of the chaos .
 Eridu lay in its heyday, around 5,000 years ago, in a fertile landscape near the coast . The city was known for its fertile landscape and fertile soil .
 In 4000BCE, Egypt consisted of a valley of farmers living in small communities spaced along the Nile . King Horus Aha, often called Menes, ruled Egypt until his death in 2000 BC .
 Horus Aha assumed the role of divine king, the living god Horus on Earth . His predecessor, Narmer, a Upper Egyptian chieftain, may have unified Egypt .
 His power came from prowess in war and control of lucrative trade routes with Lower Egypt, even Mesopotamia their fields . His power was his ability to control trade routes .
 Abydos and Nekhen in Upper Egypt were based on growing towns like Nekhen . It was a competitive world of small kingdoms, the largest of which were based in Egypt . The kingdom was based in the region of Egypt .
 Nekhen was a major pottery trading center in the ancient city of Nekhen . Abydos was the ancient entrance to the underworld, but Nekhen is a major trading center .
 Nekhen's chieftains may have been the forerunners of the Egyptian rulers called pharaohs . They are known to have supervised agriculture, and, like later kings, may have considered living gods . Nekhen may have overseen agriculture .
 Town hierarchy as towns grew, so society became increasingly hierarchical . Town hierarchy became more and more complex as society grew . Town hierarchies became more complex and more elaborate .
 At the top was the ruler, who may have governed as a living god as well as a secular leader . The ruler was likely to govern as a king as a god as a ruler, or a king .
 Beneath him were his immediate family and a small privileged class of high officials and priests . Beneath was a small group of priests, officials, priests .
 Lower down the scale came artisans, lesser functionaries, soldiers, and the commoners who were the manpower upon which all of society depended . Artisans, soldiers and commoners were among those who were commoners .
 Early Sumerian rulers and Egyptian pharaohs ruled by precedent (using the decisions of their predecessors rather than written laws) gave limited public TOWN PLANNING jg AFTER .
 Written scripts like this one were in use in both Egypt and Mesopotamia . By 5100 8cE, written scripts were used in Egypt and the region .
 The tokens were developed from day tokens used for recording commercial transactions . They developed from the tokens used to record commercial transactions.
 In Egypt and Mesopotamia, cities grew rapidly to become major trading centers, with imposing public buildings . Cuneiform is the name of the first Cuneifera script of the series .
 As urban populations rose, cities became the hubs of larger empires and empires . Cities became the centers of larger kingdoms and empires.
 The volume of longdistance trade in commodities like iron ore and lumber grew quickly . At the same time, the demand for gold, silver, and other precious materials .
 By 30008cE, irrigation agriculture used simple canals to divert floodwater to crops . More elaborate agricultural landscapes with networks of canals became more elaborate .
 Life in early towns was unsanitary and chaotic with people living at close quarters . People lived in seclusion and lived in close quarters. appearances. appearances .
 The very fact that they were not often seen in public led to the perception that they had supernatural powers . Perhaps the very fact of their lack of public appearances led to them being thought of having supernatural powers.
 A divine ruler's power came from his ability to control the labor of thousands of commoners . The king's power was to control his people's labor, according to the Bible .
 His authority came not only from a threat of force, but also from pervasive ideas and religious beliefs commemorated by art and writing on temple walls . His authority was reinforced by elaborate ceremonies .
 The latter were often displays of power that required imposing settings and conspicuous burial places such as pyramids . Egypt's pyramids and pyramids were often places of power needed to display power .
 By the end of the 4th millennium BCE in Mesopotamia, almost everyone lived in cities . For reasons that are still not fully understood, the Mesopotamians still live in cities for the most .
 In Egypt, town dwellers—even high officials—maintained close ties to relatives in areas surrounding the town . This was a rapidly changing world where wealth assumed increasing Egyptian towns . Town dwellers, even high officials, maintained close ties with relatives .
 Little detail is known about the first Egyptian towns, which developed toward the end of the 4th millennium BCE, but they probably began as connected groups of growing villages .
 Different communities came together, perhaps for defensive reasons, under the rule of charismatic rulers . Different communities were united under charismatic rulers.
 Some early Egyptian towns, such as Nekhen, became important trading centers and river ports, ruled by chiefs who competed with their neighbors .
 The roots of many of the most important cities in civilization began at this time . The roots began in this time of the first city .
 Palette of Narmer dates to 5000 Bce . Appears to show an early king and the unification of Upper and Lower Egypt .
 They began to develop greater powers of communication, create complex belief systems, and form cultured urban civilizations . They developed in the Middle East, India, Europe, China, and Central and South America .
 Start of Bronze Age in southeast Europe-in | Minoan Crete and | Cyclades islands of Greece .
 First cities develop in South America; several settlements featuring temple complexes emerge in coastal Peru . Caral ruins as 5000-2750 .
 2500 Indus Valley civilization reaches its peak . Great Pyramid of Khufu, Giza > 2500 scc A Stamp seal .
 Metalworking, in the form of copper, reaches across Europe to British Isles . Metalworking is a popular form of work across Europe and beyond .
 Sargon founds and rules the city of Akkad, uniting city-states of Mesopotamia into the first empire . The first empire was the first Mesopotamian empire .
 3rd Dynasty of Ur revives Sumerian civilization in southern Mesopotamia . King UrNammu of Ur builds a ziggurat (stepped tower), now typical of Mesopotamian architecture, while renovating Ur's temple .
 A Pepy Il, 6th-Dynasty Egyptian pharaoh 2200, is the first pottery in South America . First pottery was made of pottery .
 Middle Kingdom Egypt ruled by powerful officials, such as Sesostris . Egypt conquers Nubia and extends southern . frontier of Egypt to the second cataract . Beginnings of Shang state, China .
 In Peru, ceremonial center of La Florida built on the Yellow River, China. develops on Yellow River . La Florida was built in Peru in the 1970s .
 Old Kingdom of Babylon established in Mesopotamia . Indus Valley civilization was established in ancient Mesopotamian culture .
 A Hammurabi, king of Babylon, defeats neighboring Elam and conquers and integrates kingdom . Babylon controls all of Mesopotamia. Babylon controls Mesopotami .
 Minoan civilization of Crete at its height; palace of Knossos built . Cretan Complex civilizations developed along the river valleys of the Tigris and Euphrates in the Middle East, the Nile in Egypt, the Indus in India, and later, the Yellow River in
 Trade, increasing prosperity, and technological advances produced increasingly powerful centralized states, and in time, empires, empires .
 Hammurabi of Babylon of Babylon displayed on monumental stelae (memorial stones) in temples throughout Mesopotamia . These factors also brought many of these 1755 Law code of Hammurababas to Mesopotami temples .
 Coa TU Disintegration of Middle Kingdom Egypt; start of Second Intermediate Period . 1700 the Indus Valley the Induption Valley .
 Mycenae, Greece, emerges as center of civilization in 4 Aegean; development 7*1 of Linear B script by -] Mycensaeans . In Europe, ling was most popular in Crete, from around 2000 & BCE .
 During Second Intermediate Period, J | Lower Egypt ruled by the Hyksos, a warrior elite of . Asiatic origins; | Upper Egypt ruled from Thebes by . native kings . During Second . Intermediate period, J . ruled by . the Hykos . During . Lower
 Rise of Egypt's New Kingdom, with new capital, Thebes, facing the Valley of the Kings . Egypt's rise of the New Kingdom comes after the death of the Pharaohs .
 Crete falls under Mycenaean control . Crete and Minoan kingdom unite as Hittite Old Kingdom, with capital Hattusha .
 Arrival of 5000-700 BCE 1500 BcE 1500 Hittite Old Kingdom of Anatolia declines; kingdom of Mittani emerges nearby in north Mesopotamia . Mittani emerged nearby in . Mesopotamian kingdom .
 Mycenaean Greece at summit of power, with trading links from the Levant to Sicily . Greece's trade links with the Levant and Sicily included .
 A Mycenaean-style vase, Crete, was found in the Minoan vase . Warfare between New Kingdom Egypt, Hittite New Kingdom, and Mittani for control of the Levant .
 Kassite Babylonia, the Hittites, Mittani, and Egypt linked diplomatically and by intermarriage . Egypt and the Kassites were also closely associated with each other . Egypt was one of the most important cities in the world .
 Amenophis IV styles himself I “Akhenaten,” founds d short-lived capital ElAmarna . He advocates worship of Aten, the Sun, and instigates an artistic revolution . Shang-Chinese v oracle bone .
 Mid-1300s City of Ashur breaks free from Mittani; its rulers proclaim themselves kings of Assyria . The city is now known as the Assyria of the Middle East .
 Kassite dynasty of Babylon ended when city is sacked by neighboring Elam . Rameses III battling the ""Sea Peoples” of Babylon . Kassite dictatorship ended when city was attacked by neighboring Elam .
 Egypt battles with A Hatshepsut's temple, New Kingdom Egypt . Hittite king Hattusili III agrees Treaty of Kadesh with Rameses Il of Egypt .
 Olmec site of San Lorenzo destroyed; Olmic site of La Venta assumes leading role. d ¢.965 Solomon king of Rise of urban culture .
 First First fortified hilltop 950s | ironworking south of sites in Western Europe . First First . fortified . hilltop . 950s .
 Chavín politically and culturally dominant in Peru . Cult of supernatural werejaguar reaches height . Chavin cult of were jaguar cult reaches height.
 Dark age throughout Wet rice and bronze Middle East. technology. technology Sped 1030 to Korea. Technology. technology .
 Archaeological evidence suggests that prehistoric hunter-gatherers were robust and healthy . Sargon Il of Assyria > 52 FLINT DRILL 3000-700 BCE before Sargon .
 Their diets were probably very well attuned to the needs of the human body . Their diets-mainly raw fruits, leaves, and vegetables, with some lean meat and fresh fish- were probably well .
 Hunter-gatherers probably suffered rarely from infectious diseases . They were constantly on the move, and not living in large groups .
 Life expectancy was low, but this probably had more to do with physical dangers than disease or want . Life expectancy is low but this is probably due to physical dangers, rather than disease .
 During the Neolithic period, people began to make sophisticated stone tools and weapons . Neolithic people made stone tools, weapons and tools .
 Teeth in remains found nearby showed signs of skilful drilling to remove rotten dental tissue . Teeth were found in the remains of a man whose remains were found to have been found in a rural area . The dental remains were also found to show signs of dental drilling .
 They lived close to their livestock, too, and this led to a proliferation of diseases that had not been a problem before . This led to the proliferation of these diseases, and they were not previously a problem .
 Waste was another hazard, and water supplies quickly became contaminated . Water supplies were quickly contaminated .
 An agricultural lifestyle brought with it diets very different from those of huntergatherers . Agricultural diets were very different to those of the hunter-gatherer .
 There was less variety, and a single crop — often wheat — was often dominated . There was also less variety of crops, and there were less variety .
 Repetitive tasks such as grinding grain to make flour caused excessive wear to people's joints, leading to arthritis .
 More food was cooked, which can destroy vitamins and introduce toxins, while babies depended less on their mothers’ milk . At the same time, more food is cooked, and babies depend on their mother’s milk .
 Changes led to populations of smaller stature and with weaker bones, as well as new conditions such as anemia and scurvy . These changes led to population being smaller and with smaller stature .
 Serious bone fractures were successfully reset-remains show signs of regrowth . Often, serious bone fractures can be successfully reset .
 Busy, booming cities were surrounded by fertile land given over to agriculture . Farming became so efficient that only a relatively small proportion of the population needed to be involved in producing food .
 This led to the development of trade, mathematics and astronomy, writing, and a flourishing of cultural activities . It led to trade, math and astronomy and astronomy .
 People in early civilizations suffered from some ill effects of progress . The price of progress is the price of living in early cultures .
 Their diets were generally lower in fiber and higher in fat and salt than their hunter-gatherer predecessors . Their diet was generally lower than those of their predecessors .
 There is evidence that this led to an increase in conditions such as high blood pressure, heart disease, and cancer . The trend began with the rise of agriculture several thousand years earlier, and continues today .
 The earliest known surgery, dating back to 40,000 BCE, was trepanning—drilling a hole in the skull .
 The practice occurred in Central America, Furope, and Asia . carried diseases such as the plague and typhoid . It was used to carry out the practice .
 No one in early civilizations could understand disease the way modern medical science does . Modern medical science has helped explain disease in ancient times .
 It was normal to attribute the causes of disease to supernatural forces . Thus, it was normal for the diagnosis of disease .
 People believed that they became unwell as the result of possession by evil spirits or because of angry gods or sorcery carried out by their enemies .
 Explanation of disease appealed to the supernatural, so did most attempts to cure people . Just as explanations of disease appeal to supernatural, do most attempts at curing people .
 In most cultures, priests and sorcerers were at least as important as physicians . Exorcism of demons, sacrifice to the gods, shamanistic rituals, and counter-sorcery were commonplace .
 China has the strongest tradition of using herbs and roots in medicine . The Ebers papyrus was written in Egypt in the 2nd millennium BCE and China has a strong tradition .
 The story goes that he tested hundreds of different herbs, searching for ones with medicinal effects . The story says he was trying to find out what herbs he could use .
 He is credited with the introduction of tea-drinking for its remedial qualities . He is also credited with introducing tea drinking .
 The therapeutic use of plants is found in almost every corner of the world . Plants are therapeutic plants that can be used to treat depression and anxiety .
 The Olmec in Central America, for example, had areas of their gardens set aside for growing medicinal herbs . In some cases, the gardens were set aside to grow medicinal herbs for medicinal purposes .
 Papyri from ancient Egypt list remedies involving plants such as thyme, juniper, frankincense, and juniper . The desire to stay alive is a basic human instinct .
 People in early civilizations attempted to explain the origins of disease-and intervened to soothe pain, encourage healing, and effect cures .
 This led to a population explosion, but at the price of a dangerously restricted diet . It led to an explosion of population growth, but it came at the cost of a diet of restricted food .
 As Bronze Age gave way to the Iron Age in Europe and Asia after about 1000BCE, many killer diseases arose for the first time in human populations .
 The pathogens (diseasecausing organisms) evolved to cross species barriers from livestock, and were able to take hold because people were living so close together in mostly unsanitary conditions . In both cases, and in many others, the pathogens .
 In ancient Egypt, sharp bronze and copper instruments were used when embalming the dead, as well as for operating on the living . They contained a long list of “medical” incantations designed to turn away evil spirits .
 Ayurveda (literally ""knowledge of life"") is a holistic system that uses a combination of religion and science to create physical, mental, and spiritual well-being . Ayurvinga is a mixture of religion, science and medicine .
 Herbalism Healing based on supernatural beliefs is an example of folk medicine . Herbalists heal using supernatural beliefs . Folk medicine is a form of herbal medicine .
 Many ancient treatments based on herbs or other plants evolved through trial and error . Ancient treatments still used today for their analgesic or antibiotic, or antifungal action .
 In Mesopotamia, willow bark extract was used to relieve headaches and reduce fevers . Willow bark was also used in ancient times to relieve fevers and relieve headaches .
 People began to think rationally and organize their thoughts, discuss them with others, and derive theories . People began thinking rationally, organizing their thoughts and discussing them .
 This approach led not only to an encyclopedic knowledge of human anatomy and of a vast range of diseases, but also to well thought-out systems of diagnosis and treatment . This approach is the basis of modern medicine, and led to the creation of modern medical systems .
 The god Pazuzu, who as “king of the evil spirits” can ward off disease, looks down from the top of the amulet .
 During the Ist millennium sce, medicine became more systematic, but supernatural explanations and nonscientific folk remedies prevailed . Until after the scientific revolution of tattoos on a well-preserved body, nicknamed Otzi after its discovery, tally very closely with important acupuncture points .
 Ayurveda system flourished across the Indian subcontinent to restore health and well . being, and to relieve pain, across the world .
 Priests dressed in fish skins perform exorcism rituals at the bedside of the patient, probably a mother who has given birth . The ritual is believed to have taken place in the womb of a mother .
 Pazuzu, who has a dog's head, a scorpion's tail, and bird talons, chases the malevolent Lamashtu back to the netherworld .
 Lamashtu, the demonic goddess who preys on pregnant women and babies, has the naked torso of an old woman with a pig and a dog drinking from her breasts . Lamashu is a demonic goddess of the goddess of evil and evil .
 Mesopotamians had a complex belief system of supernatural beings and forces . The Mesopotamians believed in the belief system .
 Assyrian bronze amulet highlights the importance of Assyrian beliefs in explaining and treating disease .
 The health-giving or healing properties of many roots, seeds, and leaves have been recognized since ancient times and confirmed by modern medical science . Many of the ancient ideas about health and disease can be gleaned from the art, writing, and artifacts .
 Human remains, such as bones, d teeth, and other tissues, are equally important to human remains . Human remains are also important to the body of a person .
 Skeletal remains are the most valuable, because they decay very slowly . Skeletal bodies are most valuable in the world because they are very slowly decaying .
 They often show physical signs of deformity or malnutrition, and can also provide a physical record of certain medical interventions, such as primitive surgery .
 Further details can be revealed under the microscope and by carrying out tests . Further details will be revealed if you carry out tests to reveal more .
 Analysis of chemical isotopes present and examination of DNA can reveal subtle clues to what a person ate, how old they were, and how they lived and died . Analysis of a person's diet and age can reveal clues to how they died and lived .
 Claudius Galenus was the greatest Roman physician and anatomist . He lived in the 2nd century ce. and lived in Rome .
 His ideas about anatomy were based on careful observation, but many were false . His ideas were based upon careful observation but many of them were false, he says .
 The locations medicine was derived in isolation, Greek thinkers were influenced by Egyptian medicine, which had many excellent herbal remedies . The locations of these locations were based on ancient Egyptian medicine .
 A rich archaeological record documents the growth of irrigation, agriculture, trade, writing, towns, and complex societies . Archaeological records include irrigation, farming, trade and writing .
 Settlements grew due to irrigation programs . Settlements grow due to the irrigation programs.
 The organization and control needed resulted in more complex, layered societies . The organization needed to control society has resulted in complex societies .
 Sargon established the Akkadian dynasty and ruled 2540—2284actr. He was a great warrior-king . Sargon was one of the most powerful men in the world .
 He founded his capital city, Akkad, and created a centralized state that oversaw the first real empire in Mesopotamia . He founded the capital city and created the first Mesopotamian empire .
 It has been suggested that he established himself as a successful independent ruler first and then began expansionist policies .
 His military prowess could be explained by Akkadian techniques being more efficient than those of rival armies . Akkadians were more efficient in their warfare than their rivals .
 We know about Sargon's rule from an ancient document called the Sumerian King List . Sargon ruled the city of Sargon from the 7th century BC .
 BRONZE CAST HEAD, 23342154 BcE, of an AKKADIAN RULER, PROBABLY SARGON 54 . One figure is shown larger than | TR everyone else .
 Mesopotamia civilization thrived across an area that today includes Iraq, southwest Iran, east Syria, and southeast Turkey . It is likely that society—reaching its height this is the king, glass in hand, of sophistication slightly at his court .
 Mesopotamia is Greek for ""between rivers"—civilization here rested on a prime position between the Euphrates and Tigris rivers . Mesopotamia is also known for its position on the Tigris and Euphrates rivers .
 Civilization was focused initially on city-states in the south . The area was often called Sumer after the Sumerian language was widely spoken there .
 The lavish jewels worn by Queen Pu-abi feature precious metals and for eating, and reeds—used — semiprecious stones . Certain city-states and city-based dynasties—Uruk, Kish, Akkad, and Ur—rose to control
 This contrasts with Egypt and land-reclamation programs and its centralized rule, but bears some required well-drilled marshalling of similarity to the later lite of the Greek large numbers of people .
 Mesopotamia, a fertile land embraced by rivers, was the site of the first complex societies . Great foundations for what is thought to be cities of the third millennium included Ur, Lagash, Kish, Eridu, and Uruk .
 By 30005cE, competing city-states of great wealth and sophistication were flourishing here, with advanced irrigation and agricultural schemes and trade .
 Mesopotamian society had a hierarchy and a centralized structure headed by rulers who were all-powerful . But unlike Egypt's pharaohs, they were rarely thought to be divine .
 Grand royal palaces appeared throughout the region in the Early Dynastic era . Grand royal palace palaces were built in the Middle Ages .
 A game board of 2500 BcE, inlaid with shell and lapis lazuli, was found in a royal tomb in Ur Ur . We know of the sophistication and wealth of these palace cultures from discoveries such as the lavish, finely wrought Royal game .
 A court musician plucks at a lyre decorated with the bull's head that appears repeatedly on examples of this apparently popular Mesopotamian instrument . Heavily laden people in the procession are shown stooping visibly under the weight of sacks filled to the brim with foodstuffs
 Some laborers appear to have owned land or received rations linked to their work for central government . As in Egypt, to support such a society and its workers, some appear to own land or receive rations .
 Object was found in the royal tombs at Ur . Its purpose is a mystery . It was found by the king of Ur .
 20-in-wide wooden panels inlaid with shell, red limestone, and lapis lazuli reveal much about Mesopotamian life .
 This figure is seen in a fringed skirt, while others sport woolen fleeces . Others sport a woolen fleece, or a fringe skirt .
 In common with other civilizations, politics and religion were intertwined in ancient times . Rule and religion are intertwined in Egypt .
 Rulers took a lead in directing religious matters, while priests and priestesses took on ‘state’ functions . Some cities were ruled by priests, while others were governed by priests .
 Each city had a massive central mud-brick temple (such as the Ziggurat at Ur, see73), which was the home-on-Earth of the city’s god .
 Keeping order was made easier by the people’s belief that they must do the gods’ bidding, to the extent that, when royalty died, palace staff entombed themselves with their king .
 Around 74 bodies were found in one grave at Ur. Ur. specialists were needed administration . “Professional” layer of experts such as bureaucrats, scribes, and FA merchants were needed .
 In & this urbanized B civilization, many citydwellers lived in impressive townhouses of locally sourced mud brick, mud plaster, and wooden doors . The townhouses were built from mud brick and mud plaster .
 A large labor force was needed to cultivate the land and run the great irrigation and building projects . The labor force needed to run the irrigation and build projects .
 Playing lyres seems to have been a part of court or temple life in Mesopotamia . Poor in natural resources such as metal and stone, Mesopotamians forced to forge wideranging trade links .
 During the next millennium, a succession of cultures inherited the land between rivers . After millennium, the land was inherited by the next generation .
 As the Akkadian empire faded, local leaders won regional power in Kish, Uruk, and Lagash . Local leaders took control of the region .
 Irrigation systems were set up, temples rebuilt, and statues of Gudea were carved . The city was built in the early 1900s .
 After the Akkadian era, the Third Dynasty of Ur fought off competing city-states to found a short-lived empire . The Third Dynasty was built on Akkad achievements .
 The kings of Ur revived central rule to create a Sumerian renaissance harking back to the region's former glories . The king of Ur is believed to have been the most powerful king in the world .
 Since 19008ce, the city of Babylon, north of Sumer, had been emerging as a dominant power . Babylon was one of the most powerful cities in ancient times .
 The Old Babylonian era saw the rule of Hammurabi and his famous law code . The law code is a rich source of information about life in the Babylonian state .
 This drove much of the progress and expansion of their culture and gave them a leading profile in world politics . This led to the development of the country's culture and the rise of world politics, it is claimed .
 Its art included exquisite jewelry, musical instruments, and beautiful stone carving dating back to 4thmillennium Uruk .
 The period between early Neolithic settlement and 3100BcE is known as the Pre-Dynastic Era . The period is the period between the Neolithic and the pre-Neolithic era .
 Evidence discovered in tombs suggests a wealthy society . Evidence suggests people believed in an afterlife .
 The Early Dynastic Era covers the Ist and 2nd dynasties . The early Dynastic era covers Ist, 2nd and Ist dynastsies .
 Menes, or Horus Aha, united the kingdoms of Upper and Lower Egypt, is usually thought to be the first pharaoh . Menes united the Egyptian kingdom and is thought to have united the two .
 Narmer may be another name for Menes . Narmer or Menes may have come first, or Narmer might have come before Narmer .
 The Early Dynastic Era gave Egypt a strong sense of identity . Egypt's early Dynastic era gave Egypt an identity . The Egyptians were very proud of their identity .
 It brought a sudden (as yet unexplained) rise to greatness, with more complex irrigation programs, grander royal tombs, and more complex water systems . The state was headed by a king with a . semidivine identity .
 Djoser was the second pharaoh of the 5th dynasty and Imhotep was his 2 chief adviser and physician . Imhoteps was the leading genius of his day and was the 2 chief advisers to Djoser .
 His step pyramid is seen as the building that helped establish the Old Kingdom as a remarkable achievement . The step pyramid was built during the reign of King Alexander III of Egypt .
 The oldest surviving building made from cut blocks of stone, | it was the first true Egyptian pyramid . It is now the first surviving building of its kind .
 Giza's great tombs adapted Imhotep's design, but filled in the stepped sides to produce what we now think of as the classic pyramid . The pyramid is now thought to be the largest pyramid in the world .
 Imhotep's skills as a physician were such that he was worshipped as a god in later ancient Egypt and Greece . He was worshipped by Egyptians and Greeks for his medical skills .
 Egypt's Old Kingdom flourished on the flood-enriched banks of the Nile River . The Divine Pharaohs were the first Egyptians to be buried in Egypt .
 Id Kingdom society was tightly controlled by a centralized government headed by a highly powerful ruler, the pharaoh . Id Kingdom was tightly-controlled by a central government . The pharaoh was the most powerful ruler in Egypt .
 The pharaoh was a semidivine figure who acted as mediator between the gods and his subjects . The idea of the pharaoh is central to life, politics, and religion in Egypt .
 As a religious and political leader, the pharaoh oversaw elaborate religious rituals that underlined his links with the gods . He also headed a vast, highly organized political and administrative bureaucracy, peopled by an army of advisors and officials .
 The pharaohs did delegate a significant amount of power to governors . However, although their word was law, they did delegate significant amounts of power . As the Old Kingdom progressed (see AFTER), they gave governors more and more power .
 Horus was strongly linked with Ra , creator of life and falconheaded god of the Sun . Horus was also strongly linked to Ra, the creator of the life and the Sun.
 The Sun cult became very important during the Old Kingdom and Ra emerged as a separate figure from Horus . Ra emerged from the Sun cult and became an important figure in the Egyptian religion .
 The pharaoh Khafre was the fourth king of the 4th dynasty . He was also known as Khafra, Chephren, or Khephren . He is the fourth pharaoh of Egypt .
 This statue, showing him wearing a false beard and striped "" Is from his pyramid-tomb complex at Giza .
 Through these connections, the pharaoh was the upholder of a justice system that aimed to reflect the cosmic order . The pharaoh's justice system was aimed at reflecting the order of the cosmos .
 He worked with the gods to ensure that the Nile brought silt-rich annual floods each year, keeping the Nile Valley fertile enough to support the great Egyptian state . He was also, vitally, the figure who ensured the Nile was fertile enough for the state .
 He was often depicted dressed in a kind of kilt and false beard, bearing a crook, flail, and scepter, and with the double crown of Lower and Upper Egypt on his head .
 People fell prostrate before him. He was accompanied by the royal fan-bearer, and people fell prostras before him . People were prostrate .
 Egyptians did seem to realize he was a flesh-and-blood human, but they stood in awe of his sacred power . Egyptians seemed to be impressed by his power, even though he was not a human .
 To the north, in Lower Bgypt, the Nile's tributaries fanned out to create a wide, fertile delta, home to a high concentration of people . The Nile's Nile delta is a fertile, fertile area of Lower BEgypt .
 At the delta's south was the “capital city"" of Old Kingdom Egypt— Memphis . Memphis was the Old Kingdom's "capital city" at the delta .
 The valley snaked away in a narrow strip, with towns clinging to its fertile banks . Farther south, in Upper Egypt, the valley was filled with fertile farmland .
 The Nile's annual inundation left in its wake the rich black silt on which the Egyptians relied to grow their crops . The Nile left behind the rich silt to grow crops on which Egyptians relied on .
 The relief of an Egyptian shipyard is from a 5thdynasty official's tomb at Saqqara . Vast irrigation programs were nemes"" headcloth, Population of builders, population of builders .
 Ships were vital for travel along the Nile and for trade with some of Egypt's neighbors . Ships were designed to direct the waters to wide areas of agricultural land .
 Marshlands along the banks provided waterfowl for eating and papyrus reed, used for making writing materials . Marshlands were also provided for eating water fowl and water for writing .
 The river waters themselves supplied fish and a means of getting from one place to another . The river water itself supplied fish .
 Lookouts were posted along the Nile in southern Egypt to spot early signs of high or low waters that would affect the annual harvest . The Egyptians, surrounded by vast stretches of arid, inhospitable desert, were only too aware of how dependent they were on the Nile .
 Society was fairly clearly divided into different levels . Society's pecking order was divided by different levels of society's hierarchy .
 At the top was the royal family, presiding over court and administrative officials, such as scribes, and priests . The royal family presided over court, court officials, and also priests .
 Built in the Old Kingdom led miserable lives at Giza, close to Memphis at the edge pressed into the pharaoh's service, of the desert . These are among the building vast constructions or growing greatest building achievements .
 The Great Pyramid was one of the Seven Wonders of the ancient world, and the only one that survives intact today . It was the tomb just enough sustenance to stay of the pharaoh Khufu .
 Just to the east of the pyramid lies the Great Sphinx, a massive part-lion, part-human statue, thought to have Khufu's features .
 The Giza pyramids are one of the earliest examples of using quarried stone . They are the first examples of quarried stones being used in the pyramids .
 Huge blocks of limestone were transported from some distance away, cut with incredible precision, and lifted into place to make a perfect fit .
 No one knows exactly how this was Saqqara, Si, chiel ocr conecaben achieved . The famous ‘step pyramid’ at See ne knows how it was achieved . No one has known exactly how the pyramid was created .
 Each pyramid and then in the colossal with great precision and to may have been surrounded royal pyramid tombs of the produce fine relief carvings . by a sloping bank, built alive by a . sloping .
 Evidence suggests that there was an independent local life, too, including markets where people sold produce and simple crafts . However, evidence suggests there was also a local life in the area .
 The fact that anyone could, theoretically, gain high office also contradicts the idea of a total dictatorship . Anyone could theoretically gain a high office would also contradict the idea, he says .
 The Egyptians created large areas for cultivation, using complex irrigation systems fed by the Nile upward as the pyramid grew higher . The Egyptians used complex systems to irrigate their crops .
 Stone blocks may have been moved up the slope manually by using rollers and levers . Rollers may have used rollers to move stone blocks manually .
 Egypt became a major player in Middle Eastern politics during the Old Kingdom period . Egypt was a Middle Eastern power during the Middle Kingdom period.
 There is evidence of long-distance contact with many regions, including parts of modern Syria, Libya, Lebanon, and Sudan .
 Contact arose because Egypt wanted to keep its borders safe, and to trade for materials, such as wood . Contact arose with Egypt because it wanted to protect its borders, and trade for wood .
 Egypt must have started to develop the diplomatic skills for which it became famous . Borders cannot be maintained or crossed without negotiation .
 The Great Pyramid of Khufu is the largest and oldest of the three Giza pyramids . This is what many people now think of as the greatest ""true"" pyramid ever .
 The vast size of these royal tombs reflects the divine Status of the 4th-dynasty kings . Giza pyramid complex reflects the size of the tombs .
 The most distant tomb is Khufu's ""Great"" pyramid; in the center is Khafre's . The smallest pyramid, in the foreground, Is that of the pharaoh Menkaure .
 There are countless theories about the Old Kingdom collapse; but no one knows what happened . No one knows for certain what happened.
 It suggests that as the pharaoh lost control, others were able to take more power for themselves . It also suggests that some of the people in Egypt may have taken more power .
 Memphis lost some of its importance compared to other towns and cities . Royal authority weakened and Memphis lost its importance . Memphis was a major city in the early 1900s .
 Links have been made with Egypt's dependence on the Nile, saying that extreme flooding, drought, or both brought great destruction or famine .
 This would have been especially disastrous if central authority was weak . This is especially true for central authority in the UK .
 Threats to Egypt's borders may also have been a factor in the decline of the Old Kingdom's decline . Threats also may also be a factor .
 Neolithic Mehrgarh culture, starting 7000BcE in modern Pakistan, was a major part of the Mehrarh culture . Most notable was the Neolithic culture of early farming, starting at 7000BCE .
 Early Harappan culture saw the first examples of the Indus script, more sophisticated agriculture, and growing trade links . The early phase of the culture saw more sophisticated farming and more sophisticated agricultural practices .
 Indus Valley civilization peaked between about 2600 and 1900 5BCE, in what is often called its “Mature Harappan"" period . Indus valley seals are rich sources of imagery .
 It flourished across an extensive area of present-day northwest India, Pakistan, and Afghanistan . It flourished along the fertile Indus and Ghaggar-Hakra rivers .
 Its people also developed expert knowledge about how to harness and control the annual flooding patterns of the rivers .
 The refined artifacts produced in the Indus Valley region clearly show this to have been an advanced civilization . Artistic skills are evident in the artifacts produced by the region .
 They include finely worked jewelry in gold and fired steatite . figurines fashioned from bronze, terra-cotta, and faience . pottery; pottery, silver ornaments and seals .
 These artifacts seem to tell us that there was not only skill, but also prosperity and an elite class . This hints further at a society with different social and economic levels, says author .
 There are quite a few different artistic styles, too, perhaps pointing to a diverse ethnic mix within the population .
 Some Indus Valley artifacts have been found at sites elsewhere in the world, indicating widespread trading links . Some of the artifacts, including jewelry, were found in the Indus valley .
 Indus people relied heavily on trading arrangements and their partners included Mesopotamia, Iran, and Afghanistan . Mesopotamians, Iran and Afghanistan were also involved in trade .
 Trading practice boosted by advances in methods of transportation, especially in boats suited to long-distance travel along sea routes .
 Indus people seem to have been among the first to or kings. develop a precise weights . Sets of weights have also been found among excavated artifacts .
 People in well-planned cities lived a refined life, but unlocking more about them is tantalizingly out of reach . Their script remains mostly undeciphered, as their script remains undecipherable .
 Indus Valley civilization spread over the farmland that helped to support it-created from a floodplain . Site of Mehrgahr culture — Hine .
 Similarities in the planning of its urban centers suggest complex, centralized organization . Similarities also suggest complex and complex organization .
 Behind this system lay the kind of expert knowledge that explains why their city buildings were so impressive . Behind the system was the knowledge of the city's expert knowledge .
 A large number of settlements are associated with Indus Valley culture . The Indus valley was a major source of culture in the region .
 Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa were probably the world’s first planned cities . The most spectacular was probably the most spectacular, Mohenko-Dara and Harappan .
 There were broad avenues and narrow side streets lined with spacious townhouses, all set out in a well-defined grid pattern .
 Indus cities thousands of miles apart were laid out in a similar way, suggesting a centralized state and local civic organization . Remarkably, Indus city in Pakistan was laid out as a state, not a city .
 Many distinct symbols appear on Indus artifacts, but they remain undeciphered . Whether there was such a structure, and other details about government and society, remain largely a mystery .
 Highly developed plumbing included drains, some of which were covered, and latrines . Advanced sanitation included drains .
 Wells were built with high, sealed walls to avoid contamination problems . Well wells were built to give each dwelling access to clean water .
 Maritime trading connections with Mesopotamia were especially important to the Indus Valley civilization . Maritime trading links to Mesopotamians were important to Indus .
 The city suffered severe flooding in the 1700s BCE, and was laid waste by unknown attackers .
 Shang kings performed rituals to please their ancestors and gods . Believed to be semidivine, the ruling Shang kings believed to have performed rituals . The Shang kings were believed to be the most powerful men in China .
 Highly prized metal was cast for weapons, tools, and vessels used exclusively by the noble classes for religious rituals . The highly prized metal, which was produced on a huge scale, was made for weapons and tools .
 Early Bronze Age civilization in China was a rigidly hierarchical society, ruled by a supremely powerful king and his nobles . The early Bronze Age society was ruled by kings and their nobles .
 The people of the Shang— the second of China's ancient dynasties—believed that the king was invested with divine power from his ancestors . If appeased with offerings, the king's spirits could shape contemporary life if appeased .
 In the Neolithic period , the Chinese began farming millet and rice, and keeping animals . The Chinese began keeping animals and farming millets .
 This required a static population, so people began to build houses, and to live together in villages . This required people to live with each other in villages, so the population was static . This led to the creation of villages, with people living together and living in villages.
 In 1973, a Neolithic settlement dating from 5000 BCE was discovered at Hemudu, in southeast China .
 The finds included terra-cotta pottery, wooden and bone articles, and the remains of pigs and buffalo . The remains were found in the region of Mexico .
 There were also some whistles made from the bones of birds, possibly used to attract birds to snares . Some whistles were also made from bones of animals .
 The area of Yangshao, in the eastern province of Henan, was first excavated in the 1920s . The most exciting discovery was evidence that the people of Hemedu cultivated wet rice .
 Banpo, which was occupied 4500-3750 ct, used polished stone hoes and knives, and wore hemp and possibly silk . The inhabitants cultivated millet and cultivated millets, and used polished stones .
 They produced pots made of red clay, some decorated with spiral patterns, and others with human or animal designs painted on them .
 Shang kings ruled their state with the assistance of officials . They were supported by aristocratic clans with whom they had family connections .
 A completely different type of Neolithic pottery was found at Longshan, in Shandong province . The Shang were frequently threatened by nomadic tribes from the inner Asian .
 It was much finer than Yangshao ware, and was black, decorated with rings and grooves, and often elevated on a circular foot . It was black .
 In 1959, palacelike buildings, tombs, and bronze artifacts from 1900-1350 8ct were found at Erlitou, in Henan, China .
 Shang kings waged wars against their neighbors, thereby obtaining slave labor and loot . Shang kings fought against each other to obtain slave labor, loot .
 They established new settlements, and cultivated captured land for farming . The men captured captured land, and used it to create settlements .
 Shang civilization was based on agriculture and hunting . Despite being a warlike society, Shang society was based heavily on hunting and agriculture .
 The production of bronze, too, resulted in a relatively settled society, as a static community was required to mine and smelt the ores that contain copper and tin, the metals needed for bronze casting .
 Shang ruled over much of northern China and the center of the country . Shang rule over northern China, center of country .
 At Zhengzhou, a defensive city wall 4 miles long enclosed a large settlement . The wall and the buildings within were constructed of stamped earth .
 The houses and workshops that have been excavated indicate that Shang society was highly organized and rigidly ordered . Shang society is thought to have been organized by Shang society .
 Key Bronze Age sites include the early capital city of Zhengzhou, which later moved to Anyang . Outside the capital of Anyang, at Shang dynasty China at Shang Dynasty China .
 Pre-Bronze Age finds have been made at the Paleolithic site of Zhoukoudian . Neolithic pottery has also been discovered at Banpo and Hemudu .
 Strong handles were necessary for such a heavy pot to be removed from the fire . Chariot burials when an important person died, his chariot, charioteers, and horses were buried with him .
 Xiaotun village, the remains of what was the ceremonial and administrative center of the late Shang state, have been uncovered . XiaOTun village is the ceremonial site of the Shang state of China's Shang state .
 At Xibeigang, just north of Xiaotun, 11 huge graves have been found . They may belong to the 11 Shang monarchs who reigned at Anyang . The graves are believed to date back to the Shang era .
 Their bodies were placed in wooden coffins surrounded by goods important to the deceased . The bodies were then placed in coffins around the coffins .
 The bodies of scores of slaughtered horses and human victims were laid out on the ramps that led down to the burial chamber . The bodies were found on the ramp that led to a burial chamber.
 The most prized archaeological finds from the Shang period are the bronze objects . They were made primarily for ceremonial purposes . Bronze objects were found in Shang period .
 The production of bronze was controlled by the king, and the quantity of bronze objects found indicates that it was a major industry, employing large numbers of skilled craftsmen .
 Early bronze technology in the West allowed an object to be cast from a single mold, but early Shang vessels were cast in several molds and the parts assembled later . The Shang vessel was cast in multiple molds .
 Important finds of bronze vessels were made at the two capitals of Zhengzhou and Anyang . Zhengzhou is the Chinese capital of the city of Anyang and Zhengzhou .
 Sold in the 19th century as “dragon bones,” an ingredient of Chinese medicine, “oracle bones” are actually the shoulder blades of cattle . These vessels had ritual functions; some were intended for the preparation of sacrificial rites .
 Questions about the future would be scratched on the bones, to which a heated bronze tool was applied, and the resulting cracks were interpreted for an answer . The resulting cracks would be interpreted for the future .
 They provide fascinating evidence not only of events in the Shang period, but also of early Chinese writing . The Shang period is one of the most important periods of Chinese history .
 Patterned vessel was probably used by the Shang for the preparation of meat offerings . Some were used for the heating of wine, others for preparing meat .
 Shang created a complete writing system, which had a huge effect on their organizational capabilities . Writing system was created by the Shang .
 The highly ornamented handle of this dagger possibly depicts a stylized ram's head . Bronze dagger was made from a Bronze dagger .
 Weapons such as this were probably used for ritual and sacrificial purposes . Weapons such a weapon was probably used in ritual and sacrifice purposes .
 Di Xin, the last Shang ruler, was overthrown by the state of Zhou in the 11th century sce. Considered a tyrant, Di Xin was considered a tyrant . The last Shang leader was considered to be a tyrant by many .
 Many of the achievements of the Shang period, however, remain central to Chinese culture . The Shang period remains central to many of China's cultural traditions .
 The Shang writing system created by the Shang developed over time into the Chinese characters in use today . The writing system was created over time to develop into Chinese characters .
 When combined together, the stems and branches formed cycles of sixty days or sixty years . When combined, they formed cycles that lasted 60 days or 60 years .
 The Shang model, although modified, remains the basis for the traditional Chinese calendar . The Shang calendar is based on the Shang model .
 The Shang people worshipped many deities, most of whom were royal ancestors . They communicated with them through divination .
 This veneration of ancestors has remained an essential part of Chinese religious practice in modern times . Veneration of ancestral spirits is a key part of China's religious practice .
 People used symbols to keep records long before the invention of true writing . Symbol symbols were used to record events in ancient times .
 The tally bone dates back 50,000 years . It is the earliest form of note-taking known in the Middle East .
 From 9000 to 3000 &ct, people in the Middle East used clay tokens to record commercial transactions . People sealed them into clay envelopes called bullae .
 The seal was pressed on wet clay by stamping, or rolling in the case of cylinder seals . The seal is pressed by rolling or stamping in the cylinder seals.
 Hieroglyphs were deciphered in 1822-24 by French Egyptologist and linguist Jean Francois Champollion . The hieroglyphic letters were found in Egypt in the early 1800s and are believed to have been written in Egypt .
 He deciphered the Egyptian scripts by comparing identifiable words, such as names, in all three scripts . He worked out the sound of each Egyptian sign from the Greek .
 According to ancient tradition, writing was either invented by an individual or handed down to humanity by the gods . Writing is either handed down or invented by humans, according to tradition .
 King Enmerkar invented writing to record a message too complicated for his messengers to memorize . The Sumerian king invented writing instantly to record his message .
 The development of writing was a gradual process, taking centuries . We now know, however, that it took centuries to get to writing .
 Degradable materials, such as papyrus, bamboo, and parchment, have not endured, so the earliest surviving inscriptions tend to be found on monuments .
 These texts, such as hieroglyphs on Egyptian tombs, are too sophisticated to be the first use of writing . These texts are thought to have been written in ancient texts .
 Scribes used wedge-shaped impressions pressed into clay or carved into stone . Scribes made symbols made with wedge shaped impressions pressed in clay or stone .
 Many languages and civilizations used cuneiform, from Sumerian to Persian, so the progression of their earliest writing can be traced . Cuneiform is a form of writing that dates back to the Bronze Age .
 Writing represents a massive step forward in the intellectual evolution of humans . At early stages, writing was made up of The Writing on the Wall . Writing is the symbolic representation of spoken language .
 Clay tablet was written in a temple of Mesopotamia in 3100-2900 act . Message from a temple .
 The script is a kind of proto-cuneiform, an early pictorial stage in Mesopotamian writing development . It is a type of pictorial form of the Mesopotami language .
 The tablet probably describes grain either distributed by or offered to a temple . The tablet is believed to be the work of a local temple .
 Barley was one of the most important commodities and was used to make bread and beer . Bread and beer were the two staples of the Mesopotamian diet .
 Drawing was a messy and time-consuming process compared to impressing standardized wedge signs, as was done later by cuneiform scribes . Drawings were messy compared to those of the days when drawing was easier than drawing wedge signs .
 People involved in contracts authenticated them by pressing their seal into the clay, rather than writing their names . The seal was used to seal the contracts, and the seal was placed on the surface of the clay .
 Walking symbol suggests items specified elsewhere on tablet were moved . The walking symbol suggests that the items specified on the tablet are moved .
 The absence of verbs makes it impossible to say whether the transport was to or from the temple in which the tablet was found . The tablet is believed to have been found in a temple in the Roman capital .
 A transaction tablet was usually sized to fit into the palm of the scribe's hand, although much larger cuneiform tablets do exist . The transaction tablets were usually sized into the palms of a scribe .
 Formal writing in Egypt retained the use of pictorial symbols for more than 3,000 years . Egyptian hieroglyphs were used in Egyptian writing for over three centuries .
 Before the invention of numerals, scribes had to draw a sign once for each item . Pictures of the things it records were kept in order to preserve the history .
 These pictures were simplified and made abstract to make writing quicker and easier . Over time, these pictures have been simplified and abstracted into abstracts .
 Many early scripts were logographic, meaning that each symbol represented an entire word or idea . Logographic is logographic; logographic means each symbol represents an entire idea .
 Modern Chinese writing remains logographic, using around 12,000 symbols . The symbols allow written communication between the many different dialects of Chinese . Chinese writing is logographic and logographic .
 Cuneiform and Egyptian hieroglyphic scripts mixed logograms with symbols representing sounds . The scripts were written with logograms and symbols that represent sounds .
 Cuneiform signs were formed by pressing a stylus into wet clay, each time producing a wedge . Such sound signs were combined to form words, which reduced the total number of such signs .
 At some point, all proto-cuneiform signs were rotated by 90 degrees . Date 3200BCE 30005BcE by 90 degree .
 True cuneiform appeared when scribes began to form signs from impressed wedges . It is believed that the first language was formed from wedges, and the first appeared from the first stone stone .
 Egyptian and Maya hieroglyphs remained pictorial for decorative use in religious writing and inscriptions on monuments . Egyptian and Mayy Maya inscriptions are still pictorial .
 For everyday use, the Egyptians developed a more efficient, abstract system called hieratic . The Egyptians developed the hieratic system for everyday use .
 It was written with fragile reed pens, which restricted the shapes the scribe could form . The fragile pen was used to write the text .
 When written on papyrus, hieroglyphs were painted with brushes, allowing the scribe a freer hand . Hieroglyphiches were painted using brushes to make them easier to write .
 Chinese writing also diverged, with different styles of calligraphy being developed for different uses . Different styles of Chinese writing were created for different purposes . Chinese writing was also developed for use in different ways .
 Education of scribes began in childhood, lasting at least 10 years, and included mathematics and accountancy . Grammar was absent, so this writing cannot be read as language .
 It seems likely that others could have understood it with a little training . It's likely they could have been able to understand it better than others .
 Writing was soon taken up by the rulers of ancient societies, and adapted to reproduce spoken language . It allowed them to write literary, religious, and scholarly texts . Writing soon became more widespread in ancient societies .
 Cultures in the 3rd and 2nd millennia BCE were not really literate societies . Cultures were not literate society . Spread of the written word was spread across cultures in 3rd, 2nd and 3rd millennia BCE .
 Once writing became abstract, only a small number of merchants, administrators, and elites would have had enough schooling to read and write . Only a small group of merchants would have been enough to have enough schooling .
 Ancient rulers used writing to manage the information on which their states ran, not to disseminate it . Ancient ruler used writing for managing the information, not for disseminating it .
 Royal political inscriptions might be combined with imagery, and it seems that the masses would have read only the images, while the writing was aimed at fellow elites and at posterity .
 Assyrian kings buried inscriptions in the foundations of temples, recording their exploits . The inscriptions were recorded so that future kings rebuilding those temples would read them .
 The spread of written communication was slow until printing was invented during the European Renaissance . Writing systems became simpler and more sophisticated, but the spread of writing was slow .
 At first, written symbols represented a variety of words, syllables, ideas, or sounds . Written symbols were used to represent words and syllables . The symbol system is now known as the PHOENICIAN ALPHABETIC SCRIPT .
 The idea that every symbol should denote a sound was an innovation in the Middle East . It led to the creation of the alphabet and the idea of the Arabic alphabet .
 The first alphabetic writing appeared in the 2nd millennium BCE, using adapted Egyptian hieroglyphs . Each sign represents a consonant but with no vowels, with no consonant .
 The people of Ugarit in Syria developed a cuneiform alphabet, but the need for clay prevented it from spreading . The need to clay prevented the alphabet from spreading across Syria .
 Alphabets became important in 1000—700 BcE, being used for Hebrew, Aramaic, and Phoenician writing . Alphabetes were used in 1000-700BcE for Hebrew and Aramaic .
 The earliest surviving American writing is on 6008cE Zapotec monuments in Mexico . It records the names of sacrificed captives . It is believed to be the oldest surviving American written in the world .
 The spread of written material was hampered by the need to copy by hand . ZAPOTEC CALENDAR PRINTING was a success in the 1930s .
 Egypt saw civil war, drought and famine, and oppression by local tyrants . Egypt was subject to civil war and famine in the early years of its reign .
 The greater powers of nonroyals at the end of the Old Kingdom ushered in some broader-minded thinking, including a better justice system for all . However, the greater power of non-royal nonroyalties ushered in greater thinking .
 Herakleopolis was a dynasty of kings based at Sheakleopolis, central Egypt . One of the factions was the Egyptian city of Heraklemopolis .
 Thebes sealed its rise to prominence when Theban king Nebhepetre Mentuhotep II defeated his rivals from Herakleopolis . In the 11th Dynasty, Thebes became the most successful city in the world .
 Ancient Egyptian history is seen as periods of order and prosperity separated by “mediate” periods of chaos . Regions of control under control under Thutmosis Illertile land in the Nile valley .
 Historians now think this is an overexaggerated contrast, but prosperous eras under strong centralized rule were certainly separated by times of division . Historians say this is not an over-reagant contrast .
 Ancient Egyptian culture and ways of life continued with surprising consistency for thousands of years . Through all this, ancient Egyptian culture continued to be consistent . Egyptian culture has lasted far longer than any other ancient civilization .
 Middle Kingdom saw Thebes becoming a major royal center, although the seat of government stayed near Memphis . Powerful figures called viziers headed the administration of the Middle Kingdom .
 In the New Kingdom, one took control in Lower Egypt and another in Upper Egypt . Both took control on irrigation systems (for example, at Fayum near Memphis)
 The country’s defenses were strengthened and new trade routes sprang up . The country's defense was strengthened and trade routes were strengthened .
 Nubia supplied gold and copper, labor to mine and personnel for Egypt’s army . Egypt came under Egyptian control of the region in the early 1800s .
 The Middle Kingdom’s stability dissolved when local governors pushed for more power . Local governors pushed the government to more power, the Middle Kingdom's stability dissolved .
 During this time, a people called the Hyksos gained control and ruled Lower Egypt as pharaohs . During the time of this period, the Hykos ruled Upper Egypt . During this period of Egypt, Egypt was ruled by a people known as pharoahs .
 Southern Theban culture prevailed, with Thebes being rebuilt and great temples erected to the sun god, Amun-Ra . Thebes was rebuilt and rebuilt .
 Royalty was now buried in elaborate underground tombs, centered on Thebes' Valley of the Kings . Thebes was now known as Thebes .
 Amenophis IV took sun worship to extremes, bending his kingdom to the cult of Aten . The number of diplomatic letters in the archive of El-Amarna, Akhenaten’s capital, recording Egypt's role as the world's leading power .
 Just as the Old and Middle Kingdoms had dissolved, so did the New Kingdom . The New Kingdom was formed in the middle of the Middle Ages .
 It is unclear why outside threats again became impossible to hold back . It's unclear why the government has been forced to take action .
 Rebellion and corruption may have played a part, but the truth remains a mystery . Rebellion and internal corruption played a role in the decision to declare independence .
 Middle Kingdom Egypt had a distinct character, but it was not as different from the Old Kingdom as once thought . Egypt's Middle Kingdom had a different character, not as much different from its Old Kingdom .
 In the 12th Dynasty, the royals regained a strong grip, perhaps as strong as in Old Kingdom times . The royals are still in control of the country .
 Egypt is now run more like a corporation than an extension of the royal family . Egypt was now run by a corporation rather than a royal family, it was said .
 Greater rights for ordinary people included access to mummification , and more interest was taken in the poor and needy .
 Marked here are major centers of royal, religious, and administrative control during the Old, Middle, and New Kingdoms . under pharaoh Amose I, and the New Kingdom (c.50—1069 BCE; Dynasties 18 to 20) began .
 This era is often seen as a time of glorious ""empire,"" with a militaristic, nationalistic outlook and new heights of wealth and power . This era of glorious "empire" is often associated with militarism and nationalism .
 The king's role as warrior-defender of his lands gained a new emphasis . The king became king of England in the early 1900s .
 Egypt quashed threats to the throne thanks to warfare techniques borrowed from the Hyksos . The use of twowheeled, horse-drawn chariots that were fast and lightweight was key to Egypt's success .
 The lavish tomb contents of the pharaoh Tutankhamun were interred and the monumental buildings . In-fighting Private armies abounded during the Intermediate Periods .
 Model army of Nubian archers is from the tomb of a governor of Asyut . The model army is from a tomb of the governor of the Nubyut state .
 Queen Ankhesenamun anoints her young king, Tutankhamun, in a scene taken from a gold-inlaid throne .
 Tutankhamun's short reign continued the New Kingdom's grandeur . Egypt returned to its traditional religious practices after the Aten-cult worship of his predecessor, Akhenaten .
 The most famous wife of Akhenaten seems to have taken a prominent role in her husband's rule . Nefertiti was the wife of the Egyptian king .
 Art of the period frequently shows her alongside her king, sharing his worship of the r sun's disk . Art of this period often shows her with her king .
 Nefertiti may have died in 1338 BCE, when all record of her disappears . She is believed to have been buried in Egypt .
 Some believe Smenkhkare, a mysterious figure who seems to have ruled jointly with Akhenaten for some of his reign, was in fact Nefertiti . Some believe that Smenkare may have ruled alongside Akhenhenaten .
 Egypt's New Kingdom had become a vast empire, increasingly difficult to police . Egypt had become an empire that was difficult to control .
 By the 25th Dynasty, at the end of the Third Intermediate Period, Kushite rulers from Nubia, notably Piye controlled both Lower and Upper Egypt under their rule, so reunifying Egypt . The Kushite rule came from the end-of-the-Third Intermediate Period
 Rameses II reigned supreme for almost 70 years and brought a stability and prosperity to Egypt . He was the greatest pharaoh of the New Kingdom era .
 Like a present-day international statesman, he skillfully used diplomacy, military strategy, and propaganda to promote Egypt and maintain his empire .
 The future Rameses II was born just before the 19th dynasty . He became its third pharaoh . He was born in Egypt .
 This impressive statue of Rameses II stood in the temple of Luxor, in Egypt . From his father, Portrait and cartouche .
 The oval carving, or cartouche, has symbols representing Rameses as king, and wearing the double crown of Upper and Lower Egypt . It is believed to have been created by the Egyptian king .
 Seti I, Rameses inherited an established empire that stretched from modernday Syria in the north to Sudan (then Nubia) in the south . He inherited the empire from Syria and Sudan .
 Like his father, he had territorial ambitions in Syria . He had to contend with the threat from the Hittite Empire further north in Anatolia .
 Rameses claimed this as a singlehanded victory for himself, while others said the Hittites won decisively . Others said this victory was a decisive victory .
 The truth is probably somewhere in between, with neither side winning outright or making any major gains . Neither side won outright or made major gains, but the truth is somewhere between .
 Rameses later underlined this new accord by making at least one Hittite princess one of his wives . Mindful of his role as a diplomat serving Egypt's wider interests, he underlined his role by marrying one of them .
 Letters found in the archives of the Hittite capital, Hattusha . The new, friendly tone of relations between the two powers is clear from the letters .
 Like the famous ""Amarna Letters"" from the reigns of Amenophis III and Akhenaten , this correspondence is written on clay tablets in Akkadian cuneiform script .
 These lively letters are the earliest significant evidence of international diplomacy . They paint a clear picture of long-distance trading, political agreements, and diplomatic and daily affairs .
 The treaty was made between Rameses II and the Hittite king, Hattusili III . The letters discuss issues from international politics to medical problems and wedding plans . The treaty had been made in 1258 .
 An outstanding feature of Rameses' reign were his buildings . His buildings were his most famous buildings .
 Giant statues and images of the pharaoh swiftly appeared, and craftsmen wrote inscriptions praising him on every available surface .
 He created the new capital city of Per-Rameses in the Nile delta, close to modern-day Cairo, Egypt .
 He also built temples dedicated to himself and his favorite wife, Nefertari, at Abu Simbel, close to Egypt's modern border with Sudan .
 The four massive statues of Rameses at Abu Simbel are among the greatest achievements of Egyptian art . The four statues of the four statues are among Egypt's greatest achievements .
 Rameses' creative lead helped the arts thrive, as they had under his father . Their style was not subtle, but their style is not subtle . The arts will continue to thrive under his leadership, as well .
 An astonishingly modern document, it is seen as the first real international peace treaty . It contains causes on advanced concepts such as amnesty issues for refugees and extradition for fugitives .
 It is thought to be such a milestone in international relations that a copy of it hangs in the headquarters of the U.N. A copy of the document hangs at the United Nations headquarters .
 1275 BCE Nile at Thebes, the southern capital where Rameses created many new architectural projects . RAMESES' CLAIM THAT HE FOUGHT THE HITTITES SINGLE-HANDEDLY .
 Rameses II kept a tight grip on his lands and on his people . The king kept control of his people and his people.
 Government records that survive from his rule build a picture of a highly organized leader with a strong interest in lawmaking and order . Government records show that he was highly organized .
 He had major centers at Per-Rameses and around Thebes . He ensured strong control of both Lower and Upper Egypt .
 He appointed a tight web of able officials, including many old friends and many of his own own children .
 There seems little doubt that Rameses II was a major figure in Middle Eastern history . Despite his undoubted skill for self-promotion, he was a great figure .
 His reign was the last great era of imperial glory for ancient Egypt, and he made his presence felt as far away as modern Turkey . He ruled Egypt for more than 300 years, and his reign was one of its last great periods .
 He left a wonderful record of art and history, and left a real taste of the grandeur and power of the pharaohs .
 The mummy of Rameses II was later unwrapped to reveal his body . Discovered in the 19th century, the mummy of the Egyptian king was later discovered .
 He was a tall man for the times, with a long narrow face, prominent nose, large jaw, and red hair . He was also tall for the . times .
 The future Rameses II was born to Seti |, whose family came from nonroyal stock, and his wife Tuyu . The future king was born in 1302 BcE .
 The crown prince Rameses is made regent while still young, to ensure he will succeed his father .
 Often said to be his favorite wife, she certainly seems to have been one of his chief wives for around 20 years . She has been married to him for more than 20 years.
 He begins his reign by traveling south to officiate at his father's funeral in Thebes, Egypt .
 The defeated pirates appear to have been absorbed into the pharaoh's army . They were captured by the Egyptian army .
 A large number of Hebrew peoples may be living in Egypt, perhaps forcibly ""pressganged” into the pharaoh's service . The building of Abu Simbel is probably under way .
 There may have been an historically important ""Exodus"" of these peoples from Egypt into Sinai at some point in the 1260s .
 Another wife, Isetnofret, now seems to become Rameses' principal queen . Another wife seems to be his principal queen.
 1230 BcE Rameses probably marries another Hittite princess . NEFERTARI (MURAL FROM HER TOMB)
 Items found in graves from predynastic Egypt (before 5100BCE) suggest that, even then, Egyptians performed death-related rituals . Even then, even before, Egyptians believed to have performed rituals .
 Belief in Osiris is thought to have begun in the Nile Delta region and probably developed from the local god of a place called Busiris .
 Initially, Osiris may have been a god of agriculture, linked with fertility and the afterlife . Initially, he was linked with agriculture and was associated with fertility .
 He gained popularity throughout Egypt and by the middle of the Old Kingdom €€56—57, 24008ct, had become a dominant figure, associated with death and the resurrection of the ruler .
 Before Osiris, the cult of Ra (or Re), god of the Sun and bringer of life, held center stage . Osiris was a rival to the god of Ra, known as Re .
 Ra Is depicted with a falcon's head, RA, THE on which on which the sun carried the sun. Ra is depicted with the head of the falcon, RA . Ra is believed to be the most powerful person in the world to be seen .
 In the 5th—1st century Bce, historians such as the Greeks Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus provided first reliable data on mummies .
 Since then, studying them has become an increasingly sophisticated science . Study of them has been increasingly sophisticated since then .
 DNA is analyzed, and the mummy checked for the presence of diseases, to reveal more about its identity and the Egyptian way of life . The mummy is found in a museum in Egypt .
 The need and desire to please their gods were driving forces that influenced most aspects of their lives . Imaging techniques, such as X-rays and CAT scans, can reveal a great deal without causing permanent damage .
 They believed that the god Osiris judged them on the lives they had led and that those who had lived a 'good life' would attain a happy eternity alongside the gods .
 He was thought to preside over their complex burial rituals, including embalming and mummification . His burial rituals were devised to ensure a passage through the underworld to an afterlife .
 People came to believe that the pharaohs, Egypt's leaders, were reborn as Osiris after death . People believed that they were reborn after death as Osiris .
 The Egyptians' belief in kings as gods was reflected in the “rebirth” elements of their burial rituals . This powerful link to the Egyptians believed in kings was reflected on the 'rebirth' elements of burial .
 After the collapse of the Old Kingdom, the popularity of the Osiris cult was assisted by the shift in government dynamics . Osiris cult became a cult of the people .
 With the pharaoh no longer an all-powerful figure, local officials gained in importance . The pharaoh was replaced by local officials .
 The burial rites and the right to rebirth were once strictly confined to the pharaohs . In this slightly more democratic climate, burial rites were increasingly extended to ordinary Egyptians .
 At the height of Osiris’s popularity, even mere mortals were believed to connect with the god at The Realm of Osiris Osiris figurine .
 Myth also told that the jealous and vengeful Set trapped Osiris in a coffinlike chest and threw it brother's position as king . Myth also said to have trapped Osiris with a coffin .
 His body was then reassembled and bound with bandages, and he so became the first mummy . The mummy was reassembled, bound and bound in bandages .
 Isis revived Osiris by magic, and he traveled to the underworld to become king of the dead . Isis revived him by magic . Osiris traveled back to Egypt to become the king of his dead .
 The Egyptians' burial practices, particularly mummification and embalming, were a reflection of Osiris' own sufferings and the journey his soul made to the afterlife . From these myths, it is clear that the Egyptians' . burial practices were . clear that they were . a reflection
 Ideas about the soul and spirit were central to burial practices, and to beliefs in general . Ideas about a person's spirit and the soul are central to beliefs .
 The Egyptians came to believe that each human being consisted of a physical body, but also of three spiritual parts . Egyptians believed that each person had a spiritual part of their body .
 First, the Ka, was part of a kind of "soul"" and the essential life-force—a person's in the Nile River, then took his found and hid the body of her . It was said that Isis lovingly buried them where she buried them .
 The deceased, followed by his wife, walks into the ""court,"" ready for the weighing of his heart and judgment by the jury of gods above . The deceased is followed by the wife of the deceased, Any .
 The growth of the cult of Osiris, king of the dead, was immensely important to the ancient Egyptians . The cult of the Egyptian god was hugely important in the ancient Egypt .
 Osiris gradually became the dominant figure among a cast of potentially vengeful gods . Osiris was the most powerful god among the gods in ancient Egypt .
 Osiris remained part of a broad and complex family of divine characters, each with a vital role to play in the Egyptian belief system . Despite his growing importance, Osiris remained one of the most important characters in Egypt .
 The ba formed another part of the ‘soul’ of an individual, and, in modern terms, an individual’s personality . The ba is a part of a person's soul, and the person's personality .
 The akh was the form in which a deceased person existed in the afterlife, when the ka and ba were reunited . Finally, the akh is the form of a form of the form that a person existed .
 It was believed that the ka and ba were released from the body at death and needed to find each other again in the afterlife to create a happy, eternal akh .
 The released ka returned to the dead body, feeding off it to stay alive . The released body was found in a shallow grave in the desert .
 The bird-goddess Ma'at, keeper of truth and harmony, daughter of Ra and linked with Thoth, perches symbolically atop the scales of justice . The bird goddess is linked to Thoth and is symbolically linked to Ra .
 Any's heart, depicted with the Egyptian hieroglyph for ""heart,"" lies in one pan of the scales of judgment . able to feed and survive to reach the arterlite. able to . reach the arterylite .
 This is why preservation was so important—to keep the ‘soul’ alive after death after death . Anubis kept his spirit alive after his death .
 Osiris, the supreme judge of such ceremonies, sits among the jury of gods . Osiris is the most powerful god in ancient Egypt .
 The Feather of Ma'at lies in the other pan . He is wearing the crown of Upper Egypt . i EI The scales are supervised by the scales .
 If the heart weighs the same as the feather, eternal afterlife is assured . If you have a feather in your heart, you're guaranteed an eternal afterlife .
 Embalmers soaked with preservative salts, resins, and oils, and . decorated with . Preserving the body i | protective charms, Embalmer washed the ‘aie 7’ amulets . The ‘amulets’ were called amule
 The intestines, stomach, liver, and lungs were placed in four vessels called canopic jars . They were then removed from the intestines and stomach, and placed in jars .
 The brain was removed through the nostrils, but the heart, considered to be the source of intelligence, was left in place . The heart is considered to have been left in the place of intelligence .
 The body was then stuffed with shaped shaped like a scarab beetle . The insect's life cycle reflected the daily “rebirth” of the sun .
 The removed organs were placed in canopic jars to prevent decay . The body was wrapped in linen bandages, placed Organ storage . Organ storage was placed in a canopic jar .
 The jar second from right represents Anubis, the main god of embalming . amulets or items from everyday life to provide comfort in the hereafter .
 The Amun-Ra was an amalgamation of the sun god Ra and the god of the air, Amun . Amun is an amalgamination of Ra and Amun, the god .
 Ammit, a strange beast that is part lion, crocodile, and hippopotamus, waits to devour any heart that is found wanting . Ammit is one of the world's most dangerous animals .
 During the period of Egypt's New Kingdom, when Osiris worship was at its peak, the 18th-dynasty pharaoh Akhenaten created a breakaway cult of his own .
 He decided to worship the Sun's disc, in the form of a god called Aten . Aten is a god who is worshipped by the Sun and the Sun .
 Some scholars cite as the first example of the worship of a single god . The cult came to an end at the close of Akhenaten's reign, after which the old order returned .
 Serapis was at first identified with Osiris, but then became entirely separate . It was first identified as Osiris, then identified as Serapas .
 The belief in a god's rebirth and the idea that happiness in the next life could be achieved by being good can be reinterpreted as the concepts of resurrection and salvation .
 The performance of rites to connect humans with a divine presence is related to the idea of sacrament . The performance . of rites . to connect . humans with the divine presence .
 These ideas are present in a variety of religions, including Christianity . Christianity is one of the oldest religions to consider .
 Osiris lives on today within the “secret society’s known as the Freemasons . Osiris is still a part of the Freemason society .
 Some of their beliefs and symbolism are connected to the figure of Osiris, partly as a way of evoking a sense of order and mystery rooted in ancient wisdom . Some of them are connected with the Egyptian god of the underworld .
 Any's heart is weighed against the feather of Ma'at, goddess of truth and justice, says the Egyptian goddess .
 Gilded sunshade with a handle decorated with lotus flowers was one of many objects found | by Howard Carter in the tomb of Tutankhamun in 1922 .
 Only kings, queens, and gods were allowed to carry the ankh . Bronze ankh was the symbol of eternal life .
 Eye of Horus amulet was placed in tombs to grant protection in the afterlife . amulet is believed to be one of the world's most powerful amasses .
 Gold dagger and sheath, discovered in the tomb of Tutankhamun, dating to 1337 Bce, was discovered in a tomb of the same time .
 Ancient Egypt has left a wealth of items that reveal a remarkable civilization . Statue of the gods Isis and Horus, dating from BELT Egyptian Artifacts, dating back to BELT .
 Implements for everyday use tell us much about the domestic life of period . Excavations in tombs of the pharaohs have uncovered extraordinary treasures .
 Pectoral bearing the name Senwosret II , and made of gold, carnelian, feldspar, garnet, and turquoise . Made of gold and silver .
 Belt made of electrum, carnelian, amethyst, lapis lazuli, and turquoise beads . Belt made from electrum and amethyst .
 Gold bracelet belonging to Prince Nemareth depicts Horus as a child, sitting on a lotus leaf and protected by cobras .
 Large-scale architecture was one of the earliest features of civilization . It was also known as the largest architecture in the world .
 Tombs in predynastic Egypt were simple, sand-covered pits . Tombs were simple pits in the Egyptian desert .
 Early royal tombs were elaborations of this model, covering a rock-cut chamber with a mound of sand . Early royal tomb was elaborated on this model of covering the chamber .
 Mud-brick platforms called huacas appear along the coast of Peru . Peru is one of the world's first countries to explore the Americas .
 After the Old Kingdom came to an end, fewer pyramids were built and attention shifted to the mortuary temples . Mortuary temples of Queen Hatshepsut were built in the Middle Ages .
 These were often built at the foot of cliffs, which were possibly viewed as natural pyramids . The cliffs were often seen as 'natural pyramids'
 Every form of ancient Egyptian monumental architecture can be interpreted as part of a temple . Imost every form of . Egyptian monumental . monumental architecture is interpreted as . part of an ancient Egyptian temple .
 The pyramids were not isolated structures, but parts of mortuary temple complexes . They were found to be mortuary temples in Egypt .
 Egyptians believed that their kings became gods when they died, so the tombs were dedicated to their worship . The tombs are dedicated to the worship of their kings .
 The first pyramid, the Step Pyramid, was built 2667—2648 BCE (see Imhotep,56) for pharaoh Djoser of the 3rd dynasty . The Step Pyramid is the first pyramid built in 2667-2648 CE .
 It reveals a move toward the use of solar imagery in its imitation of the rays of the sun . The image was created by a team of scientists and engineers .
 The ""Pyramid Texts" refer to the pharaoh ascending to join the god Ra on a solar barque, a mythical boat in which the sun rides . Inscriptions were religious inscriptions on the walls of later pyramids, referring to the pyramids .
 The limestone coating was plundered in 1556 CE to rebuild Cairo after an earthquake . outer walls, the cliffs at the edge of the Nile Valley, held back the chaos that lay beyond .
 Colonnades and hypostyle halls (halls with pillars holding up the roof) represented the riverbanks, with the columns denoting reeds, while the ceilings symbolized the sky . ceilings were decorated with images of stars and the sun .
 Pharaohs the Great Gallery is a high but steep and narrow passage leading to the King's chamber . The Middle Chamber, also misnamed Queen's chamber, was never finished workers used this escape tunnel to leave after sealing the upper chambers .
 Most monuments had religious functions and were intended to legitimize the position of the rulers who built them by connecting them with the gods . Architecture was different from that of the Egyptians, but also had religious purpose and shared similar functions .
 Mesopotamian gods were linked with particular cities, and temples in those cities were seen as their houses . Mesopotamia was seen as the birthplace of Mesopotami .
 Divination—the practice of foretelling the future—was a key part of the religion . Divination was a key feature of the faith .
 The people believed that the gods controlled fate, so divination was used to determine the gods’ intentions, and rituals were performed in an attempt to negotiate a better future . Rituals were performed to negotiate the future of the people .
 Ziggurats, such as this reconstructed example, were in constant use, with astrologers working all night, every night . Astrology was a key part of this tradition, and zigguratats were a key component of the tradition .
 No one knows exactly how this ziggurat in Elam looked when new . The stepped stepped towers attached to major temples were also used as stellar observatories .
 In Mesopotamia, the construction of temples was seen as both the king’s privilege and his duty . Construction of temples is seen as a king's privilege and duty .
 Mud bricks did not endure long, so temples were often renovated or rebuilt . Mud bricks were often made of mud bricks .
 They were centers not only for the royal court but also for the civil service . They were important centers for royal court and for civil service, including the royal family .
 Mesopotamian kings were considered earthly governors appointed to rule on behalf of the gods, rather than being gods in their own right . With a few exceptions, Mesopotamia's kings were seen as earthly governors, not gods .
 Ancient temples were not simply places of worship, but also important centers of administration . Ancient temples are important centers for administration, not just worship . They are symbolic of wealth and power .
 Most were part of large tracts of land that provided considerable income and trading power . Most of the land was part of a large tract of land with considerable income .
 Before it was destroyed at the end of the 7th century BCE, the temple of Ashur—the city at Assyria’s ancient heart—was the richest in the world .
 To build monumental buildings required enormous resources, organization, and labor . The demonstration of power is the demonstration of the power .
 Most ancient societies used corvée labor to provide a regular supply of unskilled laborers . These buildings acted as a potent demonstration of ruler’s power over his subjects .
 Corvée laborers worked on state building projects for a set amount of time each year instead of paying taxes in the form of money or produce . Workers usually show evidence of new construction in the area .
 When a kingdom lacked central authority, or access to resources, building stopped . Building stopped because of lack of central authority or resources .
 The Egyptian pyramids also provide evidence of ancient methods of construction . The pyramids are also believed to have been built in ancient times .
 The pyramids were built by 20—25,000 professional craftsmen and corvée laborers who worked year-round . Rather than hundreds of thousands of slave laborers or conscripts working seasonally, as had been previously thought, the pyramids had been built by 25,000
 Snefru's first pyramid was finished in only a few years, so he had first a new palace and then two more pyramids built . The first pyramid completed in just a short time, Snefri's palace was expanded into a palace and palace .
 The decreasing size of pyramids after the 4th dynasty is probably due to an increase in the number of projects, rather than evidence that the . 4th . dynasty's grand projects had bankrupted the kingdom, according to experts .
 Monumental construction has continued to the present day all around the world . Monumental buildings have continued to be built for the past century .
 To them, everything possessed a spirit, and mountains were particularly powerful beings, so places of worship were constructed in their image . Places of worship are constructed in the image of mountains .
 The Seven Wonders of the World was publicized in the Greek world from the 2nd century act. Great PYRAMID, CHICHEN ITZA THE SEVEN WONDERS OF THE WORLD. A list of the seven wonders of the world .
 Also on the list were the Hanging Gardens of Babylon in Mesopotamia, described as constructed in tiers, like a zipliplipladel .
 The Biblical story of Babel may have begun as a reaction of Jewish exiles in 6th-century Bce Babylon to ziggurats .
 Babylonians saw ziggurats as pathways to the heavens, providing access to astrology . The Babylonians also saw zigsurats, with their stepped levels leading progressively upward, as pathways .
 Jewish writers were horrified by the thought of humans climbing to heaven . They wrote that a displeased God disrupted the project by diversifying the languages of the builders .
 The city, which was well established by 25008ce, included pyramid structures built around the same time as those at Giza, Egypt .
 An artifact offered to a deity as a gift of some kind in order to thank or appease them, or enhance the success of prayers . VOTIVE OBJECT is an object offered to be offered to the deity .
 The jaguar, found across Mesoamerica and South America, was viewed with reverential fear by the early cultures of these regions . Early cultures of this region were wary of the animal .
 It was often depicted as a ""were-jaguar,"" which combined often infantlike human and jaguar features, typically with a downturned mouth, large lips, and oval eyes . It was also depicted as an infantlike infantlike baby with downturned lips and downturn
 It appeared as jade figurines and larger sculptures, and was carved into altars and other surfaces . It was carved in jade and appeared in altars, and carved on altars .
 The wereJaguar's exact significance is unclear, but it may be a ""transformation figure"" used by shamans to connect with the gods or harness the animal's natural power .
 74 years between about 1500 and 900BCE saw the first real stirrings of more advanced civilization in Mesoamerica . The age of the Bronze Age was 74 he years between 1500 and 9BCE .
 Agricultural skill and productivity improved, pottery became more complex (possibly through contact with Andean cultures in South America), and the temple-pyramid emerged .
 This was also the period when Mesoamerica’s first great civilization sprang to life . The Olmecs were also known as the first great civilizations in Mesoamica .
 In Mesoamerica, the Olmecs established a blueprint for later cultures in the region . The Olmeca culture was a model for later culture in the area .
 At the heart of Olmec belief was jaguar-worship, which they shared with their South American counterparts . spread out over a wider area of Mesoamerica spread out .
 Olmec symbolism was adopted by various other groups in Mesoamerica, possibly as a result of trade links . It seems that Olmic symbolism was used by various groups in the region .
 Olmec farming practices were not particularly advanced, perhaps because they did not need to be, since the staple crop, corn, grew in ready abundance . Olmic farming practices did not require advanced technology, perhaps as corn grew in abundance .
 Olmecs were hunters rather than pastoralists, because there were no large herd animals in the region that could be domesticated . The Olmics were hunting for large herds of animals, not pastoralists .
 Animals were not used for transportation and, unlike in Eurasia, there were no wheeled vehicles . The Olmec heartland would have been of little use in the wet and swampy Olmic heartland .
 The first important Olmec center was San Lorenzo, on a plateau above the Coatzacoalcos River in the southern Mexican state of Veracruz . The rise of San Lorenzo was the rise of the city .
 It was most likely a chiefdom rather than a city-state, with a hierarchy comprising an elite class, skilled workers, and laborers . It was likely a top class of elite class and skilled workers .
 The buildings at San Lorenzo were erected on earthen mounds and arranged around open plazas . The buildings were built on mounds or mounds, erected around open areas .
 They included temples and houses made of poles and thatch, and the city seems to have had an advanced drainage system . They & included temples & houses made from thatch and houses .
 Bloodletting and sacrifice may have been part of ritual practice, but this is purely speculation . Bloodletted and sacrifice is not believed to be part of the ritual practice .
 Near the San Lorenzo site, 1 mile away at Cascajal, a stone dating from 900BCE has been found bearing symbols that may be Olmec writing . The stone was found near the site of San Lorenzo, near San Lorenzo .
 Evidence of widespread destruction of monuments has led some experts to suggest that there was a major uprising or invasion . Experts have suggested that the destruction of the monuments could have been caused by a major invasion .
 Others think that environmental factors may have caused San Lorenzo’s decline .
 The other major Olmec center was the city of La Venta, near the border of modern Tabasco and Veracruz states, which had a much larger population than San Lorenzo . San Lorenzo was the largest city in the region .
 Stone heads and jaguar figures and imagery were found at La Venta, as well as templeceremonial complexes .
 The major buildings at the site were all precisely aligned, perhaps linked with ideas about astronomy . The site is thought to be linked to astronomy .
 Olmec art was accomplished, especially its stone carving, including many small jade figures . Olmic art was created in the early 2000s, including large stone carving .
 Skilled relief carvings have been found at La Venta, along with other Olmec artifacts, including iron-ore mirrors that were worn around the neck .
 Mirror mirrors may have been used by Olmec leaders as evidence of their ‘special’ powers . The mirrors could be used to start fires or even project images, say experts .
 The Peruvian Chavin culture began to develop in the Andes region around 1000BCE . It then spread along a great strip of the Peruvian coast .
 Chavín de Huántar may not have been the center or birthplace of the culture, but it was certainly of great importance .
 At the heart of this sizable settlement was a monumental ceremonial complex made of stone blocks and decorated with impressive relief carving . It could have been home to around 3,000 people, with a human body, catlike head and serpentine hair .
 Such depictions may be ""transformation"" images associated with religious ritual, perhaps signifying that priests could transform themselves into deities . Images may be 'transformation' images associated .
 The buildings and site at Chavín de Huántar reveal the great engineering and architectural expertise of peoples in this part of the world .
 Flat terracing had to be created to build the Old Temple, just as the Olmecs had to reshape the plateau at San Lorenzo . The later Zapotecs would master the ultimate challenge of building Monte Albán on top of an artificially leveled mountain .
 As in Olmec culture, Chavín art often shows figures combining both human and animal features . Chavin art often depicts figures combining humans and animals .
 Several well-preserved panels depicting jaguars have been found at Chavin de Huántar . The images are important in Andean culture as well as Mesoamerican as well .
 They would have surrounded the impressive main plaza of this ancient site . Archaeologists believe they would have been able to find the remains of the site .
 Jade figures and upright artifacts are Olmec finds from La Venta . Olmic ritual ritual ritual .
 The figures have the part-human, partfeline features of the were-Jaguar . The figures are the part of a were-human and part-feline figure .
 While Chavín culture was declining by 2008cE, other cultures (such as those of the Paracas and Nazca in Peru) were flourishing .
 The jaguar remained important to the Maya culture, and also to the much later Aztecs . Jaguar remains important to Maya culture .
 Chavín culture developed the first coherent, recognizable style of Andean art . Stretching from the Andes to the coastal plains of present-day Peru .
 Neolithic people of Crete probably originated in Asia Minor . Neolithic Crete people are thought to have originated from Asia Minor in 65008ce .
 Their simple life centered around rearing livestock, growing 2 crops, and making basic pottery . The simple life of the family was simple .
 The earliest evidence of Minoan civilization is 5000 ct. The Minoan culture is 5,500 ct., and the Minoan people are believed to have lived in the Bronze Age . Minoan artifacts date back to 5000 cts.
 During the 3rd millennium BCE, trading towns on the Cretan coast expanded . Trading towns expanded during the 3th millennium BCE . The trading towns were known for their trading prowess .
 Early trading partners included the people of the Cyclades (islands north of Crete — AN in the south-western ^ CYCLADIC FIGURIC FIGurINE Aegean)
 On the mainland, Europe was entering the Bronze Age, with bronze reaching most regions in the 2000s act . Bronze reached most regions of Europe in the 1990s and 2000s .
 Made of clay, both sides of the disk feature symbols arranged in a spiral . Each symbol has been pressed into the day with a punch .
 Discovered in the early 1900s during excavations of the palace at Phaistos on Crete, it has been dated to the period 1850—1350 gct. Discovered by the 1900s . It is believed to date back to 1850 and is dated to 1350
 Some archaeologists believe it is the earliest form of movable printing type, predating anything comparable by 2,000 years . Its meaning and usage is not fully understood but, as it features reusable stamps, some believe it to be the earliest type of printing type .
 The Mycenaeans (see AFTER) modified Linear A to write the early form of Greek that they spoke . They modified the Myceneans' language to write early Greek .
 Mycenaean script has been decoded using knowledge of Greek, the Minoans unknown . Pre-Greek language still remains a mystery, and most of what they wrote down appears to be economic records .
 Island location meant limited resources, so trade was crucial . Island location had limited resources and trade was essential .
 Minoans employed a range of sophisticated vessels . They were skilled seafarers and seafarers .
 They are often credited with having developed the first ‘navy,’ albeit used for trade rather than war . The first “navy’s” was developed for trade purposes, not war .
 Minoans’ impressive trading network gave them influence across the Aegean Sea in the eastern Mediterranean, and far beyond . The Minoan empire was founded in the mid-Middle Ages .
 Minoan artifacts have been found in Egypt, modern Lebanon, Syria, Israel, and Cyprus . Minoan relics have been discovered in modern Lebanon and Syria .
 Minoan goods widely are Minoan in style and feature typical Cretan symbols such as bulls . Not only were Minoan products widely are in style, they feature typical Minoan symbols like bulls .
 Minoan life was characterized by highly developed urban 4"" » settlements dominated by ""WE. splendid palaces, which mane were home to Crete's rulers . Minoan culture was characterized . by highly . developed urban settlements .
 The major cities on Crete were Knossos, Phaistos, Mallia, and Zakros . The major Crete cities were the most opulent, and the most expensive .
 This jar is from the late Minoan period, when Mycenaean influence was evident . The cities, like those ol Mesopotamia and other civilizations, were political, religious, Natural inspiration .
 Octopuses would have been a common sight in Minoans' trading destinations . Natural imagery was popular, and octopuses were also a popular sight . The Minoan people also settled in their trade destinations .
 Murals excavated at Tell el-Dab’a in Egypt were administrative, cultural, and trading centers . They include murals found at the site of the city .
 Kings played both a political and religious role and many government officials were likely to have been priests . Kings played a religious and political role as well as political .
 Minoan women are depicted in a series of paintings taken from one of the stunning, brightly colored wall paintings at Knossos . The women were dressed in fashionable clothes that left them exposed to the waist .
 There is evidence that Minoan women took a significant lead in many aspects of life . Minoan culture is a tradition of women taking a significant role in life .
 Minoan palaces were vast sumptuous complexes with well-lit Minoan culture was its ""Kamáres" The number of rooms | O00 thought to make up the famous frescoed palace at Knossos, “capital city” of the Minoan
 Minoans worked as craftspeople, rooms arranged around internal courtyards . Minoan rooms were filled with rooms for craftspeakers .
 The palaces had advanced drainage systems, similar to those in the Indus Valley . They had advanced plumbing that featured interlocking clay pipes and flushing toilets .
 Around 1700 act, the Knossos palace complex was destroyed by an earthquake or an invasion . A culture of craftspeople Courtiers and wealthy families living in villas surrounding the palace would have owned exquisite artifacts and knossos .
 When rebuilt, the palace was even more splendid, with stone steps linking the different buildings on its hilly site . The Minoans were famed for their gold jewelry for which they were famed .
 Evidence suggests many ordinary making items for home use and export . Evidence suggests that many ordinary people make items for export .
 The wealth that this industry created meant that they, too, lived in relatively sophisticated, multi-roomed houses . The wealth was created for them to live in multimillion dollar multi-rooms homes .
 Those that did not follow a craft worked the land, providing for the cities that powered Cretan society . Worked the land would have included tending the vines and olive trees that produced wine and oil .
 Excavated artifacts give us an insight into Minoan religious practices and beliefs . Minoan artifacts reveal Minoan beliefs and myths .
 People appear to have been buried with possessions or offerings, showing a belief in an afterlife . The burial is believed to have taken place at the time .
 Cretan vases and frescoes are suffused with imagery featuring bulls, axes, snakes, and goddesses . Cretans are known for their vases, vases .
 All Minoan gods were female and one of the most popular was the “Snake Goddess,” depictions of whom have been found in the ruins of houses and small palace shrines .
 Minos' failure to sacrifice a bull sent by the sea-god Poseidon caused Minos’ wife to give birth to the Minotaur, a creature that was half-man, half-bull . According to legend, the Minotaur was half man, half bull .
 Minos trapped the Minotaur in a labyrinth, and young people were sacrificed to the creature every year . Minos was killed by Minos in a battle between Minos and the Minotaur .
 Cretan frescoes also show young men and women leaping over bulls, which may have been performed for sport or for religious purposes .
 Women played an equal role to that of men in Minoan society . Women participated in all occupations and trades, including the priesthood .
 Young men and women took turns somersaulting over a bull's back . A Knossos palace fresco bull-leaping in which young people were shown .
 Dolphin fresco was discovered in a throne room in a palace throne room . It is believed to be one of the world's most beautiful paintings .
 Minoans moved from decorative artistic style in early days to naturalistic style of art . Santorini islands, near Crete, experienced a huge volcanic eruption in 1600Bce .
 Minoan-style city of town houses, frescoes, and fine pottery, frozen in time beneath 200ft of ash and pumice . Near the modern city of Akrotiri, on the island of Thera, archaeologists have unearthed a sophisticated, Minoanstyle city
 The eruption has been linked with the “lost city"" of Plato's Atlantis, the Bible story of the ten plagues visited upon Egypt, and the dedine of Minoan civilization . The eruption is believed to have been linked to the Minoan culture .
 Minoan civilization started to wane around 1500 BcE, but its complete decline took hundreds of years . Minoan culture was rich and highly successful, but it waned around 1500 BCE . Minoans were the most successful and most successful in the world .
 Thera eruption in 1600 Bce may have resulted in the loss of the Cretan fleet . Crete was more vulnerable to outside powers and influence .
 Trade networks may also have been wiped out, causing ""ripple-effect"" damage throughout the whole region . Trade networks also may also be wiped out .
 By 15008ctE, the Mycenaeans, a late Bronze Age people from mainland Greece, had arrived on Crete . The Myceneans were from the Bronze Age .
 Minoan and Mycenaean cultures had already influenced each other through trade . Minoan culture was already influenced by trade between the two .
 Their takeover may have been aided by an earthquake on Crete in the 1400s, which partially destroyed some Minoan cities . The Minoan people are believed to have taken over Crete .
 The Mycenaeans adopted much Minoan culture, and a wonderful fusion of styles flourished during this period . The fusion of Minoan-MycenAEan styles flourished in this period, with Minoan art .
 The flow of bronze was the need for supplies of copper and tin to make bronze for weapons and tools . The key to this stability was the availability of supplies of tin and copper .
 Copper was abundant, but the source of tin at the time was in distant Afghanistan . Tin was found in Afghanistan . The source of the tin was in nearby Afghanistan .
 The core territories were usually secure, but the borders were fluid and in constant dispute . The core territory was usually secure but still subject to constant disputes .
 Between 1200 and 10505ce, the records of these powers hint at tumult and upheaval . Then most simply fall eerily silent, signifying a dark age of history .
 Whatever the current political balance and regardless of who was fighting whom, bronze was delivered . "Bronze" was delivered. Whatever the political balance, it was a victory for the country .
 Diplomacy allowed empires to make peace when strategically necessary . Diplomacy also allowed the empires to have peace when strategic necessity was needed .
 Mittani made peace with Egypt to concentrate on the Hittite threat from the north . Egypt and Mittani initially fought over southern Syria, but Mittani later made peace .
 Hittites later came into conflict with the Egyptians, but formed an alliance with them to repel the Assyrians . The Hittite later came to terms with the Egyptian, but later became allies with them .
 Assyrians, formerly vassals of Mittani, were newcomers to the “Club of Great Powers” Assyrians . Assyrians were newcomers . It was some time before they were fully accepted .
 The first sign was that Mycenaean citadels in Greece were destroyed (see 77) Most likely by northern invaders, most likely by invaders .
 It seems that dispossessed Mycenaeans flooded outward looking for new lands . It seems they were looking for a new place in their homeland .
 Troy equates to a kingdom in Anatolia known to the Hittites as Wilusa . This is probably the origin of the story of Troy . The Hittite kingdom was known to be Wilusa, and Troy is the name of the city .
 What follows in the scant records available seems to be a cascade of mass migration, disruption, and destruction . What follows seems to have been mass migration and disruption .
 Mycenaeans drew Hittite forces away from Hattusa, the capital, leaving the rest of the empire to fragment . Hattusa was then destroyed by tribes of northern Anatolia .
 The ruins of Hattusa, destroyed around 1180 BCE, were unearthed at Bogazkoy in central Turkey . The Egyptians fought off invasions by groups called the “Sea Peoples,’ whom they blamed for the fall of the Hittite capital .
 Many of these groups seem to have had connections to former Hittite territories, meaning they were probably displaced by the empire’s fall, rather than the cause of it . Many of the groups were displaced from the empire's former territories .
 Babylonia’s wars with Assyria and Elam resulted in the Kassite dynasty dissolving in 1154 BCE . Meanwhile, Elam again disappeared from the records a few decades later, when its capital, Susa, was sacked .
 This period of ancient history is one of the most hotly debated subjects in ancient history . This period is known to be the most debated subject in the world .
 The events are known from only a handful of sources, such as the Ugarit letters and Egyptian accounts of the Sea Peoples .
 The collapse represented only the removal of the top layer of culture, however . A dark age is simply a period in which the elite stop producing monuments and written records .
 The political map was redrawn, but the lives of most people would not have changed . The lives of many people in the U.S. would have not changed, says CNN.com .
 Assyria and Elam were the only Bronze Age powers to return, but new kingdoms soon arose . Assyria, Elam and Assyria were the last Bronze Age power to return .
 The patterns of the Bronze Age were still deeply ingrained, but the new technology of iron would soon allow states such as Assyria to break free of the old system of diplomacy and bid for world domination on their own .
 New kingdoms, including the Hebrew states of Israel and Judah, were founded in the former territory of the Bronze Age powers .
 Migrations were a key feature of the collapse, and the most significant migrants were the Aramaeans . The Aramaean kingdom was founded in the 13th century .
 These people settled on the coast of the Levant at the end of the 2nd millennium Bce. Bce .
 They may equate to the Peleset, one of the ""Sea Peoples" mentioned by the Egyptians . The name Palestine may be the origin of the name Palestine .
 Their architecture and culture appear PHILISTINE Greek, suggesting that they began FUNERARY as displaced Mycenaeans . Their architecture suggests they may have been displaced from Myceneans .
 Iron ore was more readily accessible than the ingredients for bronze, but the transition to an iron economy was highly disruptive, so the great powers stuck with bronze .
 By the 10th century BCE, Assyria was making the change, and the emerging new states were already using iron . Assyria made the change in 10th Century BCE .
 Correspondence survives between the king of Ugarit, a regional ruler of the Hittite Empire, and a king of Alashiya on Cyprus .
 The letters talk of hostile marauders plaguing the Ugarit area and are brought to a sudden stop soon after 1200 ck by the city's destruction . The letters were sent to the city after the city was destroyed .
 Hittites had called the bulk of Ugarit's forces away to fight elsewhere, leaving it defenseless . They mention that the majority of the Hittite's forces had been called away .
 The marauders are never named but, as many cities around Ugarit were left unscathed, it is possible that they were displaced Mycenaean Greeks looking for a rich port to loot .
 Assyrian Empire's roots can be traced to the period 2000-1800 8cE when Shamshi-Adad I created a kingdom including the great trading city of Ashur, once an independent city-state .
 Under Ashur-uballit, Assyrian lands expanded over all of modern north Iraq . Assyria came into conflict with Babylonia and the Hittites .
 Assyria declined in the 11th century BCE, but the state survived . Like other Bronze Age powers, Assyria was a state of the Bronze Age state .
 Assyrian empire dominated the Middle East and stayed in control for two centuries . By the 9th century, a great Assyrian Empire dominated the region .
 It is often seen as the first real ""world empire,"" and much of its success can be traced to a stable political system and skillful exploitation of new Iron Age warfare techniques .
 Sargon built a new residence city called Sargon's Fortress in the Assyrian heartland . With a vast workforce from all over the Middle East at his command, heavy tribute and taxes filled his coffers . The fortress's palaces and temples bearing lavish stonework .
 Neo-Assyrian Empire built on the foundations of the Middle Assyrian period . Assyria commanded much wealth and resources, improving agriculture and irrigation .
 Neo-Assyrians were famed as fierce warriors and they showed innovative military prowess . They showed innovation military prowess, which helped them to expand their territories . Neo-assyrians are famed for their innovative military techniques .
 Neo-Assyrian military success was aided by the Assyrians' effective adoption of new Iron Age warfare techniques . The Assyrians were able to use the techniques of the Iron Age .
 Their highly disciplined army featured a mix of chariots, infantry, and horseback riders . The British army was known for its disciplined discipline .
 This was the first army to use cavalry units, which, along with the Assyrians' use of iron weapons, gave them a great advantage over less advanced enemies . The Assyrians were the first to use the use of cavalry units and iron weapons .
 The fighting forces mixed a standing army of professional soldiers (including foreign mercenaries) under the control of the king with provincial contingents . Provincial contingents mustered as part of | %5 regional tax obligations .
 Assyrians used impalement, mass execution, and the ruthless mass “deportation” of those who opposed them . Famed too for the barbaric subjugation of their enemies, the Assyrians were also known for their brutal treatment of their opponents .
 Such methods were also used by other powers throughout the Middle East . But such methods were used by others throughout the region .
 Assyrians invented a new way of dealing with conquered people by moving them en masse to other parts of the empire and replacing them with other people from within the empire . The Assyrian invented a way to deal with the conquered people .
 9th-century relief from Ashurnasirpal Ils palace at Nimrud shows a priest preparing to predict the future by studying a sheep's entrails . However, the Life in an Assyrian military camp is still a mystery .
 Assyrian population movements were more like resettlements than deportations, because the people were given land and state assistance . Foretelling the future was a prominent aspect of Assyrian life .
 This resettlement was the fate of the people known in Biblical tradition as the “Ten Lost Tribes” of the conquered Hebrew kingdom of Israel . The people were known as the "Ten lost Tribes" of the conquerors of Israel.
 They were moved to the Upper Habur area of northern Mesopotamia and the Zagros mountains of southwest Iran . They are now living in the Upper Hursur area and the Hursursur mountains of northern Iran .
 People from the Middle East trace their ancestry to the biblical Noah and his son, Shem . A language group that includes Hebrew and Arabic, and a description of people .
 Assyrian priest joins another man in butchering a sheep so that he can "read" its entrails . Assyrian priests butchering sheep so they can read its entrasils .
 Resettlement was designed to create a uniform population, although it created some hotbeds of dissent . Resettlement created by the government in the 1930s and 1940s .
 By the 7th century BCE, the royal entourage included scholars, craftsmen, and singers from Babylonia, Anatolia, Egypt, and Iran .
 Military effectiveness was crucially backed up by a relatively stable political system . Stable foundations were key to the success of the U.S. military .
 The first was the royal bloodline, which was considered all-important, so that outsiders could not become king . The bloodline was considered important to ensure the king was not from outsiders .
 A crown prince and heir apparent was selected as soon as a new king took the throne . The prince is expected to be the heir apparent of the new king .
 "There was always a successor, and he played an important role in running the empire," he said . "He played a key role in the empire. He played a vital role, and there was always an important successor"
 If the king died unexpectedly, the succession arrangement was already in place . The king's succession arrangement has already been established .
 Second was the way in which power was delegated from the king to local officials . Third was how the king delegated power to the local authorities .
 Food, probably a meat stew (perhaps from the butchered sheep) is being prepared on a stove . Assyria was organized into food, probably from meat stew . Food was probably from the meat of butcheered sheep .
 Assyrian governors often enjoyed great wealth . Coded signs written by the gods were believed to be hidden in sheep’s entrails .
 A servant sets out a bowl of soup, a fan is used by roasted animal the servant to cec ribs, and flat bread protect the meal PHRYGIA: 'EE'
 Babylon The Assyrian Empire is the name of the ancient Assyrian empire . Babylon was the birthplace of Israel .
 Strong were directly appointed good communication links, and varied trading links were developed with the king .
 As the eunuch governors could not have children, there was no danger that they would try to start their own dynasty .
 The provinces raised taxes and sent troops directly to wherever they were needed . It ensured that the provinces raised tax and sent them directly to where they needed .
 ANAL EDS have been used by a powerful aristocracy from whom Sm ""i ae ae" was used to bake bread or leading officials and army commanders of ari oven roaa were drawn .
 Shamash-shumuspectacular capital, ukin, had been installed as ruler of Babylon, wolf on the fold, Nineveh, and Nineveh . Nineveh and Assurbanipal, the eventual victor, were the eventual winners .
 Assyria conquered Egypt . An d h IS CO h O rts defended the empire's empire's Assyria . Assyria defeated Egypt .
 His campaigns included sacking rule of the Nubian dynasty . His campaigns the 7th century sce and ended the . endthe . BylonIANS AND MEDES ; í included .
 By around 3000 ct trading centers were developing in the eastern Mediterranean, the Arab peninsula, and Nubia .
 By 3000BcE, the maritime cities that would become the heartland of ‘Phoenician” (a later Greek label) civilization were developing or well established along the eastern Mediterranean coast .
 During the 3rd millennium Bc. Bc, states were flourishing in the better-watered parts of the Arabian peninsula . The Arabian peninsula is now the most fertile region in the world .
 Magan was valued for copper and diorite, while it received goods such as textiles and wool . Magan is valued for its copper, diorites and dorite .
 Since ancient times, tales circulated about a ‘lost city’ on the Arabian peninsula . The city is believed to be located in the Arabian Peninsula .
 Archaeological discoveries in the 1980s and 1990s, using images taken from space, appear to have found this city and identified it as Ubar . Ubar is in modern Oman and is believed to be Ubar in the region .
 Incense was so precious, and its trade so important, because it masked unpleasant smells . Incense masks unpleasant smells and was used in religious ceremonies. Incense is so precious that it was used to mask unpleasant smells.
 This is why the incense, gold, and myrrh brought to Jesus by the three kings were such special gifts . This is the reason why incense and gold were given to Jesus, the Bible's first king .
 yre, Byblos, and Sidon formed the core of a great maritime trading network . yre was the center of the world's most famous maritime trading networks .
 These citystates on the east Mediterranean coast, known as Canaan in the 2nd millennium sce and as Phoenicia to the Greeks, prospered between 1200-600 cr. sce . The region was known in Canaan by the Greeks as the region known by the ancient Greeks
 Phoenicians used maritime trade to expand a relatively small land base and keep at bay powers looking to control them . The Phoenician used maritime trading to expand their relatively small coastal land base .
 Phoenician control center for routes crossing the Mediterranean . Phoenicians' extraordinary seafaring prowess made them control control centers for routes across the region .
 Their trade links extended to Mesopotamia and, through the Red Sea, to Arabia and Africa . Their trading links included Mesopotamian and Arab traders .
 Carthage in North Africa and Gades in Iberia were centers of tin production . A vast network of trading posts included Carthage and Carthage . Carthage was close to the centers of Iberian tin production. Gades was the center of the tin trade .
 Ugarit was abandoned in the collapse of the Late Bronze Age system . Most other Canaanite cities survived intact and formed close trading links with Philistines and other new arrivals .
 Arab trade networks were established in the Arab world at this time . Important trading networks were also established in Arab world . Arab trade
 By the late 9th century BCE, there were major centers in southern Arabia, including the Minaean and Sabaean kingdoms, and in the north . By the mid-9th century CE, there was major center in southern Saudi Arabia .
 This made it easier to create settlements in the desert, based around large oases, and to travel across arid regions in search of new resources . This allowed people to travel in search for new resources, and create settlements around large desert oases .
 Camel trails marked out routes that became part of an ""Incense Road,"" carrying incense and spices . Camel trails were used to carry incense, spices and incense .
 Only the Arabs knew the secrets of traversing their dangerous desert routes . Only Arabs knew how to traverse the desert routes.
 This knowledge made them powerful and wealthy, and they did the best to shroud their trails and sources in fabulous myth . They did not know their sources and sources, but they did try to shroud them with fabulous myth.
 A valuable nexus of trade routes was thriving west, around the kingdom of Kush, in southern Nubia . The trade routes brought precious materials such as ivory and gold to the ancient world .
 Kush and its capital, Napata, were enjoying a glorious period as a major trade center freed from Egyptian domination . By the 8th century BCE, Kush and Napata had been a major trading center .
 The value of Nubia's trade routes was one of the main reasons why Egypt had worked so hard, from about 2000 BCE, to exert control here . Egypt worked hard from 2000 BCE to exert influence here, and the two cultures had a lasting impact on each other .
 A stone slab from the Amun temple at Kawa shows a Nubian king called Ary, who may be the 8th| ~ century BCE founder of the ""kingdom of Kush"" .
 All manner of goods, from many different sources, were transported across huge distances by networks that meshed Phoenician-controlled e routes with the trade routes of Mediterranean, Middle Eastern, African, and Arabian peoples .
 14th-century-&ct ship found wrecked off Uluburun (moder Mycenae, Canaan, Egypt, and | Assyria)
 Phoenicians built sophisticated multi-oared Warships . Warships were powered by a combination of on-red pottery to Cyprus .
 Cypriots had evolved their own band’s mix of Middle Eastern and Mycenaean mix of mix . Cypriot probably developed a bireme with two banks their battles with the Greeks 93 >>, biremes > version .
 There are many tales of the Phoenician’s incredible long-distance voyages . Phoenicians’ tales of their long, distance voyages are often told of their exploits .
 Arabian peninsula, the . Assyrian king Sargon II kined Pam eae oie +] in Khorsabad shows a . ingdom of the Himy -| wood shipment being unloaded being unloaded . Arabian peninsula .
 Assyria eclipsed that of the Sabaeans ‘imported top-quality cedar for its palace’
 African ivory to the Roman CARVING Empire . Roman Empire maintained a brisk trade in precious resins such as frankincense and myrrh . African ivory was traded to Roman Empire for ivory .
 Ma'rib city was its center—a major post along the Arabian incense road . Ma'ib city was a major post in the region .
 Vast empires rose and fell, systems of government that still influence society today were born, and great religions emerged . The world's first great empires were created in the Middle Ages .
 Greece continues colonization of Mediterranean with colony of Massalia . Massalia, founded in southern France, was a colony of the Greek colony of France .
 Much of Middle East controlled by short-lived empire of the Medes . Mesopotamian region dominated by NeoBabylonian Empire . Much of Mideast region controlled by Neo-Babylian Empire. Mesopotamusian region .
 These were more than formidably wellorganized states and empires, with expansive, military, and materialistic ambitions . These were formidly well organized states, empires, and with expansive military ambitions . The world's first great empires were ruled out of existence by the Roman Empire .
 Celtic La Téne culture emerges in Central Europe; Celts expand east and south and into British Isles . Celts spread across Europe and into Britain in the 17th century . Celtic culture emerged in France, Italy, France, Germany, Italy and France .
 In Central America, final phase of Olmec civilization, but Zapotecs flourish in Monte Albán . In Central American, the Zapoteca thrived in the area .
 They also gave rise to a series of global religions-Buddhism, Judaism, and Christianity . They gave birth to Buddhism, Christianity and Judaism .
 Elsewhere, Central and South America, Africa, and Japan, new civilizations were also emerging . Elsewhere in South America and Africa, the civilizations were emerging .
 Rome crushes Carthage in Third Punic War; creates province of Africa in its place; absorbs Greece . Carthage was defeated by Rome in the war . Rome conquered Carthage and created a province of African in Africa .
 Gandhara falls to steppe nomads . Gandharara falls out of control of the steppin region .
 Kushans invade Buddhism spreads in coastal Southeast Asia . Antiochus's sanctuary was a Buddhist sanctuary .
 Moche culture flourishes in Peru . Nabataeans, allied ' with Rome, control First Chinese population census . First Chinese census was held in China .
 Buddha represented for the first time, Gandhara, northwest India . Buddha represented in the first place in the region of India .
 Pompeii 73 Peak of Han Dynasty military success . Celtic cauldron, A Gundestrup, Denmark . A Fresco, Pompeii . Pompeii73 Peak of . Han Dynasty .
 Embassy of Syrian merchants to China; German tribes invade northern Italy . German tribes invaded northern Italy. German tribes attack northern Italy;
 Angles, Saxons, and Jutes migrate to Britain; Celts survive in Wales and Ireland . Celts survived in Wales, Ireland and Wales . Angles and Saxons migrated to Britain .
 The Hellespont Imm n T” ansi | was a narrow sea channel that had been both a Greek depiction of northern nomads, known as the Scythians . This Greek depiction shows trading contact frontier and pivotal point of empires . It was both a depiction of nomads
 Hatra's circular layout reflected steppe lands from Siberia to southeast Europe . Hatra was designed to reflect the steppe steppies from Siberia and southeast Europe's steaks .
 The natural geographical zones of Eurasia have shaped the growth of powers, their conflicts, and their contacts . Eurasia has shaped the history of the world's most powerful nations .
 Mesopotamia remained the heart of the | ancient civilized world . Mesopotamian culture was once a thriving center of the world's civilization .
 This was a fertile commercial crossroads and a gateway to the resources of the Mediterranean . The city was a major commercial hub and gateway to Europe's resources .
 The Assyrians’ heartland lay in the upper part of T AL Mesopotamia, but in 8008ct they dominated *. a rem, ema their neighbors more than any state had done ATO DUET before . KUSHAN EMPIRE WORLD DOMINANCE .
 They fought the mountain tribes to the ONE north and east of their realm, but also developed diplomatic »relations with them .
 The Bisitun was a sacred mountain beside a site used successively as a staging post, garden, È i and palatial retreat . Babylon was now at the BisitUn was used as a stage post and garden, and was later a palace .
 The mountain towered center on the route from Babylon, on the low Mesopotamian plain, to the Iranian Plateau .
 In the second half of the Ist millennium, the world's great powers became yet more mobile and ambitious . World's greatest powers became more mobile, ambitious and ambitious in the 2000s .
 Indus River was a central link in the route between the Persian Gulf and the interiors of India and Central Asia . The Indus river was a vital link between Iran and the rest of Asia .
 Kushan statues such as this are relics of a tribal power that in 1-250 ce consolidated a huge land empire between the Hindu Kush mountains and the Ganges River . Kushan tribesmen consolidated a land empire in the region between the Himalayas and Ganges .
 The heart of the city-based empires remained in the south, from southern Europe through the Middle East to India and China .
 Great changes in the seats of power of both settled and nomadic people took place . Nevertheless, great changes took place in the area .
 Frontiers of Power dimly aware today seem to have moved frontiers in the European steppe, Central Asia, and northwest China . Enormous population movements of which we are only dimply aware today .
 At the same time, rulers resettled populations as a method of imperial control . The Assyrian, Babylonian, Persian, Roman, and Han Chinese empires did this .
 Imperial powers used symbols to reflect the rich diversity of their lands . The vast size of these empires was hard for their inhabitants to comprehend . Imperial powers were hard to comprehend, but imperial powers often used symbols .
 Assyrian and Persian rulers described the varied resources and people of their territory in inscriptions . Inscriptions include descriptions of resources and the people of the region .
 Each dynasty or empire developed its own ideas about the structure of the world . Each empire had its own idea of how the world was built .
 During Assyrian and Babylonian rule from the fertile, low-lying plains of Mesopotamia, mountains seen as wild, chaotic places threatening danger .
 The mountainous homeland of the Macedonian Greeks and Persians helped to instill in them a hardy self-image . On the other hand, the mountainous region of the Greek and Greek homeland of Macedonia was the birthplace of the Greeks and Persian .
 For these empires, great rivers, such as the Danube and Indus, marked the limits of their realm . Great rivers such as Danube or Indus marked the boundaries of their domains .
 Each of these imperial movements encountered barriers to its empire-building . Assyria, Rome, Assyria and Rome faced barriers to their empires-building.
 A snapshot of the Eurasian landmass in 1 CE illustrates both the barriers to communication and unification, and the portions of land that were acquired and fought over by the main powers at that time .
 Later states with global ambitions looked back on a series of civilizations whose heirs they presumed themselves to be . Later states looked back at those who they presumed to be their heirs .
 Its apocalyptic destruction was often depicted in art in the 19th century . The apocalyptic destruction of the city was depicted in 19th Century art .
 To the people of imperial city civilizations, invading nomadic tribes represented the forces of chaos . The tribes were seen as the "forces of chaos" to the people .
 The bulk of Assyrian lands were taken over by a dynasty ruling from the ancient city of Babylon . Babylon was the birthplace of the Assyrian kingdom .
 Medes first developed a luxurious empire to match their Mesopotamian neighbors . Greek historians, influenced by Persian views, describe how the Medes developed a lavish empire .
 Cyrus supposedly took over the Medes’ empire from within . Cyrus was one of the Persians who attended their court . Cyrus is said to have taken over Medes' empire .
 Cyrus conquered Mesopotamia in the mid6th century BCE before moving on the capitals of the heartland itself . Contemporary chronicles unearthed in Babylon instead tell how Cyrus conquered lands surrounding the region .
 Babylonian king Nabonidus and his capital were next to fall to Cyrus . Next to fall was the city of Babylon, Babylon, and its capital, Babylon .
 The empire of the Persian kings was one of an unprecedented scale . The empire in central Asia in the east are less well documented .
 With Cambyses' annexation of Egypt, the Persians acquired a world empire within a generation . The Persians, a small tribal elite from the Iranian plateau, had acquired a global empire .
 Cambyses' brother Bardiya seems to have been recognized as king . Bardiya was king of the kingdom from Cambysyses .
 The structures included massive columned audience halls and smaller royal palaces built of stone and mud-brick . The structures were built in the Middle Ages .
 Persian kings had annexed DIA ord"" zs a ‘Mev ‘ae Egypt, many Greek communities in Cappadocia Harran 4 CN (qu eng Tepe BACTRI a, p tp the Aegean) and extensive areas of o
 Despite retreating from Greece, Cyrene ""o"" “I a) Plnascus E Plateau ARACHOSIA X Persia lost no further possessions ef hean cac MB Babylon a” ans. Eide on. %,, i7 Iranian E < Despite retreat from
 Bardiya was an imposter whom Darius had removed from the mountain of Behistun . Bardiya's court robe resembles the king exactly. exactly. monumental inscription carved into the mountain . The inscription was carved in the mountain that Bardiya had removed .
 Darius tried to create a harmonious image of the empire under his rule . In the wake of this upheaval, Darius tried an image of his empire under Darius .
 The architecture at his capitals of Persepolis and Susa incorporated peaceful images of all the peoples of the empire . The architecture of the cities was designed to create peaceful images .
 Darius claimed that the building materials had come from farflung corners of his realm, from India to the Ionian coast, and that many subject peoples had brought the splendid structure to completion .
 Darius and his successors emphasized harmony and productivity under their rule . Darius's rule emphasized harmony, productivity under his rule . Encounters with Greece were important for Darius .
 Persians left no sustained historical account of themselves . Texts on the Persian kings, written HOW WE KNOW, are written .
 The kings did, however, leave monumental statements on their palace walls about how they had wished to be seen .
 Darius boasted of massive excavations for a platform for his columned halls . Images and texts found in Darius l's palace at Susa show Darius boasting of excavations . Darius' palace was built in Susa and is believed to have been at the center of the city .
 Pictures show a Persian guard in colorful court robes by Greeks in small states scattered across the edge of Persian territory, instead concentrate on conflict .
 Athens and Eretria sent help from mainland Greece in the 490s BCE . Persian-held Greek cities on the Ionian coast revolted in 490s BC .
 Some Greek cities came to terms with the Persians immediately, but other Greek states staged valiant resistance . The Persians were eventually defeated by the Greeks .
 Despite withdrawal from Greece, Persia continued to wield the Cyrus cylinder . The Cyrus cylinder Scythians of the steppe to the north, to fortresses on the frontier of Upper Egypt in the south . Persia was a world empire .
 The range of cultures encompassed by this scope stretched from the historic, settled cities of Babylonia to newly emergent kingdoms on the Caucasus frontier .
 The difficulties of administering such a vast and varied empire were significant . Even a journey between two of several royal capitals could take up to three weeks .
 Official royal routes, supported by regular staging posts and carefully administered travel rations, provided a swift communication network . The royal network was established in the early 1900s .
 This clay foundation document gives Cyrus's carefully positive account of his conquest of the city in the 540s Bce . Cyrus was welcomed by the locals as a better ruler than his predecessor, the Babylonian king Nabonidus .
 The peoples who offered tribute to the Persian kings reached from need . The peoples offering tribute to Persian kings were not from need, but from necessity .
 The ruling Persians spoke their own language . It was recorded only in the limited royal inscriptions appearing on monuments in the cites of the empire .
 Official communication was in Aramaic, a lingua franca inherited from Assyrian administration . Only a few fragments of such parchment and papyrus documents have survived .
 Letters from Egypt and records from Afghanistan illustrate how movements of officials and provisions were closely supervised by local administrators .
 Interconnections led to unprecedented transmission of ideas, goods, and people across vast distances . Such interconnections were unprecedented in the history of the world .
 Afterward, the East would be regarded as foreign to the West, and vice versa . The East and the West would be considered foreign to each other, the West .
 Unifying notions in Greek and Jewish communities are linked with their experiences in the Persian empire . The Persian empire was ruled out of existence by the Persian Empire .
 The Achaemenid period was a catalyst for the development of states and identities across the Middle East . It was the first time the region had a state or identity .
 Folkloric tales of fate and heroism surrounded the early life of Cyrus . Cyrus was the founder of the Persian Empire and founder of Persian Empire .
 Cyrus was “King of Anshan,” an old city on the Iranian Plateau . In his own words, Cyrus said he was ‘King of anshan’s old city’
 He blended architectural styles from the lands he conquered in his garden-filled capital of Pasargadae . He blended styles from his lands with those from his homeland .
 Cyrus also adapted local ideas about kingship to cast himself as a desirable ruler in the subject cities of Babylon and Jerusalem . Cyrus was a king of Babylon, Jerusalem and Babylon . Cyrus is believed to have been the most successful king of all time .
 Both Greek and Middle Eastern sources inspired a long tradition of viewing Cyrus as an ideal king . Cyrus was the first Persian king of the Persian kingdom .
 Artifacts from Mycenae, Greece, are evidence of a rich Mediterranean civilization that existed before the rise of the city-states . Artifacts show evidence of an early city-state culture that existed in the region . Archaeologists say the Mycenean culture existed before city
 Between 1100 and 7508cE, ancient Greece was in a ""dark age"" about which little is known . The "DARK AGE" refers to the period when ancient Greece had a dark age .
 All of the future city-states were probably clusters of villages at this time . The city-state was likely to be a cluster of villages .
 At the start of the Archaic Period (c.0480 CE), increasing Mediterranean populations fueled the rise of cities such as Athens, Sparta, Thebes, and Corinth .
 By the 7th century sce, Athens was on the rise as a leading city-state . Athens was one of the most important cities in the world .
 Later, the Athenian statesman, Solon (c.0560 BCE), brought in laws that helped protect the rights of ""ordinary"" people . Solon's laws were later brought in by the statesman Solon .
 Many of the architectural features of these city-states are shared by cities today . Many of these architectural features are still common today's cities .
 The rise of the polis in ancient Greece was a major development in world politics . A major figure in the story of the citystate was the Athenian magistrate Cleisthenes who instituted major reforms .
 Sparta probably remained principally a cluster of villages . Although termed ‘cities,’ population levels were low, and Sparta remained mainly villages . Sparta is now a Roman city of Sparta, and its population levels are low .
 What was important, and central to the city-state concept, was that the inhabitants identified with their State first . The inhabitants of the city state would identify with their state first, the author says .
 Being a ‘citizen’ of Sparta — a Spartan — was more important than being Greek . So being a Spartan was important for Sparta, the king of Spartia .
 City-states often varied greatly in character, each shifting through various types of government at different times . Beyond this, the city-state states often shifted through various kinds of government . The city-states were often larger than any other state in the world .
 These included monarchy, tyranny (where there was one strong leader, not necessarily an unpopular one) and oligarchy (rule by a small group of people, typically nobles) and democracy .
 The eligible male citizens participated to varying degrees in many of these forms . The eligible men participated in the various forms .
 This participation and idea of self-rule became one of the key characteristics of many of the citystates that came later of rule. of rule . This participation of self rule was a key characteristic of the later citystates .
 He changed the Athenian tribal system and permanently altered Athens’ political structure . He also permanently altered the political structure of Athens .
 Attica (the area around Athens) was divided into three areas: coast, highlands, city, and city . The tribes were made up of citizens from each of these areas and subdivided further into demes .
 The acroterion was a decorative feature above the pediment . The 5th-century statesman Pericles moved Athens farther toward a new kind of democracy .
 These states were independent, self-contained entities bound by the rule of law . These states are independent states bound by law, bound by rule of the law . They are self-sufficient entities bound to the rule by law .
 The eastern pediment was filled with sculptures depicting Greek mythology . It is believed to be one of the most important pieces of art in the world .
 Sanctuary of Athena is one of several buildings clustered around the oracle at Delphi . Delphi, a sacred site close to the Gulf of Corinth, is a sacred temple of ancient Greek goddesses . The oracle is located near the ancient city of Delphi in the ancient Greek city
 4th-century theater was built at Epidaurus, a city-state in the Peloponnese . The theater is one of the largest in the world and was built in the 4th century .
 The theater is the best-preserved theater to survive from ancient Greece . It seated around 12,000 people and has exceptional acoustics . The theater has been restored to its former glory .
 The theater of the ancient Greeks influenced the development of both drama and theater design . The ancient Greeks' theater was the birthplace of the theater industry .
 With colonies in the Adriatic and Macedonia, Macedonia, its command of several important harbors made it an important seafaring and trading center .
 He wrote on a variety of subjects, including an exploration of what might be the best form of government . He also wrote on what he called the Greek democracy .
 A gold and ivory statue of the goddess Athena by the famous sculptor Phidias stood in the center of the temple . In general, he had a great respect for the polis as a good way to govern .
 In his famous work, Politics, he analyzed many of the Greek city-states in 3 p / f n mE p sm. In his work, he analyzes many of those city-state states .
 Juried courts were set up, therefore moving judicial power from the city council to its citizens . Juried court was set up in order to move judicial power away from the council .
 All male citizens, regardless of background or wealth, had an equal vote . The assembly became a democratic council where all male citizens had equal votes .
 Athenian city-state life in the 5th a nd 4th centuries BCE also saw a remarkable flourishing of intellectual and artistic life . The 5th century BCE saw a flourishing of artistic and intellectual life in Athens .
 Playwrights including Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides explored great philosophical themes . The many columns were fluted, without bases and with square capitals at the top .
 The great era of the Greek city-states came to an end, although the polis model survived . Distinctive three-stepped 3,000-year-old polis was created by the city-state .
 This chaotic era brought more city-state conflicts that weakened their power . City-state states were weakened by the chaos of the chaotic era .
 Athens's great rival, Sparta, had a dual kingship from two royal lines . These kings ruled concurrently . Sparta and Corinth had dual kingships from two lines .
 Later, this rule was tempered by a council of aristocrats and an assembly of citizens . The assembly was a society of equal male citizens willing to take arms for their state . Later, the assembly was tempered with a council .
 Sparta relied heavily on a serf population known as helots . Sparta was the first Greek state to rely heavily on serfers . The state of Sparta is one of the most ancient Greek states .
 In the 5th century BCE, a small council-elected body called the ephorate came into being . The council-appointed body was a council- elected body in ancient times .
 They were intended to oversee government processes . They eventually seized power for themselves . They sidelined the monarchy for a time .
 Corinth commanded a strong strategic position geographically on the narrow strip of land connecting mainland Greece . Corinth was one of the most powerful polis in Greece, with a strong position on the peninsula .
 As the use of the phalanx formation became widespread, citizens who fought for their states expected some political say in return .
 Rivalry between city-states was constant, particularly between Athens and Sparta . Sparta and Athens were one of the most powerful cities in ancient times .
 Some events brought the states together, such as the Panhellenic games, and religious festivals, to bring together .
 The 11th century saw the rise of Italian citystates such as Venice and Pisa . Pisa was the birthplace of the first Italian city state .
 Other examples flourished at Florence, Padua, Hamburg, and Flanders . By the 13th-15th centuries, other examples flourished .
 There were rumors that Olympias tried to — have Philip assassinated before a son by another wife could grow old enough to acce, ed him . Alexander's mother, Olympias, was rumored to have wanted him assassinated before his son could grow up .
 One of his first acts on crossing to Asia Minor was to visit the site of Troy as an act of homage to his ancestor .
 A priest at the desert shrine of Ammon hailed him as the “son of Zeus,” the king of the Greek gods . He was believed to be an ancestor of the Macedonian kings . Later, in Egypt, he was hailed as the son of Zeus .
 Alexander’s selfimage as a heroic man of destiny chosen by the gods inspired his relentless drive to conquest . Alexander was a self-confessed conqueror of the world . Alexander's self image as a hero inspired him to conquer world .
 Alexander’s army served him as the dedicated followers of a great fighting man . Alexander's army served as the loyal followers of the great man, Alexander . Alexander died in a battle of his life in the city of Alexander III .
 His elite cavalry, the Companions, were a tight-knit group with whom he fought, ate, drank, and drank as the first among equals . The Companions were his elite cavalry .
 He liked to spearhead the cavalry charge and was often the first to storm city walls during a siege . He often led cavalry charge during the siege and would often storm walls .
 He could be supremely reckless of his own safety, yet he was also thoroughly professional in organizing and motivating his cavalry and infantry in battle . He was a professional organizer and motivator of his troops and troops .
 Alexander's decisive victories over numerically superior Persian armies at Issus and Gaugamela showed a shrewd eye for the weaknesses of the Persian army . This silver coin shows Alexander as the semidivine Herakles .
 On other coins he is represented as the horned god Ammon, the supreme Egyptian deity . Ammon is the god of Ammon .
 Alexander's close association with the gods and a suggested direct paternal link to Herakles, rather than Philip, enforced his own sense of destiny . Alexander believed to have had a close relationship to the gods . Alexander was the son of Philip, who died in childbirth in childbirth .
 Alexander attended banquets in Persia dressed as gods, according to one written source . Alexander was known for his role in the creation of the Persian empire .
 The myth of his divinity was widely accepted and shrines were raised in his name . Shrines were built in his honor and were dedicated to him .
 Alexander founded Alexandria as a Macedonian capital for Egypt . Alexandria was the birthplace of Egypt's first capital .
 Alexander was born on the coastal plain, at Pella, where his royal predecessors had established their capital . The Macedonians originated as hill tribesmen in the mountains of northern Greece . Alexander had an instinct for gambling on aggression as well as a powerful enemy .
 He went on fighting, not just enforcing his claim to rule all the Persian domains, but also pushing farther into India . He fought against his claims to rule the Persian domain, and went on to conquer India .
 Alexander saw himself as spreading Greek civilization by the sword . Alexander was influenced by Persian influence . Alexander believed he was spreading Greek culture by sword .
 He founded Greek cities, the most famous of which was Alexandria in Egypt, in Egypt . He sought to Hellenize—to make Greek— the Persians whom he conquered . The most famous city in Egypt was Alexandria .
 His adoption of the mantle of the Persian Empire created great strains with his Macedonian followers . But his adopted mantle created strains with many of his followers . The Persian Empire was one of the greatest achievements in the world .
 Macedonian veterans were jealous when new Persian followers found favor with Alexander . Alexander was also jealous of his followers' popularity with the Persian king .
 Alexander violently suppressed a series of mutinies that he violently suppressed . Discontent came to a head in a series that came to an end in Alexander's reign .
 His fame in antiquity was . unequaled, yet he lett no creative legacy . Noble savage. Noble savage His fame was unequaled .
 Alexander was a ruthless man who killed both in anger and in cold blood . Alexander was the ruthless killer who killed in anger or cold blood, says historian .
 His father makes himself leader of all the Greek city states except Sparta . His father was leader of the city state in Sparta, but only Sparta was Sparta.
 She bears him a son who could threaten Alexander's claim to inherit the throne . Alexander's son could threaten his claim to the throne if she dies .
 Alexander succeeds to the throne and has Attalus, the chief supporter of Eurydice, killed . Attalus is killed by Attalus . Alexander succeeds the throne .
 He visits the site of Troy and then conquers western Asia Minor, defeating a Persian army at Granicus . He defeats the Persian army in Granicus.
 He visits the orade of the god Zeus-Ammon at the Siwa Oasis and founds the city of Alexandria . He finds the city in Alexandria and finds it in Egypt .
 He suppresses a conspiracy in his army; his second-in-command Parmenion is among those put to death . His second in-command is also executed . The assassination of his son is one of the most notorious crimes in history .
 He bloodily suppresses a conspiracy by his royal pages, who oppose his adoption of Persian customs . The king was forced to suppress the conspiracy by royal pages .
 Alexander's soldiers mutiny and force him to turn back, following the Jhelum, a tributary of the Indus River, to the sea . Reaching the Hyphasis River his soldiers mutine and force Alexander to turn .
 Alexander is plunged into deep grief when his closest friend, and rumored lover, Hephaestion dies . Alexander is left devastated by the death of his rumored lover . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray in May 2015 .
 Anybody wishing to rule over it would have to take into account the legacy and traditions of Persia's Achaemenid rulers . The city was ruled by the Achaemid dynasty in the mid-2000s .
 Divided into satrapies (provinces) governed by men appointed by the king, it had several royal capitals .
 The ceremonial capital of Persepolis was largely destroyed by Alexander, but its great stairways, decorated with reliefs of subject rulers bringing tribute, survive . The ceremonial city was largely demolished by Alexander but its stairways are still intact .
 Alexander conquered the Persian Empire in just ten years, the largest empire the world had ever seen . The Conquests of Alexander the Great were the most famous conquests in the world . Alexander conquered Persia in just 10 years, becoming the world's largest empire .
 His empire now stretches from North Africa and the eastern Mediterranean to the Indus valley in northern India . His own empire now stretched from North Morocco and the east Mediterranean to India .
 The Achaemenid Persian Empire had ruled over an area extending from the Mediterranean to the Indus valley . Alexander the Great ruled over the region of Asia . The Greeks in Asia were ruled by the Persian Empire .
 Alexander the Great conquered the Persian empire in less than ten years . His army brought with it ideas and tastes from Greek civilization . Alexander had placed the key provinces in the conquered Persian empire under the control of trusted governors .
 He allowed local systems of government, to which the people were accustomed, to continue . However, he allowed local governments to continue, allowing local systems to continue. He also allowed local government to continue as well .
 Alexander tried to create a ruling race through intermarriage between his officers and Persian noblewomen . Alexander appreciated the role of the Persians as an imperial people and tried to make them an imperial race .
 The process of changing one mode of rule for another, he knew, was a delicate one and needed patience . He knew that the process of change needed patience, he said .
 Alexander's body was embalmed to be taken home, but it was diverted to Alexandria in Egypt, where it was exhibited in a glass case . The body, an important talisman for Alexander's potential successors, is now displayed in a case .
 The smallest was the Antigonid kingdom, which ruled in Macedonia and Greece . The smallest kingdom was the smallest in the history of the Greek kingdom .
 The richest and most secure was the PTA i, i ae ane F Bactrian deities . This plate from Ai Khanoum shows the Greek goddess Cybele in a chariot pulled by lions in front of a Persian priest .
 It lasted until 30 BCE, when in the reign of Cleopatra VII, it was annexed by Rome . It was the first city to be annexed to Rome .
 Three empires spread Greek ideas through their political institutions, town planning, and architecture . The three empires spread ideas through political institutions and town planning .
 The Seleucid empire established many Greek-style cities to help control their huge territory . The cities were established to help keep control of their vast territory .
 Seleucus I had a new capital built in Mesopotamia, on the Tigris, near Babylon . The capital was soon moved to Antioch in Syria, but the capital was later moved to the city of Antioch .
 The Seleucids had a relaxed attitude to the religions practiced in their territories . Greek ideas were accepted alongside old Persian, Jewish, and other local traditions .
 By 1008ct the empire had been reduced to Antioch and a few other Syrian cities . The empire was reduced to only a few Syrian cities, Antioch .
 The distant Bactrian kingdom (in present-day Afghanistan) retained a magnificent Greek coinage . Archaeological sites such as Ai Khanoum (thought to be the city of Alexandria on the Oxus) reveal that Bactrians cities continued to follow Greek models with temples and other
 Pergamum is an important new regional Admiration for Greek philosophy, poetry, and sculpture . To the west of the Seleucid sphere of influence, in present-day Turkey, it was an important regional admixture of Greek culture .
 Philhellenism (love of Greek culture) takes no account of the fact that Greek women had no vote or that Greek society depended on the labor of slaves . Greek women were not allowed to vote or were subject to labor slavery .
 Greek ideas and artistic styles were adopted in Asia, Egypt, and, most importantly, Rome . Greek ideas were adopted by Asia and Egypt, Egypt and Rome .
 Hellenistic culture also survived farther east, in Bactria and parts of northern India such as Gandhara . Aspects of Hellenism also survived .
 In the 1st century BCE, the king of Commagene, Antiochus |, built a mountain-top shrine where the fine statuary depicts both Greek and Persian deities and uses a combination of eastern and western artistic styles .
 It had its own acropolis, magnificent temples, a theater seating 10,000 people, and a vast library . The ancient city was also known for its acropolis and temples .
 Ancient Greece entered the Dark Ages, about which we know little . After the destruction of the Mycenaean civilization, ancient Greece became a nation of city-states . Ancient Greece is now a 'nation of cities'
 The city-states relied on their armies for their protection . The revolution was the birth of the American Revolution . It was the first of its kind in Europe .
 Increased trade in the 7th century BCE began a military and political revolution . Increased trade led to increased political and economic instability .
 The new rich could now afford their arms and supplied regiments of hoplites (armored infantry) alongside the aristocratic cavalry .
 The need to act collectively in warfare led to a new form of government based on the shared interests of a broader section of society . The need for collective action led to the creation of a new government in the 1930s .
 Slots in the device held volunteers' names, and black and white balls were dropped down a tube to select them . Slots were filled by volunteers who were selected by the device .
 His severe penalties were designed to stop aristocrats from taking the law into their own hands . His severe penalty was designed to protect the aristocrats .
 Solon's solution was to abolish slavery brought about by debt, free the peasantry from feudal servitude, and make wealth rather than birth the prerequisite of political office . Solon: Wealth should be made a prerequisite for political office, thus reducing the power of the aristocracy .
 To encourage good governance, he created a council to prepare the weekly business of the lot from each of the 10 tribes . The smaller 50-member group of council leaders to administer the daily affairs of government .
 Its composition was changed on a regular basis so that no one remained in power too long . The composition of the country's government was changed regularly so that it didn't become so long .
 Jury members for the courts were chosen randomly to avoid corruption . Jury members were also chosen randomly for the trial's jury members .
 Athens' defense could not be left to chance, officials say . The powerful officials controlled the army and the navy, could be reelected . Greece's defense was at risk, they say .
 The effect of all these reforms was to reduce the powers of the aristocracy while creating a united body . The Acropolis of Athens was its spiritual center .
 As in other Greek polis, women, slaves, and foreigners were excluded from participating in a citizen’s assembly . A popular court of appeal for legal redress against abuses of power was also excluded from participation .
 In 560BCE, the aristocrat Peisistratus took advantage of incessant internal feuding to seize power in a popular coup . He initiated land reforms on behalf of the poor, initiating land reforms .
 Cleisthenes created a future for Athens’ citizens to match their potential . Athens' democratic evolution was a model for the future of Athens . The future of the Greek city is in the hands of Cleisthens .
 As a further safeguard, ostracism was introduced to banish any ‘dangerous’ leaders from the city for 10 years . Ostracism has been introduced as a safeguard for the city's residents .
 A brilliant orator called Pericles presided over a ""Golden Age"" of Athenian prosperity and cultural preeminence . The orator presided over the 'Golden Age' of Athens .
 He consolidated the democratic ""constitution"" by compensating the poorer citizens for their time on jury service or attending the ecclesia . He also limited citizenship to those with two Athenian parents .
 It was extinguished during the 2nd century BCE by the Roman Empire . It was finally extinguished by the expanding Roman Empire.
 It took a long time for the idea of democracy to become widely adopted . It was not until the mid-20th century that it became the most common form of government .
 Republican government in ancient Rome was based on elected representatives (representative democracy) rather than Athenian-style direct democracy . Republican government based on representatives rather than direct democracy.
 Athenians thought representative democracy was tilted in favor of wealthier candidates . The Athenians believed representative democracy tilted toward wealthy candidates . Athenian democracy was thought to be skewed toward wealthier candidates, the Athenians .
 During the 2008 U.S. presidential election, the main candidates raised over $25 million each . During the campaign for the 2008 United States presidential election . The main candidates in the 2008 election raised $25million each during the campaign .
 India's democracy governs a population of over a billion people . The world's largest democracy is the largest in the world . India has the largest democracy in the country .
 As Greece emerged from the ""Dark Age"" and writing was rediscovered, new ways of passing on knowledge and stories developed . From Myth to History, Greek writing is a key part of history .
 British archaeologist Arthur Evans found a huge collection of written clay tablets on Crete in 1900 . For the first time in the Western world, history was recorded in prose, rather than verses .
 When the script, known as ‘Linear B, was deciphered, it turned out to be the first known example of early Greek writing . The script is known to be known as Linear B, a form of ancient Greek writing.
 The subsequent development of the Greek alphabet and writing led to the recording of history . It led to a series of events including the creation of the first Greek alphabet .
 Epic narratives often lie between myth and history . Before the 6th century BCE, history was BEFORE . Epic narratives lie between myths and history.
 Such poetry was born out of an oral tradition and was common in many ancient cultures before written history .
 Some parts of the story are fantastical and others may be based on real events . Some of the stories are based on events in the real world .
 Scribes in Babylon recorded events relating to the history of their city from the 2nd millennium act. The Babylonians recorded events from the . 2nd century .
 The records contained references to earlier semilegendary times and were a mixture of fact and fiction . The records were made in the early 1800s and 1800s .
 Homer is an important figure in the transmission of history in the Western world . He probably never wrote down his own poems, and subjects he used were a mixture of myth, folk memory, and fact .
 The Trojan War may have been an actual event of the 13th century BCE . The story of the Trojan War inspired both his epic poems, the Iliad and the Odyssey . It may be the most famous poem in the world .
 Two intense weeks in the story of the war are told . In the first of these, two intense weeks are told of the conflict in Afghanistan .
 The Odyssey tells the tale of the Greek hero Odysseus’s ten-year journey home from the Trojan War . The Odyssey is based on the 10-year quest to return to Greece from the end of the war .
 The actual events, if they happened, were not recorded in any surviving written accounts .
 This meant that over the intervening centuries, the facts were mingled with myth and travelers’ tales to become the story we know today . The facts and myth mingled into myth and tales to create the story you know today.
 19th-century archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann became obsessed with the story of the Trojan War . He was determined to find evidence that it had actually taken place in the Trojan era .
 Using the text of the Iliad as a guide, Schliemann found a vast city complex buried under various layers at Hissalik in northwest Turkey . The city complex is thought to have been buried under layers of rock and water .
 The word was first used by the Greek writer, Herodotus . He was convinced that this was Troy, where the mythical Achilles had killed the a v NM uoc .
 Schliemann's archaeological practices destroyed a great deal of the value of the site, says archaeologist . Schlieman's archaeology practices destroyed the value .
 Later experts were appalled at what he had done and even questioned the authenticity of the many gold artifacts he claimed to have found .
 3rd-century-ce Roman mosaic shows Homer's Odysseus on his epic journey . Schliemann went on to find more treasures at Mycenae on the Greek mainland .
 It is probable that it was in fact part of a royal burial treasure from a period before the Trojan War . It is thought to have been part of the burial treasure .
 Hecataeus of Miletus considered by some to be the first history writer . Early Greek writer to break away from this mix of myth and reality .
 In one of his works, he set down in writing stories that had been passed down orally from generation to generation as well as recording family genealogies .
 He was interested in studying human nature and the world around him . He recorded what he saw as he traveled the length and breadth of the ancient world .
 He came from Halicarnassus (modern Bodrum in Turkey) and lived in Athens for a time . He also lived in Greece .
 His travels allegedly took him to Egypt, Italy, Sicily, and Babylon . His writing is full of entertaining detail about the customs and habits of the countries he visited .
 Herodotus was the first to write about events of his own time in prose rather than verse . He organized his material systematically and wrote about events in prose .
 He inspired later historians to break with the old epic tradition and write in this style . Historians recounting real events rather than the mythical exploits of heroes and gods .
 His writing still depended, to some extent, on oral history and was colored by folklore and tradition . His work still depended on oral histories .
 He claimed to have authenticated his information, but critics in antiquity argued that it was not wholly accurate . He claimed that his information was authenticated .
 Later Greek historian and biographer Plutarch had a very low opinion of the poet . There is no firm evidence about the life of the most famous Greek epic poet .
 He is believed to have lived in Greece in the 8th or 7th century Bc, but we do not know what he looked like or where he originally came from . He was believed to be believed to live in Greece and lived in 7th or 8th century .
 Traditionally, he is said to have been blind and to have told his stories as he traveled around Greece . He is believed to have traveled around the country telling stories .
 His two great works, the Iliad and the Odyssey, began life as epic poetry, recited aloud to audiences . His great works began life in epic poetry recited to audiences in ancient times .
 Homer is still considered one of the most influential writers of the Western world . Homer is considered to have been influential in the world's literary circles .
 This astonishing burial mask was found at Mycenae in Greece by the archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann in 1876 .
 The mask was named after the leader of the Greek troops during the Trojan War . He named the mask after the head of the Trojan forces during the war .
 It is part of a collection of royal treasure dating from 1600 BCE. word for word, but rewritten to express Thucydides’s i personal opinion.
 4 N^ famous example is the speech made by Pericles in which the city of Athens is praised in a funeral oration for those who had died in the war .
 Despite their shortcomings, Herodotus and Thucydides are rightly acknowledged as the first true historians in the West . Despite their flaws, they are the first genuine historians of the Western world .
 Thucydides examined the long-term causes of the war and moral issues it raised .
 Thucydides also took a new approach to recording history . A striking characteristic of his writing is the use of long speeches, not reproduced .
 It is thought to be a Bronze Age form of Greek used to record lists and inventories at Knossos . Over the centuries, written histories have been shaped by the values of the times they were recorded .
 Old stories told in traditional ways connect powerfully with the listeners, as they are rooted in local landscape, history, and folklore . The EPIC PETET PE LADS TRADITION is the latest in a long-running tradition of storytelling .
 In Cyprus, shepherds tell stories about one-eyed giants, horned gods, and Bacchanalian feasts in nearby river beds .
 Kathakali stories of Hindu myth, using to accompany oral texts, are still various Hindu divinities who may have been unable to told in ancient Greece . Kathakalis stories of ancient Greek gods may be unable to tell in ancient times .
 Map shows Herodotus's view of the world based on descriptions found in his writings . Asia Minor and the Middle East are at its center .
 He included an extraordinary amount of detail about the places he did visit, (Egypt, Africa, Italy, Sicily, and other parts of the Mediterranean), including the length of rivers and sizes of continents . Although he did not venture far in modern terms, he included an enormous amount of details
 In Mesopotamia and Egypt, practical knowledge was used to help make life easier . Just as in Mesopotamian and Egyptian times practical knowledge is used to make things easier .
 Some individuals acquired skills in mathematics and astronomical observation, but they were used for practical purposes . They were used to learn more about astronomy and astronomy .
 Mathematics, therefore, was used in commerce and construction, and knowledge of astronomy in timekeeping . Astronomy was used as a tool for timekeeping and commerce .
 When it came to accounting for natural phenomena, ancient civilizations tended to be less practical . Ancient civilizations tend to be far less practical when it comes to account for phenomena .
 They relied unquestioningly on fanciful mythological mythological explanations for everyday events . They relied upon fanciful myths and myths to explain everyday life .
 Triumphs of Greek Science Science is an attempt to understand and explain the world around us . Science is a science-based attempt to explain and explain what we know .
 The modern scientific method was established in the 17th century . Modern scientific method is a combination of observation, hypothesis, experiment, and theory .
 Ancient Greeks were among the first to think scientifically and search for plausible answers to life's mysteries through logic and observation . But its roots lie with the ancient Greeks, who searched for answers through logic .
 Some of the scientific ideas of the Greeks had been considered by earlier civilizations .
 In ancient India and China, philosophers thought about the world rationally . They explained causes of events by ""laws,"" rather than myth .
 "Natural philosophers" employed logic and reason to question accepted myths . These thinkers, or ""natural philosophers," used logic to question the accepted myths.
 Thales pondered the nature of matter in his work on the creation of the universe . Like many of the Greek scientific thinkers, he pondered matter .
 All solids, liquids, and gases are ultimately made of water, he said . He suggested that all solids and liquids, including water, ultimately made up of water .
 This clay tablet was left at a temple, and was dedicated to god of healing, Asclepius, from someone who believed their foot to have been healed through traditional rather than scientific medicine . Water is one of the few substances that we can observe directly changing between these three states .
 Another philosopher, Anaximenes, suggested that air was the ""fundamental"" substance . Heraclitus (535475 BCE) thought fire might fit the role . Another philosopher thought air might fit fire .
 This theory explained many common phenomena in terms of the movement and interaction of air, earth, fire, and water . This theory was developed in the 1930s .
 His ideas on geometry and number theory remain key to mathematics today . His ideas are still key to math today .
 Pythagoras' theorem was known long before Pythagora, and there is no evidence that he even used it, or whether he even existed . In fact, the theorem was already known, and Pythagoreas is not known to have used it .
 His reputation for mathematical excellence comes from later Greek writers, such as Aristotle .
 Modern academic study of Pythagoras' ideas shows that they were more religious than scientific . Pythagora's ideas were religious rather than scientific. Pythagoras' ideas were more scientific .
 Pythagoras and his followers saw mystical relevance in mathematics . His student Democritus suggested that matter is made up of tiny, indivisible particles separated by empty space .
 It is not important whether theories were right or wrong, or even plausible, but that they were thinking rationally and philosophically, and were making observations to satisfy human curiosity . The theories were constructed to satisfy curiosity, not to be wrong, but to satisfy people's curiosity .
 That can be seen as the true essence of science, and it had been missing from almost all earlier civilizations . Science is missing from most earlier civilizations, scientists say . That can't be seen in all earlier cultures, they say, but science is essential .
 Philosophers in the ancient civilizations of India and China employed reason and observation in their attempts to understand the world .
 The theory of the four elements and atomic theory is similar to the theory of four elements . They, too, formulated convincing theories similar to atomic theory, they say .
 Science counts Thales, and many of the other natural philosophers, as important to their theories . Thales used mathematics in formulating his theories . Maths was a key part of Thales' theories of science .
 Mathematics can be divided into geometry and arithmetic, the study of numbers . The study of the relative position and size of objects, including Earth, is a key part of math .
 Geometry was used to help astronomers and architects, while arithmetic formed the basis of commerce . Geometry had been used to . help astronomers, architects and architects .
 Some philosophers derived elegant mathematical proofs that provided insight into the nature of the world . Some of the proofs were based on the work of mathematicians .
 Pythagoras suggested that numbers describe reality, but that the world is literally made of numbers . Pythagora said that numbers define reality, and that reality is based on the numbers .
 Pythagoras was fascinated by the mathematical relationships between everything, including musical notes . Pythagora was fascinated with the relationship between musical notes and mathematical relationships with everything .
 The connection between mathematics and reality is still a central theme in science today . Maths and reality are still an important part of science .
 Mathematics was also crucial to the scientific ideas of Plato . Plato was better known for his writings on ethics and politics .
 Each element is made of atoms with a particular idealized geometric shape . He suggested that each element was made up of atoms made of an idealized shape .
 Plato supposed that the real world was an imperfect reflection of an ideal, “theoretical” and mathematically perfect world . Plato supposed the real was an ideal reflection of the ideal world . The real world is imperfect reflection .
 Many of the advances and ideas put forward by the ancient Greeks were lost in the centuries that followed . The Greek philosopher who had the greatest influence on the history of science was
 In many cases, it was not until relatively modern times that they were considered again . In some cases, they were not considered until modern times .
 Greek knowledge was used by the Romans, although much of it was later lost . Romans tended not to be great theoretical thinkers .
 Ideas of the Greek natural philosophers passed to Arab scholars . The ideas of the natural philosophers have been passed to the Arab world .
 The Arabs translated the works of Aristotle into Arabic . In particular, the works were translated into Arabic.
 He maintained that truth was to be found only in reality, an idea known as empiricism . He said that truth should be found in reality and that it should be in reality .
 Plato and Aristotle deduced many previously unknown scientific facts . Using logic and observation, they used logic to deduce previously unknown facts .
 Aristotle was perhaps the most prolific of the Greek natural philosophers . Aristotle was a prolific natural philosopher . He is considered one of the world's most prolific thinkers .
 He wrote texts on a range of subjects, including botany, zoology, astronomy, anatomy, anatomy and physics .
 Aristotle’s theories were plausible and well thought out, but were based on common sense, rather than common sense . Atlas was made by Zeus to hold up the universe as a punishment .
 This was the sort of idea that the Greek thinkers began to question, with their rational, scientific investigations and theories . The Greek thinkers questioned the idea of the gods in their scientific investigations .
 Ancient Greek ways of thinking about matter and energy are still relevant today . Scientists of physics and chemistry ask much the same questions as Thales, Plato, and Aristotle .
 Marde applied the tools of Greek natural philosophy to practical and technical challenges . During the final phase of the ancient Greek period in the 3rd and 2nd centuries BCE, great thinkers began to come Marde .
 Archimedes was a brilliant theoretical mathematician, but also a great engineer and inventor . For example, he was a great theoretical mathematician but also an inventor and engineer .
 Further developments were made at institutions such as the Museum and Library at Alexandria . Archaeological discoveries were made in Alexandria .
 Competition between centers of learning led to further innovations and the development of science . Competition led to innovation and innovation in science .
 The ancient Greeks’ scientific way of thinking extended to the study of medicine . Ancient Greeks' scientific approach to medicine extended to study medicine . The Ancient Greeks are known for their scientific thinking .
 Hippocrates promoted a rational, scientific approach to medicine, giving it a firm footing as a professional endeavor . More than anyone, the physician Hippocrates .
 He rejected traditional temple medicine theories about illnesses and cures . He placed importance on the careful observation of symptoms .
 Even today, the ethical ""contract"" between doctors and patients is known as the Hippocratic Oath . The ethical contract between doctors, patients is called the "contract"
 We do not know whether Hippocrates was the author of the original, with promises to work ""for the good of my patients according to my ability and my judgment and never do harm to anyone"" It is preserved on papyri of later periods, such as this 3rd-century
 Latin-speaking people settled in villages, including Rome, in the hills above the Tiber River in about 1000 cr. centuries . One of these was a Latin speaking people who settled in Rome in the . hills .
 Romulus and Remus, twin brothers suckled by a she-wolf as babies, founded Rome . In legend, Remus and Romulus were suckled and suckled as babies .
 They became adept at working with the form and related structures such as the vault and dome, to help support monumental temples, amphitheaters, walls, aqueducts, tunnels, tunnels and lighthouses .
 Ancient Roman civilization arose from multicultural beginnings . Rome itself began life as a group of villages on the hills above the Tiber River . The Rise of Rome was filmed in Rome in Rome's first century .
 From 600BCE, Rome had become a sophisticated city-state ruled by kings . From these foundations arose the powerful Roman Republic, whose influence spread around the world .
 It boasted specialized crafts, a rich aristocracy, monumental buildings, and organized social systems . The city was known for its specialized crafts and monumental buildings .
 The Senate was a council of elders composed of the heads of various clans . It was composed of heads of several clans .
 The Assembly consisted of all male citizens of Rome . Citizenship was granted only to those whose parents were native Romans .
 The Assembly's main function was to grant absolute power to the monarch . Clans approved the candidate for king once the candidate was approved by clan leaders .
 Rome stood at the crossroads of major trade routes connecting Europe with Asia and North Africa . Rome was once a major hub for trade routes between Europe and Asia .
 Trade generated great commercial wealth for Rome . It also brought the Romans in regular contact with several different cultures, such as the Greeks .
 The Romans' Etruscan neighbors also had a profound effect on Rome, so much so that from the middle of the 6th century BCE the Roman monarchs were Etruscans . From the middle to the middle . BCE, the Roman kings were E.C. Roman
 The ancient Romans made considerable advances in building and civil engineering, mainly by clever development of principles obtained from other civilizations they came in contact with . The Roman engineering of the Roman Empire is a study of ancient Roman architecture .
 While using fired bricks, tiles, and stone to great effect, they also perfected concrete . They developed a form capable of hardening under water .
 From the 3rd century BCE, Roman builders became the first to use Etruscans . They gave the Romans the toga, art, religious practices, forms of stone arch , sewage systems, and chariot racing .
 The Etruscans also passed the Greek alphabet to the Romans, who developed it to create the basis for many modern western languages . The Roman alphabet was created by the Romans in Rome .
 He captured the city of Saguntum in Spain, allied to Rome, then advanced on Italy . The Roman general was allied with Rome and allied with Italy .
 Hannibal took 37 elephants and 55,000 men over the Pyrenees and Alps . With Rome blocking the sea routes, Hannibal took the sea route . Hannibal took over the Alps with the help of 37 elephants .
 Despite heavy losses, he won many victories but was defeated at Zama in North Africa . He won many of his battles, including the Battle of Zama, in which he was defeated .
 Hannibal was largely a transfer of power from the king to the wealthiest classes in Rome . Carthage was destroyed by the Romans, and Hannibal fled to Syria, where he later committed suicide . Hannibal built many large-scale engineering projects .
 From the 3rd century BCE the Romans used slave labor on a large scale for building projects . The Romans used slaves as slaves to build large projects in Rome .
 Rather than install a new monarch, the Romans dismantled the institution and Rome became a republic . Rather than installing a new king, Rome became the republic .
 The early republic had two consuls (to counter overreliance on one individual) who were elected annually . Consuls were elected in the early republics .
 The Senate was originally put in place to prevent despotism, it became the true decision-making authority . The Senate is now responsible for most decisions in the United States .
 Public meures were expected to show loyalty to the republic, self-sacrifice for the general good, and lead blameless lives as an example .
 Roman armies won extensive lands for the Republic in wars that gradually took place farther afield and with increasing scale . Roman armies were victorious in many of their wars .
 Figurine of a young Roman boy in a tunic leading a sacrificial boar . Young boy and boar in a Roman Roman boy .
 The most significant free people were citizens, who were able to elect the consuls . Citizens were also able to choose their consuls from their elected councils .
 The Senate drew its members from the Patrician class; therefore, the Republic in its early form . Animals were sacrificed to mark a census of citizens, which was done every few years .
 To those who seemed to be ‘civilized enough and close in kinship, they granted rights similar to those of Roman citizens . Those who seemed "civilized" enough were granted rights .
 Both these approaches were seen as effective ways to enforce power and influence . Both approaches are seen as ways of enforcing power in the world .
 A society not ruled by a monarch in which power is shared between the aristocracy and the common people . The republic was formed from the aristocracy to the people .
 By the 2nd century BCE, Rome was in a state of perpetual war, flux, and social discontent . Despite its extensive lands, Rome had a history of constant war and social unrest .
 Farms fell into disrepair while their owners were away fighting, and debts were mounting . Farms became disrepair and became destitute in the war years .
 Rome was at the heart of a growing empire . Tensions arose as the republic’s existing social and political institutions struggled to address new problems .
 It was the beginning of the Roman Republic's decline . It was an episode that signaled the start of its decline .
 The 1st century BCE saw Mx a mix of new gains and intensifying civil strife . Mx was the first city of Mx and the second of its reigns .
 Some of Rome's former allies, having fought for the republic, became frustrated by Rome's domination over them and failure to grant them Roman citizenship . Some of the former allies were frustrated by the domination of Rome and failure of them .
 The common ‘class’ included every freeborn male citizen not a senator or equestrian . They wore a toga with a narrow stripe . The toga was worn by the men .
 Latins were freeborn citizens from parts of Italy outside Rome . It varied from the unskilled poor to wealthy merchants . Latins are freeborn Italian citizens .
 Freeborn inhabitants of Roman territory outside Italy were considered foreigners . They had certain legal rights and were granted a form of Roman citizenship .
 They had rights, but their status changed over time. bought and sold by their owners. Bought and sold over time .
 Slaves were considered personal property under Roman law . The non-free who had no rights and were la Roman social order were la free . Slaves considered private property .
 These were influenced by family background, wealth, citizenship, and freedom . These were also influenced by the state of the country .
 Women had virtually no rights and belonged to the same class as their father or husband . His rule increased patrician power. Women had no rights .
 During his dictatorship there were heightened levels of . corruption within the Senate . During his . dictatorship there was heightened . levels of corruption within . the Senate.
 Spartacus was killed in around 70 Bce. The Romans were ultimately victorious and Spartacus died . Spartacus's death was part of a Roman invasion of Rome .
 The uprising showed the dangers of employing slave labor on a massive scale . However, the uprising showed that slavery is still a problem .
 The ambitious young patrician was in his mid-30s before he achieved prominence . This setback į slowed the career progress of the ambitious young .
 This imperious statue of Caesar was made in 17th-century France and is now in the Louvre, Paris . It is one of the most famous statues of the Western world's greatest men .
 Caesar is a hero of Western civilization, partly through his own accounts of his military campaigns . Caesar is also a hero in the history of the Roman Roman Empire .
 He was a blatant womanizer notorious for his affairs with married women . He may have been the natural father of one of his eventual assassins, Marcus Brutus .
 In pursuit of public office, he spent far beyond his resources and fell heavily into debt . He spent far more than his own money to run for office than he did in pursuit of office .
 His political stance was that of a flamboyant populist, embracing policies such as the distribution of land to war veterans and the poor . His political stances were that of the populist populist .
 He was widely distrusted among the Roman elite as unprincipled in the pursuit of money and power . The Roman leader was widely disliked among the elite .
 Caesar made a private agreement with the wealthy and powerful general and politician Marcus Licinius Crassus . 4 Pompey, Rome's most successful general, was the most successful Roman general in Rome's history .
 Caesar was the junior member of the alliance (the Triumvirate), but it earned him election to the consulship . Caesar was elected to the most important office of state . The consulhip is the highest level of state in Roman history .
 46 BCE was made into a 445day year to align Rome with the solar cycle . 46 BCE made into 445 days, 46 days a year, 46 years a year .
 Gaul was one of the Roman provinces of Gaul . Julius Caesar was a Roman general in the Roman province of Gaul.
 He showed outstanding energy and ruthlessness in years of campaigning against the Celtic and Germanic tribes of the region .
 Caesar made forays across the Rhine in Germany and north as far as the Thames River in Britain . Caesar went beyond the borders of his provincial command, making forays into Germany and Germany . Caesar's forays also included the River Thames in Britain and the River Rhine .
 50OBCE the Senate, under the control of Pompey, called on Caesar to disband his army after his ten-year command in Gaul had come to a successful conclusion . Rome's civil war was the first civil war in Rome between Rome and Rome .
 Caesar led his legions across the Rubicon, the stream separating Cisalpine Gaul (the region to the south of the Alps) from Italy proper . The Rubicon is a stream separating the region from the Italian Alps .
 He took on Pompey in an armed struggle for control of the Roman world . Easily occupying Rome, he took over Pompey and took on him in a war .
 After two years of fighting, the battle of Pharsalus in August 48 proved decisive for Caesar . Caesar's victory over the city was decisive in the battle .
 Pompey escaped from the scene of his defeat, only to be murdered a month later in Egypt . Pompey was murdered in Egypt a month after his defeat in the Battle of Egypt .
 Caesar's outstanding military skills had won him the supreme power he sought . Pompey's sons, Sextus and Gnaeus, continued the civil war until 45 BCE . Caesar's military skills won him supreme power .
 Caesar revealed a zeal for innovation and reform during his brief reign . Caesar's column: Reform and power are at the heart of Caesar's brief rule .
 He halved the number of Roman citizens dependent on handouts of bread from the state by resettling the destitute in colonies in Italy and abroad, and reformed the calendar, see above .
 The Republic had in the past appointed a temporary “dictator,” a leader with exceptional power Caesar's death . Brutus steps forward to stab Caesar in this painting by 19th-century artist Vincenzo Camaccini .
 This column marks the place outside Rimini, Italy, where Caesar crossed the Rubicon in 49 BCE . The Forum, the heart of Rome, is where delivered a funeral oration over his body .
 A temple to Caesar was later erected on the spot where he was cremated . Caesar's remains were later found in the city of Rome .
 Caesar permanently assumed the role, and advertised the fact on coins . LE UEI to cope with an emergency, . but Caesar permanently assumes the role of the .
 A group of senators led by Gaius Cassius Longinus and Marcus Junius Brutus conspired to kill him . They were inspired by an idealistic attachment to the Republic, and the desire to defend their own privileges .
 They stabbed him in the assembly hall, where he had come to address the Senate . The attack was the first time he had been stabbed in the Assembly hall, he was stabbed .
 Two years after his death, the Senate made him a deity . Ironically, his death brought about the end of the Republic his assassins were trying to restore . Two years later, he was made a deity.
 He is remembered today as a skilled orator, | author, and military leader . He is also remembered for his skillful orator .
 Caesar's daughter Julia marries Pompey; he marries his third wife, Calpurnia . Caesar's third wife was Calpinia .
 He is granted a five-year governorship of Cisalpine Gaul and Illyricum . Transalpine Gaul is soon added to his command .
 Caesar crossed the Rubicon into Italy, precipitating civil war . Caesar defied a call from the Senate to disband his army at the end of his governorship . Caesar crossed into Italy on January 10, 49 .
 The Ptolemaic Queen, Cleopatra, gives birth to Caesarion, probably Caesar's son . June 23, 47 The birth of Caesarion is the first recorded birth of Julius Caesar in Egypt .
 Caesar defeats Pharnaces, king of Pontus and the Bosporus, at the battle of Zela . August 47 Caesar defeats the king of the Pontus .
 Caesar defeats the last of Pompey's army at Munda in Spain, ending the civil war . Caesar defeated Pompey in the Battle of Munda . Caesar's victory in Spain ended the war in 45th year .
 Caesar Caesar assassinated by a group of conspirators set on restoring the Republic . Caesar was assassinated on March 15, 44 Caesar . Caesar's assassination was the first assassination of the Roman Empire .
 The end of the Roman Mediterranean, gained lands for Rome in the Middle — allies of Caesar, who in 45 BCE became dictator for FADING OF THE REPUBLIC Republic . Caesar was Rome's most powerful leader to date .
 POMPEY defeated pirates across the now led by Pompey . Friction between the two sparked civil war between Pompey and the Roman Empire .
 The great structures for which Rome has become famed—from walls and aqueducts to amphitheaters and temples—appeared all over the empire, and many still survive today .
 The street would have been lined along both sides with buildings for public use . It would be lined with public buildings along the sides .
 The Romans themselves did not consider that the republic ended with Caesar’s death . Augustus came to power when he did not paint himself as an all-powerful emperor figure .
 He claimed to have restored the republic and to have returned power to the Senate and the people . Instead of restoring the republic, he said he had restored the Senate .
 Augustus represented himself as ‘first among equals’ with his fellow senators, although, in reality, he held supreme power . Augustus was represented as first among equals, but he was supreme power in the Senate . Augustus represented his position as “first” among equals with his
 The Library of Celsus at Ephesus was built in the 2nd century ct as a monument to |a Roman senator and governor . It was built as a . monument to a Roman . senator and . governor .
 The empire of Augustus started out with republican pretensions (rule by the Senate and Roman people) Augustus retained parts of the existing system, but he grafted his own autocracy onto it .
 The republic's system of rule, based on competition among aristocratic families, was replaced by an imperial one in which a single aristocratic family dominated . The republic was replaced with a single imperial one dominated by one family .
 Rome headed an empire of great wealth, which stretched across a vast area that took in all of the Mediterranean, the Middle East, and a large chunk of northern and central Europe . Trajan (ruled 98—117 CE), Trajan ruled Rome from 98-99 CE .
 In the first two centuries of imperial rule, there were probably around 50 million people living in Roman lands . Around 50 million Roman people lived in Roman land .
 The bulk of these lands were conquered during the days of the republic . They were conquered by the British Empire in the early 1900s .
 The empire consolidated these areas and added a few new provinces, although these new acquisitions were also the first to be given up later on . The empire consolidated these areas, consolidating them into one of the most important provinces .
 Britain, Dacia , Assyria, and Mesopotamia were short-lived gains compared to other territories . Mesopotamians, Britain, Assyria and Dacia were short lived .
 Roman rulers were quick to crush any rebellion or threat (from outside or from within), often brutally . Roman rulers would crush any threat or threat from outside or within, often brutally.
 This is one reason why the empire was relatively stable during this time . This is because it was a relatively stable period of the empire .
 The expansion of the Roman empire was greatly helped by the work of the emperors such as Trajan and Claudius . The Roman Empire was founded in Rome in the early Roman Empire .
 The Romans’ legendary military might was a major factor in maintaining the lands . The Romans' military might also helped maintain the land in the Roman capital .
 The empire had a standing army, unlike during much of the republic . Crucially, the empire also had standing army .
 Ancient Roman civilization was highly urbanized, with a vast network of prosperous cities . Ancient Roman cities were filled with beautiful buildings that usually mirrored the city of Rome itself .
 The empire's extensive territories were divided into provinces ruled by governors called proconsuls or FROM REPUBLIC TO EMPIRE praetors . Proconsuls ruled in the emperor's name .
 By the 3rd century CE CE, separate leaders often attended military matters . By the 2nd century CE, different leaders attended to military matters more often .
 Within these provinces, cities looked much like Roman ones and were run according to a Roman-style system of law . Roman cities were ruled by Roman law in Rome's provinces .
 The urban centers of imperial Rome were linked by an impressive transport and communication network . From Republic to Empire the structures of the republican system gave way to the empire .
 The Romans' unique talent for engineering has had a lasting impact on their empire . New roads, bridges, viaducts, harbors, and aqueducts were built throughout the empire . The empire encompassed a diverse mix of peoples, and its politics, way f life
 Rome’s huge empire was connected by thousands of miles of expertly made roads, typically consisting of stone slabs laid over rubble . Rome's huge empire meant | that it had at its command a . huge empire .
 Roman roads were vital for soldiers to move around as fast as possible . They helped to control the vast territories of Roman cities .
 Augustus was the Roman Empire's first emperor . He was the first Roman emperor . Augustus was Augustus' first Roman Emperor .
 Julius Caesar was Julius Caesar's grand-nephew and adopted son . He was born Octavian, and was Caesar's grandson and son of Julius Caesar . Julius Caesar died in Rome in August 2013 .
 He brought an end to civil war, and appeared to be restoring the republic to its glory days . But he ruled as an autocrat . He ruled as a dictator .
 He held power for 41 years of relative peace, heralding the start of the empire that was to last for 4T 58 over four centuries . He was the first king to hold power in England .
 The oculus is open to the elements—rainwater drains away through the floor . Mf E is the world's largest private oculus gallery .
 Rings of concrete made with lightweight pumice stone become narrower toward the top . vast array of Z4 human and natural resources, and a diverse web of trading connections . The Z4 network is based on a complex web of trade connections .
 Throughout its many provincial cities and towns, the empire brought into being some of the really great works of ancient Roman architecture, engineering, and art . The Roman empire brought in some of its greatest works of engineering and architecture .
 Imperial-era buildings and monuments took the Romans’ love of impressive grandeur to a peak, proclaiming their wealth and power to the world . The Romans were known for their love of grandeur .
 It was built between72 and 82 CE to stage a variety of ""entertainments,"" including battle reconstructions, gladiatorial combat, dramas and executions .
 The pediment Is set above Corinthian columns to form a Classical entrance . built. built. in the 19th century .
 This was made possible due to expertise in arch construction and the discovery of cement to make concrete . This is made possible because of expertise in the arch construction .
 The immense load-bearing capacities of concrete, along with further advances in the application of architectural elements like the arch, meant that they could produce massive structures such as Rome's Colosseum, the enormous dome of the Pantheon .
 The number of spectators that could fit structures were Rome—the Forum Bronze household god . The Romans worshipped a variety of ancestral gods as guardians of their homes .
 Life in the Roman Empire continued as it did during the republic . Everyday life continued in many ways as it had done before .
 Male citizens had varying freedoms, while women were mainly confined to the domestic arena . Male citizens were mostly confined to domestic life, while female citizens were limited to limited freedom .
 The Pantheon in Rome is famed for its dome, the largest until modern times . Created as a temple in the 2nd century ce, the Pantheon was the largest temple in Rome's history .
 In August 79 ce, a massive eruption of Mount Vesuvius buried the nearby Roman city of Campania (now called Pompeii) in southern Italy under 20 ft of ash and debris . The nearby city, now Pompeii, was buried under 20 feet of ash .
 Excavation has revealed a perfectly preserved example of a sophisticated Greco-Roman city of around 20,000 people, with buildings such as a forum, amphitheater, and lavish villas .
 Many human bodies left their shapes in the ash, from which plaster casts have since been made . The plaster casts show Pompeii's people as they fell, showing the destruction of Pompeii .
 Port of Ostia lay at the mouth of the Tiber, close to Rome . This great trading seaport was a great trading hub close to the city .
 Large merchant vessels unloaded goods onto barges to continue their journey into the city itself . Large merchant ships unloaded goods on barges .
 The floor, now gone, was raised by short pillars around which furnace-heated air circulated . These pillars were essential for keeping the wheels of Roman life running smoothly .
 In the country, up to a third of the population were slaves carrying out agricultural work to supply the towns and cities . In the 19th century, slaves were used as slaves to provide food and water for the city .
 The wealthy lived in magnificent villas with toilets, running water, and central heating . Villa villas had central heating, central heating and running water .
 Famous examples survive at Pompeii and in Rome itself, such as the House of Livia . Often centered on a cool inner courtyard, these were filled with statues and artifacts .
 These great houses were often designed and decorated by Greek artists living in these Roman cities . Greek artists were often involved in the design of these Roman houses .
 Food and drink was consumed on an excessive scale that has become legendary, and was accompanied by music and dancing . Food and drinks were consumed on a 'excessive scale'
 Many poorer townspeople lived in crowded basic apartment blocks known as insulae . Many poorer people lived in overcrowded basic apartments in the city .
 Remains of these buildings show similarities to modern apartment buildings, with uniform entrances and windows . Remains are similar to modern apartments, but have uniform entrances, uniform windows and uniform entrances .
 Roman Roman culture was a central part of Roman life . Romans gathered for business or pleasure for worship or pleasure .
 Gold coins represent over four years’ pay for a Roman Grooming kit . Wealthy Romans were well-groomed .
 Bright red ""Samian"" pottery, known for cleaner, was used for cleaner . The owner may have intended to collect its distinctive red coloring .
 Silver ladle and spoon came in various styles and showed great technical mastery . Roman silverware came from various styles of silverware from the Roman era .
 Wealthy Romans enjoyed fine interiors in their homes, such as this late3rd-century mosaic from a villa in Sicily . places such as markets, public “forum” areas, bath houses, and even communal toilets were popular spots .
 Meetings were often conducted outside, in open places, to discourage secret plotting that characterized Roman rule . Meetings would often be conducted outside to discourage the secret plotting .
 This took the form of athletic games, gladiatorial combat, animal hunts, chariot races, plays and public execution of criminals . It was also known as animal hunts and public executions .
 Romans believed in a range of gods and goddesses, both state and “household,” to whom they built temples . In the early centuries, the Romans of the . empire believed in the gods .
 Augustus made some legal reforms, but the basic tenets of Roman law remained . Augustus made a few legal reforms in his first year of the year . The laws of the land are now known as the laws of Rome .
 Roman law administered by magistrates administered by Roman magistrates . Citizens charged with crimes often had patrons to defend them . Roman law was administered by Magistrates .
 Roman citizens pleading a miscarriage of justice were entitled to appeal to a higher court based in the city of Rome . By the first half of the 2nd century CE, Roman citizens pleaded a miscarriage .
 A variety of problems beset certain parts of the empire, including starvation, plague, inflation, high taxation, and ""barbarian"" attacks .
 Some regions, such as Gaul and Britain, started to assert their own interests and threaten imperial authority . Gauls and Britain were among those who threatened imperial authority.
 Emperor created the first imperial college of four emperors to oversee four sections of the empire . He created a college of emperors that oversaw four sections, the first of the four .
 Constantine established a ""second Rome"" at Byzantium, renaming it Constantinople . Constantine (280337 CE) established a "second Rome" in the 4th century .
 In its early days it resembled the ancient Greek hoplite army, which was primarily made up of men who volunteered to fight to protect their city . The army is now the largest in the world and is based in London .
 The ‘classic’ Roman army that we know most about today is that which Caesar began and Augustus honed . The “classic” Roman army is that that Caesar began . Caesar's "classic" Roman army was that which Augustus began and Augustus honed.
 By the reign of Trajan , this is the army that seemed unbeatable to its enemies . Trajan was Trajan's first Roman Roman ruler .
 In the days of the early Republic the army was staffed by volunteers from aristocratic families . The army is now a rapidly developing force .
 They provided their own weapons and uniform and trained for five or six years . They trained with weapons and uniforms and trained with them for five to six years.
 The Roman army was shaped by confronting enemies with successful armies of their own . Roman soldiers were formed from small units of men . Roman armies were shaped by the success of their enemies .
 The ancient Greek hoplites fought in organized formations . GREEK HOPLITE formed organized formations.
 The hoplite ""phalanx" allowed them to form a united front against the enemy . It was used during the Roman republic .
 Young boys were trained as soldiers, and the aim of the state was to produce a perfect and invincible hoplite army . The aim was to make a perfect army, with the aim being to produce hoplite soldiers . The state was able to train young boys as soldiers in order to be
 Some of these values were echoed in the self-sacrifice demanded of Roman soldiers . Roman soldiers sacrificed their lives to protect their country .
 Alexander the Great's army of 50,000 infantry and 4,000 cavalry marched an average of over 20 miles a day . The army marched as long as 20 miles per day . Alexander's army was the largest in the world and lasted for nearly 100 years .
 They worked and lived together and fought with iron discipline, just as the Greek hoplites had done before them . They worked, lived and fought together, just like the Greeks did before them.
 The general Marius made many reforms, including opening the army to all . Marius was the first general to open the doors to the army .
 The practice of giving a piece of land to retired soldiers is also attributed to Marius Marius .
 Caesar oversaw a professional and well-led military force . Augustus maintained a stable number of legions to make up the army that would safeguard the empire .
 The nickname “Marius’s Mules” was given to the couple in the early days of the Second World War . They were stationed in a far-flung part of the empire .
 Modern studies have estimated the weight based on rations for 16 days and a full set of equipment . The weight is based on the weight of a person and a set of weapons .
 At the end of a day spent on the march, they often had to set up a fortified military camp for the night, digging boundary ditches and setting up tents . The soldiers would often have to dig trenches and set up tents in fortified military camps .
 Skilled engineers within the ranks also built bridges and roads, if necessary, in order to reach their destination . Engineers built bridges, roads, bridges and bridges to get to their destinations .
 Training in physical fitness involved running, swimming, H""H Perhaps nowhere can the formidable organization and ruthlessness of the Roman world be better seen than in its army .
 The professional standing army of several hundred thousand men at the height of the empire was a disciplined and well-trained fighting machine . It was a well-known and well trained fighting machine at the time of its peak .
 From this time, soldiers swore their allegiance to the emperor, which was key to ensuring their loyalty and in defending and protecting the empire's borders over the next two centuries . The emperor's role was key in ensuring the loyalty of soldiers .
 The camp prefect is responsible for training and equipment . PRAEFECTUS CASTRORUM is the camp pre-fect .
 Medical staff, surveyors, armorers, and armorers excused from regular duties . Those excused include medical staff and surveyors .
 For many Roman soldiers it was an escape from a life of poverty . Life in the army was dangerous and brutal, but it was also an escape .
 It was a way for those without money to gain political power and influence . It was also a way to those who had no money gain influence .
 Young men are expected to do military service as part of their education . Young men were expected to be expected to serve in the armed forces .
 Those from wealthy backgrounds saw the army as a step on the ladder to public office . Those from wealthier backgrounds saw it as a stepping ladder to the ladder of public office.
 Julius Caesar was born into he retired but was given Roman citizenship in her own right . Julius Caesar's daughter was born in Rome and became a Roman citizen . She was also born into the Roman state of Roman citizenship .
 Although the army was feared by many, it was scrupulously disciplined and dealt fairly with local people it came in contact with .
 A good general would not allow his troops to loot and pillage at random . Supplies were paid for, rather than taken, and a good general wouldn't allow loot .
 These scraps of wood were found in a waterlogged trash pile near a Roman fort in northern England . They were expected to march up to 20 miles a day, carrying all their equipment, which may have weighed 60 Ib .
 The tablets reveal personal letters from women and servants from the army . As well as personal letters, the tablets also reveal details about the army's role .
 Work rotas, accounts, and reports give us an idea of everyday life as a Roman soldier . Roman soldiers were Roman soldiers .
 This roof tile was made by the 20th legion and features their charging boar emblem . wrestling, and throwing games, was a favorite of the legion .
 Exercises designed to build stamina might last two days without rest without rest . Exercising might last for two days .
 The men also practiced military drills and training, as in battle every soldier would be expected to follow commands .
 The “tortoise’s” was the most famous of the ‘tortsure’ in which soldiers stood together with their shields facing outward and upward toward the enemy . Soldiers stood together in a rectangular blocs of soldiers standing together .
 The life of a Roman soldier was tough, but discipline, effective leadership, and organization were key to its success for so long . The discipline, leadership and organization was key to the Roman army's success .
 The weighted javelin was designed to pierce armor and bend or break on impact . It's designed to shatter armor and pierce or bend on impact, breaking on impact.
 Legionaries may have worn segmented metal plate armor (/orica segmentata) but auxiliaries would more likely have had little more than a leather tunic or shield for protection .
 The gladius was a short weapon measuring about 20 in long, used for stabbing . It was used to carry a sword that was used in stabbing .
 The pugio was a short stabbing knife measuring 8-10 in for hand-to-hand fighting . The dagger is a short knife measuring eight to 10 inches in length .
 Roman soldiers, who often marched 20 miles a day, wore leather footwear with steel studs . Sandals were worn by Roman soldiers during their time in Rome .
 A belt carried the pugio and the gladius, but more importantly, a cover of metal studs that hung in front for protection . A belt was also used to carry the pugsio and gladius . The belt was designed to protect both the luckyius and the p
 The tunic was a short woolen garment that did not impede the wearer's movements . It was worn by the wearer of a tunic that was made of wool .
 Roman army changed over time as enemies threatened the empire . The Roman army was the focus of the Roman army during the Roman era .
 The skills and legacy of the Roman army have influenced and inspired later fighting forces . The skills of Roman soldiers have influenced later generations of soldiers .
 After the middle of the 3rd century ce, the army was forced to evolve to deal with new challenges at the frontiers . The army evolved to cope with the challenges faced by the Romans .
 Much of the road network, built as the most direct route for the marching army, is still in use . The road network was built as a direct route to the army .
 The tank has taken the place of the tortoise as a mobile fighting machine and an armored unit to hold places of strategic importance . The tank is a mobile, armored unit that can be used in strategic situations .
 The total number, including auxiliaries such engineers, armorers, and doctors, may have been twice this size .
 Trojan priest Laocoón and his two sons were attacked by snakes . The Trojan priest was killed by snakes in the battle of the Trojan gods .
 One of the stories relating to Laocoón was that he was killed by serpents, along with his sons, as a punishment from the gods for having broken his vows of celibacy .
 The agonized facial expression of Laocoón is one of the best examples of the increased realism in later ancient Greek art . It is an agonized expression of the agonized face .
 The human form is portrayed in marble in great realistic anatomical detail, although it remained within the idealized view of physical perfection . The human body is portrayed by marble in marble .
 The writhing serpents the sculpture's main F are shown wrapped around protagonist's human limbs . The sons look inward and upward toward their father, > helping to create a balanced composition that focuses on i C .
 The twisting poses of the figures create a realistic sense of movement, and effectively express tortured writhing . The twisted poses of these twisted poses create a real sense of motion .
 Examples of early Greek art include striking symmetrical pottery and stone statues of idealized human forms . Early Greek art includes symmetrical designs and symmetrical sculptures .
 Between the 10th and 8th centuries BCE, the ‘Geometric’ style dominated Greek pottery . The “Geometan’s” style of pottery is thought to be the earliest form of its kind .
 Its abstract, linear forms reveal the love of an symmetry and proportion that STYLE VASE was so important to Greek art . The abstract forms reveal a love of symmetry and proportions .
 The “Archaic’ period (c.0480 BCE) Is famous for its kouros sculptures showing an idealized human form . Is famous . for its artworks .
 These forward-facing nudes show the same symmetry as early Greek pottery . Early Greek nudes are forward facing nudes .
 Bronze casting became popular in the 500s, which made side-on poses easier to create . Bronze casting was made popular in early 1900s .
 The art of the classical world a took the form of statuary, painted pottery, wall paintings and mosaics, and architecture . The art was a form of art of classical art .
 In general, Roman art took the ideas of both the Greeks and the Etruscans and developed it in new ways . Roman art was influenced by both the Greek and Etrusans .
 Art became more realistic over time, moving from the idealized form of the early period to the realism of the later Hellenistic renders fabric with great realism .
 Polyclitus’ Doryphorus reveals a more realistic pose and musculature— informed by the Greeks’ study of the human body, aided by observing naked athletes . The work was inspired by the study of human body .
 It also displays a mathematically calculated ideal of beauty with perfectly proportioned limbs and body .
 Classical styles continued into the Hellenistic period, but, while sculptures such as Venus de Milo retain an ideal of female beauty, works isses Art .
 Images appeared depicting characters from everyday life, such as a woman at a market or a boy strangling a goose . Images of everyday life appeared on the internet .
 Classical black figure vase Greek vases often had dark figures against a red clay background, or red figures on black .
 The painters were highly skilled and the style evolved over time . Many surviving Roman wall paintings give an idea of the lost art of Roman wall painting .
 Those from Pompei and Herculaneum illustrate a particular talent for creating threedimensional illusions of scenes such as mythological dramas .
 The art of floor mosaics, using tiny pieces of colored stone, was invented by the Greeks, but is the Romans who are famous for their mosaics work .
 Imperial Rome saw mosaic pavements and walls featuring ambitious schemes and imagery . Imperial Rome was known for its mosaics and mosaics .
 The art of ancient Greece and Rome has influenced many later cultures . The Romans created monumental architecture and statues that celebrated the glories and wealth of their rule .
 Domed buildings, perfected by the Romans, became a distinctive feature of the eastern Byzantine empire . The domed buildings were a distinctive characteristic of the Eastern Byzantine Empire .
 The 6th-century ce church of Hagia Sophia, in the former Byzantine capital, Constantinople, Is one example .
 Sculptors and painters, such as Raphael in Italy, gained a classical understanding of human anatomy . Architects created buildings informed by ancient Greek temples .
 During the Classical period, sculpture began to show greater realism than the idealized style of earlier periods . The Classical period was the first period of realism in sculpture .
 Myron's Discobolus (Discus Thrower) is a masterly attempt to freeze realistic movement . The unattributed Apollo Belvedere statue is bronze .
 Before the Hellenistic era there had been little sense of ‘art’ as a separate creative entity . Statues were made to mark a grave, glorify a temple, or commemorate a war; vases often had practical uses .
 Wealthy buyers now want a portrait of themselves, or figures to decorate their villas .
 Many of the Greek statues that survive today are actually Roman copies . The art of Rome was created by the Roman Empire .
 In many ways the Romans copied the art of the Greeks, but later went on to create their own artistic identity . The Romans were inspired by the Greeks' art, but they later created their own identity .
 Apollodorus of Damascus was a Roman architect and architect of the Roman Empire . He was the first Roman architect to have been involved in the creation of artworks .
 The Romans also used the Greek temple form, often placing it on a platform, to make it more impressive . The Romans filled the panels with sculptures plundered from Greece .
 Roman leaders used the power of art as propaganda . Their grand villas overflowed with statues, while Roman leaders use it as a tool of power .
 Without the Roman use of Greek art, much of its style and influence might have been lost to us . The Roman art was used in the creation of the Roman Empire .
 Ancient writers told a famous tale about Zeuxis painting an image of grapes that was so realistic that birds tried to peck it . The image is so realistic it is thought to have attracted birds to pecking it .
 The Ptolemies did not impose their culture on the Egyptians . The Egyptian culture was not a matter of cultural coexistence . Egypt's culture was shared by the Egyptians, not by the Egyptian people .
 Egyptian culture continued much as before . While the ruling class enjoyed a Greek lifestyle, all other layers of society did .
 Greek rulers styled themselves as native monarchs, taking the title of pharaoh . Furthermore, the Greek ruler styled himself as a native monarch .
 If the Ptolemies' cooperative policy was shrewd political strategy, it paid off, because their rule brought stability to Egypt . Ptolemaic rule was a shrewd strategy, because it brought stability .
 Reforms made to land location opened Egypt up to the trade and cultures of the Mediterranean . Reforms were made to make Egypt more open to the world of trade .
 With its library of legendary fame, it became the world's center of Greek learning . The library of the same name is now known as the University of Athens, Greece .
 By the middle of the 1st century BCE, the Ptolemaic dynasty was weakened by leadership rivalries . The Romans were one of the world's most famous Roman cities .
 Rome had been increasing its role in Egyptian affairs and was now effectively overseeing the country . Rome has been increasingly involved in the country's affairs .
 Octavian, the victorious Roman leader, incorporated Egypt as his own personal domain . Egypt was the birthplace of the Roman Empire .
 Alexandria continued to flourish and became a meeting point for Roman trade routes . Alexandria was a major Roman hub for trade routes during the Roman era . Alexandria became a major city of commerce in Rome .
 It was a center for Greek culture, visited by scholars from across the Greek-speaking world . It also remained a center of Greek culture .
 Ancient Egypt's later history is one of fascinating change and diversity . In the early days of Roman rule, the Egyptian government kept its strong Greek anc Roman Egypt government .
 Agricultural methods improved in Mycenaean times (see ownership, and agricultural methods improved) Agricultural methods have been improved since the Mycenean times . Agricultural techniques have been used in agriculture for centuries .
 Regional administration was organized using the existing Egyptian ‘nome’ system of administrative districts . Regional administration used to be based on Egyptian “nome-based’s .
 4 5 ft -the reputed height of l the Pharos lighthouse at Alexandria, second only to the pyramids business . The Ptolemies also began to replace the Egyptian barter system with an early form of monetary banking .
 The title of pharaoh became identified with the far-off emperor in Rome in Rome . The title was used in Greek culture, but the title became identified as pharaoh .
 Romans probably retained much of the Ptolemaic system of administration, but they slowly introduced many of their own practices in agriculture and everyday life .
 As Rome's power faded from the 4th century CE, Egypt came under the influence of the Christian Eastern Roman Empire based in Constantinople (once Byzantium, now Istanbul) Egypt became a melting pot of religious ideas .
 During the Ist century CE, Christianity spread to Egypt . Coptic Christianity was first introduced to Egypt in Egypt .
 By the later 4th century, it was the Roman Empire's official religion, and by the 6th, Egypt was strongly Christian . Egypt was heavily Christian by the late 6th century .
 A devout Coptic church developed, which later became the principal Christian church in mainly Muslim Egypt . The Coptic Church is now the main Christian church .
 Copts held the “monophysite’s belief that Christ was solely divine, and not both human and divine . Copts believed Christ was only divine, not both humans and divine, according to the Copts . The Copts were the first Copts to hold the
 In the 3rd century sce, during Ptolemaic times, a great lighthouse was completed on Pharos Island, in the harbor of Egypt's cosmopolitan capital Alexandria .
 This towering structure was one of the Seven Wonders of the ancient world . It was destroyed by an earthquake during the medieval period . The structure was destroyed during an earthquake .
 During the 1990s, archaeologists made some incredible finds underwater, including possible masonry from the lighthouse, and the remains of some impressive ancient statues . The remains of an ancient statue were also found in the same area .
 Image shows the recovery of a massive statue that may be one of the Ptolemaic kings .
 In theory, Egypt was independent, but in practice it was controlled by Rome . Egypt was ruled by Rome at the beginning of the century .
 Romans supported Ptolemaic monarchs in return for financial favors . Romans supported the Ptolemic kingships in exchange for financial favours from them .
 Cleopatra’s father paid enormous sums to secure Roman backing . His older sisters Tryphaena and Berenice plotted against him . Tryphaen and Beremice plotted to overthrow him .
 Cleopatra, as eldest surviving daughter, ascended the throne with a younger brother . When her father died in 51 BCE, her father passed the throne to her brother . Her brother was the youngest surviving daughter of her father .
 Ptolemy wished to be sole ruler, and by 49 BCE, Cleopatra had been deprived of power and exiled . However, he and his chief minister Pothinus had other ideas . Ptolemmy wanted to be the sole ruler .
 In 48 BCE, when the Cleopatra and Antony were on the silver coin, they were on one side and her lover Mark Antony on the other .
 19th-century image depicts the glamorous Cleopatra of myth and legend . A legendary beauty .
 In reality, her success as a leader and lover owed more to her intelligence and charm than her looks . Her success as leader and a lover was more to intelligence than looks .
 Julius Caesar led a military campaign to Egypt, Cleopatra feared for her life . Julius Caesar was assassinated in Egypt in the early Roman years of his reign . Caesar's death was captured in Egypt .
 During the same campaign, Ptolemy XIII drowned—pulled into the Nile by the weight of his golden armor . The king drowned during the campaign in Egypt .
 Cleopatra is depicted in the style of a pharaoh, wearing the crown of Hathor and a vulture headdress . In this relief from a temple at Dendra, she is depicted wearing a crown and vulture .
 Cleopatra visited Rome on the pretext of negotiating a treaty . The queen's visit was the official pretext for a treaty, but it was a pretext for negotiations .
 Cleopatra was careful to avoid the power struggle that broke out after Caesar’s death . For the next three years, she avoided the chaos that followed Caesar's death . She was careful not to engage in a power struggle .
 She restored order and prosperity to her own kingdom, where she was a popular and efficient ruler . She was also an efficient and efficient leader of her own country .
 By 42BCE the Roman general Mark E Antony and Octavian (the future emperor Augustus, see 112) vere in control of the Roman world . The future Emperor Augustus is Augustus .
 Antony taking charge of the eastern Mediterranean . They split power between them, with Antony becoming prime minister . Antony takes charge of Syria .
 Antony summoned Cleopatra to Tarsus . She set out to conquer a conqueror, dazzling the Romans with her style and guile .
 Antony rejoined his Roman wife, Fulvia, in Greece, where she had fled after a failed rebellion against Octavian in Italy .
 By 40BCE Fulvia was dead, which enabled Antony to seal another peace deal with Octavian by marrying his sister Octavia . Antony married Octavia in order to keep Octavia alive .
 She was the first and only Ptolemy to learn Egyptian, the language of her subjects . She was also the first to learn the language .
 Cleopatra and Antony proclaimed themselves as living gods and their children as rulers of lands currently dominated by Rome . Antony was Antony's first king and first queen of the Roman Empire . Cleopatatra proclaimed herself as Isis (she Isis) and he Dionysus/
 Octavian had no difficulty in persuading the Roman Senate to provide the means for an all-out war against Cleopatra . The Roman Senate provided the means to set herself up as a rival power . After this, the Roman Roman Senate agreed to go to war with Cleop
 After her defeat by the Romans at the Battle of Actium, fought off the coast of Greece, she fled to Egypt with 60 treasure-laden ships . Antony followed her to Egypt, followed by Antony .
 Antony took his own life with a poisonous snake hidden in a basket of figs . Cleopatra, perhaps aware of her likely fate as the star of Octavian's triumph, took her own life .
 Her eldest son, Caesarion, was executed, but it is thought that the other children's lives were spared . Caesarion's eldest son Caesarion was executed by the Romans .
 Cleopatra breastfeeding her son while making an offering to the goddess Isis . The limestone stele was found in Egypt .
 In 37 BCE, Antony came back to Egypt, and, while still wedded to Octavia, married Cleopatra . Antony returned to Egypt in 37 BCE and died in childbirth .
 Isis found Osiris' body and performed rites that would return him to eternal life . Osiris was murdered by the god Set, and Isis found his body . Isis performed rites to bring Osiris back to life in Egypt .
 She raised her son Horus, magically conceived from her husband's corpse, until he was old enough to avenge his father . Then she retired to raise her son, Horus .
 Isis may have arisen as a representation of the flooding of the rich plains by the Nile . The cult of the sorrowing wife and loving mother spread far beyond its place of origin . Isis is a myth of the wife and mother .
 Isis was adopted as a patron divinity of travelers, and had particular appeal to women . Isis is the most popular divinity among travellers, and was adopted by travellers as a divinity .
 Cleopatra, third daughter of Ptolemy XII of Egypt, was born in 68 BCE . Cleopsatra was the third daughter to Ptolemmy XII . Cleopatatra is the most famous woman in the world .
 Alexander Helios and Cleopatra Selene were born 40 BcE . Cleopatatra bears twins, Alexander Helio and Alexander Selene . The birthdays of Cleopratas were celebrated at the birth of the year .
 Vast territories and exalted titles are assigned to Cleopatra and her children in a ceremony known as the ""Donations of Alexandria,"" which alarms Rome . Vast territory and titles are given out in an event known as "The Donation of Alexandria" The ceremony alarms Rome.
 Alexander's conquests were partitioned after his death . Alexander was the only person to have conquered most of the world . Alexander died at the age of 50 in August .
 Alexander dreamed of a Greek-Macedonian-Persian empire with its component cultures taking strength from one another . Alexander had dreamed of an empire of Greek, Macedonian and Persian cultures . Alexander's empire would be one of the strongest in the world .
 By the 3rd century BCE it had started to crumble as its subjects asserted their autonomy . This empire was almost as vast as its predecessor—the first Persian empire of the Achaemenids .
 Roman traders denied Roman traders access to routes to China and India, leading to battles with the Roman armies . The Roman armies fought to deny trade routes to India and China .
 Historians rely on art and architecture, and foreign texts to paint a picture of the period . They left little written record, so historians rely on their art, architecture and architecture to paint picture of period .
 Takht-e Solalman, or Solomon's Throne, was one of the holiest sites of the Sassanid Persians . Built high above the fertile Iranian plateau, the site was a fortified settlement .
 It housed a Zoroastrian fire temple with an eternally burning flame . Ormazd, or Ahura Mazda, was god of light, truth, and life .
 Sassanid rulers were tolerant of religions other than their own . Large populations of Jews and Christians inhabited the empire, especially in Mesopotamia .
 Sassanids suffered a serious military defeat at the hands of the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius in the early 7th century . The Sassanid was defeated by the Byzantine Empire in the 7th Century .
 From this point, the weakened empire lay at the mercy of Islamic forces invading from the south . The weakened empire was left vulnerable by the fall of the fall .
 Sassanid king hunting on a camel on a gold plate is typical of Persian artistic refinement . This gold plate shows the king hunting with a camel .
 Sassanid rule lasted for four centuries . War with the Romans and successors, the Byzantines, continued through four centuries of Sassanids rule .
 Sassanids built a rich civilization based largely on agriculture and trade . The Sassanid was known for its trade and agriculture . It is believed to have been the first Persian city of the modern era .
 Persia was rapidly annexed by the Islamic conquerors, but Persian culture lived on in its art and literature . Zoroastrianism, the traditional faith of the Persians, was elevated to the status of official state religion .
 Scholars of all religions made contributions to law, medicine, astronomy, mats, and philosophy . Scholars also contributed to law and medicine, including medicine and medicine .
 Ferdowsi's Shahnameh, or ""Epic of Kings"" , is a key work from this time . Ferdowi's "Shahnameh" is one of the most important works of the medieval period .
 Many local dynasties came into being, and by the 8th century Bce, India was divided into many small, competing kingdoms . India was ruled out of control by the 7th century .
 Around the 8th century gce, large urban states known as mahajanapadas started to take shape in northern India .
 The northeastern Magadha area came to dominate the various warring regional powers . The northeastern region came to prominence in the region's early years .
 Its strategic position in the Ganges valley aided trade and linked it with flourishing ports in Ganges river delta . The city's strategic position helped trade and was linked to flourishing ports .
 In the 5th century gce, just a few states, including Magadha, dominated India . Just a handful of states dominated India.
 By the 4th century, after countless wars, Magadha had emerged as the most powerful . By the 3rd century, the city had become a powerful city of power .
 Ayodhya was an important city and the eastern capital of the Kushan conquerors . The city was the eastern city of the ancient Kushan state of India .
 Mauryans came to dominate India's massive subcontinent with what became its first real empire . From their northeastern heartland, the Mauryan dominated the region . India's First Empire was India's first real Empire .
 Chandragupta won a great deal of new territory, combining smaller kingdoms and uniting—often rather loosely—vast regions of India . Ashoka's famous sandstone pillars bearing edicts inscribed in Brahmi script .
 The texts are among the oldest deciphered original Indian texts under one ruler tor the first time . They are believed to be among the most ancient texts in the world of ancient texts .
 The empire embraced much of the Indian subcontinent and part of Afghanistan . The empire was based in India and extended to parts of the country .
 Chandragupta expanded lands into which he expanded included parts of the Macedonian empire won by Alexander and by his successors the Seleucids . The lands included areas won by the Selemans and by the Alexander empire .
 Ashoka made this four-lion motif his symbol of imperial authority . It is now used as India's official emblem . His highly efficient and impressive centralized system also owed much to his minister, Chanakya .
 At the core of Chandragupta's newly won empire was its glittering capital at Pataliputra . At the heart of his empire was the glittering city of Patalimiputra, the capital of the empire .
 Under his sure hand, backed by strong military resources and an eftective secret service, agriculture and trade flourished . The British Prime Minister was in charge of the country's agricultural industry .
 As a convert to Jainism, he spent his final days in ascetic repentance for a terrible famine that struck his people . He was grief-stricken at being unable to hold back .
 Four magnificent gateways lead to the Great Stupa at Sanchi . Little is known of his reign, but it seems Sanchi gate .
 Dating from the first century BcE, these ‘torans’ are decorated with intricate carvings that are one of the greatest artistic achievements of ancient Indian art . The “toran’s” are a masterpiece of ancient art, dating from first century
 They show scenes from the life of Buddha and feature motifs such as Ashoka's famous four lions . They are shown in a series of Buddhist paintings .
 He used the elephants in battles fought between Alexander's ""successors,"" notably in the to the battlefield, ran red with the blood of the many thousands fallen . The elephants were used in battles with Alexander's "successors"
 As his empire prospered, he promoted the arts and sciences . He instigated a vast building program . He also instigated an arts and science program .
 This included a great many stupas (mound-shaped shrines) built to house supposed relics of Buddha . Stupas were built in ancient Buddhist temples in ancient times .
 At some point in his reign, Ashoka converted to the fast-growing religion of Buddhism . He converted to Buddhism .
 Only the southern tip of India, plus the Kalinga area in the east (now in Orissa state), were not incorporated in the empire . According to a story that mirrors the tale of his grandfather's repentance, he converted in remorse at that he successfully expanded Mauryan territories
 Bindusara’s son, Ashoka, the third emperor (c.5— 232BCE) was the last major ruler of the Mauryan dynasty . Ashoka was one of the great figures of ancient history .
 Ashoka gained the Kalinga region after a particularly bloody battle . Ashoka brought the empire to its greatest extent, bringing it to its most .
 It was said that the waters of the Daya River, next “All men are my children,” was said to be the next ‘All men were my children.’ It is said to have been said that .
 By the 4th century BCE, scholars were developing the idea of using combinations of units of different sizes . Scholars developed the idea to use combinations of sizes .
 By the 1st century ce, they had devised a decimal-like system using the symbols shown here . They refined the concept of zero as a “placeholder” to add and multiply numbers .
 The Kalinga War was added to over subsequent centuries by the Buddhist leader . He turned his back on violence and embraced the peaceful Buddhist way of life . The war added to the waste and bloodshed of the Kalingas War .
 He sent missionaries to spread the word far and wide throughout Asia, including Sri Lanka . In so doing, he played a major role in the development of Buddhism . He played a role in spreading Buddhism throughout Asia .
 His edicts are inscribed on stone pillars and rocks across India, Nepal, Pakistan, and Afghanistan . He also spread the word through edicts .
 These set out his principles of peace, morality, respect, and humane rule, and of being the father who guides his people's spiritual welfare, he says .
 The peace and prosperity of Ashoka's reign did not continue long after his death . Ashoka was one of the most successful monarchs in history .
 Subsequent rulers lost territories and prestige, and there were squabbles over the succession . Subsequent ruler lost territories, prestige and prestige .
 Small kingdoms arose in northern India, among them those of the so-called ‘Indo-Greek” rulers . Small kingdoms were created in the region .
 Menander may have battled with the Sungas . The most famous of these was Menander . Menander is the son of Menander, who may have been the most famous .
 1st-3rd centuries ce saw the Kushans from the steppes of Central Asia ruling in the north . Small dynasties came and went elsewhere in the region .
 As these crumbled, the way was paved for the great empire of the Guptas . The way paved for them was paved by the way they built up their empire .
 Great artistic achievements of this well-administrated, prosperous empire include the Ajanta cave paintings in western India . Great achievements of the welladministrated and prosperous empire are well-documented .
 The Gupta era is often seen as the ""classical" period of Indian culture, especially of Hindu and Buddhist art . Gupta era was the period of Hindu, Buddhist art, particularly of Hindu art .
 The Guptas had a strong Hindu leaning, but Jainism and Buddhism also flourished . Jains, Jains and Buddhism flourished in India .
 The dassic image of Buddha developed, with a peaceful, reflective expression and curls flat against his head . The image was developed with the help of the artist .
 Wealthy patrons also encouraged architecture, dance, drama, and Sanskrit epics . Great advances were made in mathematics, astronomy, philosophy, logic, logic and medicine .
 Under the fourth Guptan ruler, Kumara Gupta , cracks began to appear in the empire as it faced incursions by Hephthalite nomads from the north . GUPTA-ERA BUDDHA DEMISE OF the GUPTAS .
 Under the short-lived but ambitious rule of the First Emperor, the laws and infrastructure of imperial China first took shape . The laws and . infrastructure of . imperial China took shape in the early 1900s .
 The Shang were defeated by the Zhou, the last of the pre-imperial dynasties . As China moved out of the Bronze Age, the Zhou defeated the Shang . The Zhou were defeated in the Shang era of China .
 Zhou dynasty lasted longer than any other dynasty in Chinese history . The Zhou dynasty was one of the most successful dynases in history .
 ZHOU BRONZE iron technology was introduced in China . During the Zhou period, bronze was widely used, and bronze was used widely .
 The First Emperor's mausoleum was constructed near Xi'an by 700,000 conscripts . The terra-cotta army was constructed in China's capital .
 The scale of the mausoleum is a testament to the power of the First Emperor . The scale was a testament of the power he held over Rome .
 Today, the terra-cotta army Is visited by two million people every year .
 One of the territories to survive the Warring States period was the state of Qin . Qin was the only state to survive during the Qin period .
 Qin were situated to the west of Zhou territory along the Yellow River valley . People said they shared customs of the Rong and Di, non-Chinese groups regarded as uncivilized . Qin was situated so far west that people said they had shared customs with non-China groups .
 They argued that the interests of the state came before those or individuals . Instead of individuals, rulers should apply strict laws and punishments, they argued . The use of war as an instrument of state policy was acceptable .
 Lord Shang began a program of Legalist reform in the state of Qin . All adult males were registered for military service in Qin .
 First Emperor was an advocate of Legalism . The Emperor was the head of state of Japan . He was the founder of the First Emperor in Japan .
 Li Si, the chief minister, put Legalist principles into practice and introduced measures that are still in effect throughout China today . During his reign, Li Si introduced measures still in place throughout China .
 Later Confucian historians have painted a picture of Qin Shi Huang as a ruthless megalomaniac . His reputation can be traced to two notorious acts committed during his reign .
 The achievements of the man who unified China for the first time cannot be underestimated . The establishment of official measures for weights and lengths, the issue of a unified currency, and even the regulation of the width of roads were among his achievements .
 Qin expansion continued southward after conquest of the Warring States . Qin was the first Chinese empire to expand southward . The Qin empire was created by the conquest of China in the early Qin era .
 Expeditions were sent to modern Guangdong, on the south coast of China, and Chinese colonies were established there . The Chinese colony was established in modern Guangzhou .
 Pronounced ""Chin"—a Chinese | QI N dynasty and a likely origin of the English word for China . The wall was built in order to help repel further incursions from the steppes .
 Qin Shi Huang commissioned many grand public building projects, including palaces, bridges, and canals, to strengthen imperial rule in China . He also built palaces and bridges to strengthen his imperial rule .
 Emperor became increasingly obsessed with finding the secret of immortality . Emperor was obsessed with the tomb .
 The tomb contained a model of the empire, a model and a mechanism for operating the tides . It was guarded by traps that would shoot any intruders after the tomb was closed . The tomb also contained rivers of quicksilver and a trap trap .
 Not far from this burial chamber stood the terra-cotta army, a legion of life-size pottery soldiers that were constructed to defend the First Emperor in death .
 Qin-dynasty coins are round coins with a square hole, similar to those used in China until the late 19th century . Qin coins were first appeared during the Qin dynasty .
 Qin Shi Huang died in 210BCE on an expedition to the east of China in search of the island of Penglai, where immortals were believed to reside . Qin Shi Shi Huang was believed to have died on the island . Qin died on a mission to find the island
 After the death of the First Emperor, his son took power, but he was never as effective a ruler as his father . He was forced to commit suicide by his chief minister two years later .
 China crumbled into civil unrest and much of Qin Shi Huang’s work was lost . Much of his work was destroyed in the civil unrest .
 Revolts and uprisings led to the demise of the dynasty less than twenty years after it had begun . The dynasty was overthrown less than 20 years after its birth .
 The Legalist ideas of the Qin were rejected by the Han dynasty . Qin Shi Huang was felt in China for centuries . His influence was felt for centuries in the country .
 The expectation that China should be a unified state remained strong up to modern times . Following the short-lived Qin dynasty, the expectation remained strong .
 The Han dynasty rejected Legalist principles in favor of Confucianism . The influence of this philosophy in state affairs is still felt today .
 Historically, the rule of the First Emperor was seen in a negative light by scholars . His cruelty and obsession with immortality were highlighted . The First Emperor's cruelty was highlighted by his obsession with immortal immortality .
 In more recent years, modern China has come to reevaluate Qin Shi Huang's aims and achievements in political and social terms . Modern China has reevalued Qin ShiHu's aims in more modern terms .
 Qin Shi Huang’s son, the Second Emperor, fell under the influence of the eunuch Zhao Gao, who persuaded him to execute Li Si, his first minister, by having him cut in two in the market place .
 Liu Bang, who came from a poor peasant family, rose to prominence as the leader of a rebel band . Liu Bang was the first Chinese leader to become a leader of the revolution in China .
 At first he supported Xiang Yu, an aristocrat who hoped to revive the feudal states . At first, he was opposed to Xiang Yu's attempts to revive feudal states, but he later supported him .
 When Xiang Yu arrived, the city was looted and the royal family killed . Xiang Yu was killed by Xiang Yu and his family were killed .
 The rebel leaders quarreled, and for the next four years they campaigned against each other . The rebels are still fighting for independence in Somalia .
 In 1972 the tomb of the Countess of Dai, dated 168BcE, was found at Mawangdui in present-day Hunan province . The tomb was found in 1972 in the same place as the Tomb of the Lady of Dai .
 The grave offerings included silk garments, lacquer bowls for wine and food, and wooden tools for her servants .
 The beautiful E banner draped over her inner coffin is one of the earliest surviving B examples of Chinese painting on silk .
 It depicts the route her soul would take on its quest for immortality . It depicts her journey to Penglai and then to the gates of paradise .
 The tomb also contained silk manuscripts and a divination board, with markings similar to those found on bronze mirrors of the period . The tomb is believed to have been discovered in the early 2000s .
 Gaozu himself was the embodiment of the principle that a man of peasant origins but of outstanding virtue could become emperor . He was born in a family of peasants but outstanding virtue and could have made him emperor .
 He began his reign by announcing an amnesty and measures to restore peace . He also announced measures to bring down violence .
 In the east and south he initially accepted the existence of ten kingdoms, whose rulers professed allegiance to him . But he later replaced them with members of his own family .
 In the commanderies he rewarded senior officials, military leaders, and leaders of non-Chinese groups who had submitted to the Han, by conferring on them the rank of marquis .
 This title allowed them to raise taxes for the state, retaining part of the money for themselves . This title was the first time they had the title . The state legislature passed the title to the governor .
 Gaozu formalized the system of bureaucratic government introduced under the Qin . Promotion on merit was formalized by Qin's successor Gaoz .
 Emperor was assisted by three senior officials and nine ministers . He was supported by nine ministers, each with a defined area of responsibility . The emperor was in turn supported by 3 senior officials, 9 ministers .
 Gaozu was contemptuous of scholars, but he recognized the importance of the Confucian ideals of education and public service . He was contemptious of scholars but he was committed to public service and education .
 Gongsun Hong, a former swineherd, was appointed chancellor of China in 2010 . The same year saw the most celebrated example of social mobility in Chinese history . Gongsun was the first person to be appointed chancellor in China's history .
 During Wudi's long reign China made extensive territorial gains . of the modern provinces of Guangdong and Guangxi and north Vietnam .
 Wudi decided to augment tax revenues by imposing a state monopoly on salt and iron . All these military campaigns naturally cost money, so Wudi .
 This provoked a complicated debate over the degree of which the government should interfere in the economy . This provoked the debate over how much of the economy should be regulated .
 Wudi became obsessed with his search for immortality in his later years . He enlisted the help of the leading alchemists of the day . Wudi's successful reign came to a sad end .
 In 138BCE Wudi sent an envoy, Zhang Qian, to contact the Yuezhi, the traditional enemies of the Xiongnu, in the hope of forming an alliance . Zhang Qian was Zhang Qian's envoy to Wudi, who sent a message to the enemies .
 Wudi's greatest conquests were to the northeast and the south of the existing empire . Wudi was one of the most successful monarchs of all time .
 He soaked bark of mulberry tree and bamboo in water, pounded it with a wooden tool . He then drained it through cloth, leaving only the fibers .
 His invention was adopted rapidly for documents and books and subsequently spread to the Islamic world and the West . and the excessive influence of the court eunuchs .
 One of the eunuchs’ main duties was the care of the imperial concubines, any one of whom sons could be named to succeed the emperor . Any one of the concubine’s sons could have a son to be named as emperor .
 This led to palace intrigues in which the eunuchs played an increasingly significant role . The eunuch played a significant role in the palace intrigue of the Roman Empire .
 The economy, meanwhile, suffered from financial mismanagement, and there was widespread tax evasion, the government says . The country's economy suffered from mismanagement and tax evasion .
 Their administrative structure was revived and retained by future Chinese rulers . The administrative structure of the Chinese state was revived by future rulers .
 The Romans governed a sprawling empire with people speaking many languages . The Romans ruled a vast empire of people speaking different languages . Romans ruled an empire of many languages, including Romans, Romans .
 The fall of the Later Han was followed by a period of division between north and south .
 In 25 cE Guang Wudi reestablished the Han dynasty, transferring the capital to Luoyang, which became the most populous city in the world . The Later Han became the world's most populous and most populous .
 This was an age of scientific and technological progress . Major inventions included paper and instrument that indicated the direction in which an earthquake had occurred .
 Rebellions broke out, and Han generals, the most famous of whom was Cao Cao, contended for power . Cao Cao was one of the Han's most famous generals .
 Under Wudi, the Han extended their control over south China . Q o N iS ay e Q ý Taiwan 2000 km 0 2000 miles
 By Socrates’ time , Greek thinkers had begun to seek rational explanations, instead of adhering to traditional beliefs . By the time of Socrates, Greek thinkers were seeking rational explanations .
 Exposure to new ideas through trade inspired thinkers to challenge traditional wisdom . Exposure to trade through trade has led to the development of new ideas .
 Greeks exchanged social, political, and philosophical ideas and dared to imagine novel ways of governing society and understanding the world . Greeks exchanged ideas and shared ideas with each other .
 The Greeks recognized seven sages as founders of their intellectual tradition . The Greeks were known for their intellectual traditions .
 Hilosophy is a method a of rational inquiry used to attempt to understand the world and phenomena around us . It is also the study of the process of philosophical inquiry itself .
 Three philosophers who taught in Athens are credited with laying the foundations of all classical thought— Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle . Socrates and Plato are considered the most influential thinkers in classical thought .
 He questioned what was meant by concepts such as ""good,"" ""evil,"" and "courage,"" to show people that their understanding of such terms lacked truth . He did this by questioning what is meant by such terms .
 He wrote nothing down, but his logical style of argument is portrayed in the works of his followers . His followers include Plato and Xenophon .
 At the age of 70 his constant questioning was thought to threaten the Athenian state . The constant questioning of the ancient Greek leader was believed to have threatened the state .
 Many of his writings, such as Symposium and the Republic, were composed as dialogues on subjects such as ethics and justice, the nature of reality, and the immortality of the soul .
 Epicureans used the skull as a memento mori (which means ""remember that you are mortal"") to remind them of the importance of enjoying life while it is still possible . Zeno is said to have strangled himself at the age of 69 in accordance with the
 His books, compiled from lecture notes, covered subjects ranging from poetry, drama, ethics, politics to mathematics, physics, logic, zoology, and anatomy .
 They remained the basis of Western and Islamic science and philosophy until the 17th century . They were used to form the basis for science and science in the Islamic world .
 Many philosophical movements emerged from the work of Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle . Plato, Socrates, Socrates and Aristotle were influential thinkers .
 Among the most important were Skepticism, Cynicism, Epicureanism, and Stoicism . The last two had the most enduring influence, Stoicism.
 A philosophical movement denied the possibility of knowing the real truth with certainty with certainty . SKEPTICISM was a philosophical movement that denied the . possibility of . knowing the . real truth . The . philosophy movement was founded in 1903 .
 A philosophy that taught that virtue and asceticism, rather than pleasure and indulgence, led to happiness . The philosophy was based on a belief that virtue, not pleasure, was to lead happiness .
 Epicurus taught that good and bad should be measured by the pleasure and pain they bring, and that the point of justice is to increase human happiness . Epicureanism and Stoicism is a form of Epicureanism .
 He believed that the gods, if they exist, had no interest in human affairs . He believed there was no life after death and that there were no gods .
 The Latin poet Lucretius brought Epicurus’s ideas to the Roman world, where they strongly influenced writers like Virgil . The Latin Poet brought the ideas of Epicurus to Roman world .
 He believed that underlying all matter was energy, which he called divine fire . He called it divine fire and believed it was God's energy .
 Zeno claimed that universal human fellowship was more important than narrow loyalty . He said that man's duty was to accept what fate brings and behave in accordance with nature . Zeno: Man's duty is to accept fate brings .
 Roman thinkers such as Seneca the Younger, Cicero, and Cato the Younger adapted Stoic ideas to the new realities of the Roman Empire .
 The Stoics were the Stoics, an ancient Roman philosophy of the Roman religion . Stoics taught Roman values of bravery in battle, fortitude in the face of hardship, and fortitude .
 Greek philosophical ideas became the common heritage of intellectuals in the Mediterranean world and beyond, well into the Roman period . Greek philosophy ideas became a common heritage for intellectuals throughout the world .
 Pliny the Elder (born 24 CE) added to Aristotle’s natural history and Claudius Ptolemy gave Aristotle's astronomy MARCUS AURELIUS mathematical treatment . Claudius the Elder added to the natural history of Aristotle .
 Horace was known as the Roman Aristotle for his analysis of literature and drama . Horace's poetry was known for its analysis of literary and dramatic works . The poet Horace is known for his literary analysis of the world .
 This had a profound influence on Christian theology, particularly through St. Paul's influence on St. James .
 Augustine's Neoplatonist ideas survived his conversion to Christianity . Augustine converted Augustine to Christianity in 17th century . Augustine was a Neopatonist philosopher and philosopher . Augustine is credited with his Neopatonicism .
 He emphasized truth, justice, correct social relations, and obedience to parents . He believed that the family was the proper foundation for society and good government .
 In the United States Declaration of the right to ""life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness"" is an Epicurean ideal . Aurelius gave expression to Roman Stoicism in his book Meditations .
 Schematic diagram of the world dates back to 1000500BcE . It describes mythical beings inhabiting the corners of the globe .
 The perspective is centered on the city of A Wider Links . Links across the ancient world were forged by merchants, rulers, and migrants . The perspective of the city is centered around the city .
 Babylon in Mesopotamia was a Mesopotamian city of Babylon . Babylon was the birthplace of the world's largest city, Babylon . It was also known as Babylon in Babylon .
 The knowledge of geography only gradually came to be expressed as maps or texts . Maps and texts were first written in ancient times .
 The powerful showed off their connections with monuments in the landscape, or by displaying possessions from distant lands . Instead of showing up in public, the powerful showed their connections to monuments or possessions .
 Since Phoenician times, cities that could control trade had become wealthy . The wealth of cities that control trade has increased in recent times .
 City-states built on monopoly on goods such as incense or silk . Some city-states and kingdoms were built on their monopoly of goods .
 The most luxurious or prestigious commodities were often those that had traveled the greatest distance . Luxury or prestige commodities often traveled the most distance .
 Silk that found its way from China to Rome changed hands many times en route, with each middleman taking his markup . Silk that made its way to Rome from China changed hands en route en route .
 Ideas, stories, religions, languages, languages all traveled along the trade routes between the various lands . The trade routes included trade routes from China to Europe .
 His identity is blended with the hero Verethraghna of Persian tradition . But here, his identity has been blended with that of the hero of the same name .
 The gradual spread of ideas and culture through trade and migration, although little documented, has left many archaeological traces . Traces of trade have also been left behind by migration and trade .
 Artifacts unearthed far from home provide clear evidence of long-distance trade . African ivory in Assyria, hoard of Roman coins in India, or Persian carpet in Siberia, provide evidence .
 The occasional shipwreck can represent a detailed time capsule of information . Shipwreck of the Titanic was the largest shipwreck of its kind in history .
 It records journeys made across the Roman world and beyond before the Ath century ce. It was made in the Roman Empire and beyond .
 Distances are distorted unrecognizably to preserve the order of places and routes in a clear itinerary . Distances between places and destinations are distorted to preserve order and routes .
 Common languages spread across vast, multicultural territories . Greek in Central Asia is one of the world's most common languages .
 The rations given to official travelers from the Persian capital Persepolis would have conveyed status on its owner . Such an exotic commodity from far-off lands would have signaled status on the owner of it .
 In the E commercial world, itineraries S M were drawn up as guides for li S EN merchants . In the S EN world, S M was a guide to the world of travel .
 One surviving B example, written by a Romanized author from Alexandria in Egypt in the lst century CE, describes the Red Sea and Indian Ocean .
 It relates the ports and the goods, such as iron, gold, silver, myrrh, and slaves, available for import and export in each . It extends its account to the Ganges River and beyond, to China .
 Greek and Roman mapmakers compiled accurate maps of the world . Such knowledge was consolidated into an accurate geographical picture of the globe .
 In the 2nd century CE, Ptolemy of Alexandria compiled Geographia, a world atlas that laid out instructions on charting the world with lines of latitude and longitude . In the 19th century, the world was charted by Ptolemans .
 It featured North Africa, India, Taprobane, and Sinae, including its capital, Chang’an . The city was featured in China's most populous region .
 The transport networks of the ancient world evolved as common routes over millennia . The ancient world's transport networks were not so much constructed as evolved as . common routes .
 In places, roads were cut deliberately by mobilizing forced labor . In some places, it was used to cut roads deliberately . In others, the roads were deliberately cut deliberately .
 More often a route was marked less by a physical road than by a string of stages or settlements . More often, a route is marked by a series of stages and settlements .
 Petra was the capital of the Nabataean Arabs, who controlled the supply of luxury goods between Arabia and Mediterranean markets . Monsoon winds were a crucial aspect of the Roman Empire and client stat .
 The wealth of such a trade hub is evident in the surviving colonnades, temples, and tombs . control . control. control of the city .
 Persians developed a swift messenger system to send letters across their vast empire . Their reputation for speed spread well beyond their empire . Likewise, the Persians had a reputation for their speed of communication .
 Xenophon, the Greek historian of the 4th century BCE, described relays of horses at stations at stations spaced at one-day intervals and manned by officials . The relays were described by Xenophon as relays at stations .
 Whenever a letter arrived, the officials immediately sent it on with fresh riders and fresh horses . "Whenever a letter . arrived, it was immediately sent on"
 The imagination was important in forming ideas of the world, says the author . Imagination was important to form ideas of a new world, he says .
 Old tales of exploration were remembered by the next wave of adventurers . Old stories of exploration will be remembered in the next generation of explorers .
 Scholars relied on Classical views of the world for centuries after they were first produced . Academics rely on Classical world views for centuries .
 Herodotus wrote that the gold emerging from east of Persia was mined with the help of giant ants . The Greek historian said that giant ants were responsible for the discovery .
 The Muslim cartographer Al-Idrisi created a map for his patron, Roger Il of Sicily, in the 12th century . The map was created for Roger Il, king of Sicily .
 Al-Idrisi’s map is oriented with south at the top, reflecting the outlook from Sicily toward the lands of Islamic rule . The map shows the view of Sicily from the north to the south .
 This map was one of the triggers for the pioneering Renaissance voyages that were to introduce the Old World to the New . The map was created in the 16th century and was published in 17th century .
 By1 ce, the world's trade routes had extended, through many intermediaries, from western Europe to China . Al-IDRISI'S MAP Nexus of trade .
 China was largely self-sufficient, but imported desirable goods, such as spices from Southeast Asia and cavalry horses from Central Asia . China imported horses, spices, horses and horses from the region .
 Celtic ancestry is thought to be rooted in the Eurasian steppes . Celtic ancestry may also be linked to the stepples of the region . It is also thought to have roots in the steppe region of the Middle East .
 Hallstatt Celts seem to have been one of Europe's first Iron Age cultures . They appear to be wealthy and powerful and appear to have lived in the Bronze Age .
 Chieftains’ graves contained valuable items such as bronze buckets and jewelry, suggesting trade with Greece and domination of several major European trading routes . The graves of their chieftains were found in the area .
 Boudicca led a bloody uprising against occupying Roman forces after the Romans ignored the will of her dead husband, King Prasutagus . Queen of the Celtic Iceni people of eastern England led the uprising .
 The king had left his estate jointly to his daughters and to Rome, but Romans seized his entire kingdom and mistreated his family . The king's estate was left jointly to the daughters and the Romans .
 Celts were not one cohesive people, and were composed of numerous and fairly diverse groups . The Celts displayed a common culture, but were not unified .
 This culture was typified by organization into tribes or clans, a nomadic or village life existence, and a strong warrior tradition . This culture is typified into organization .
 The Celtic otherworld was peopled by gods and supernatural beings, such as Cernunnos, horned god of virility, nature, and plenty . It was also known as the world of horned gods, such an ancient Celtic deity .
 The Celts believed that people journeyed to the otherworld after death . Great feasts were held as preparation for chiefs' burials .
 Celtic mythology featured a strong belief in an afterlife, a parallel with the real world . The Celts swept across much of Europe during the 1st millennium . Fierce warriors and skilled ironworkers with a love of feasting .
 Their advance brought them in contact with many of the cultures that shaped history, including the Greeks and Romans . Their advance also brought them into contact with other cultures, such as the Greeks, Romans .
 By the 200s BCE, Celts and their culture were prevalent across a large swath of Western and Central Europe . Celts were prevalent in Europe by the mid-200s BCE . The Celts are the descendants of the Celts .
 They met with varying fortunes, sometimes victorious and sometimes defeated . They met each other, sometimes winning or losing, sometimes losing .
 Where they did triumph, there was a significant exchange of cultures between the Celts and those they had conquered . The Celts were able to conquer many of their conquests .
 Celtic society was an agricultural one of fortified villages . Tribal structure was organized into many inter-fighting tribes or clans . Celtic society is organized into inter-feeling tribes .
 Tribal structure was hierarchical, with a king or chief at the head; followed by noble-warriors and priests . Commoners, many of whom were farmers; and slaves; were commoners . Many of them were farmers or slaves .
 They came from leading families and were exempted from paying taxes or taking part in fighting . They were exempt from taking part part in the war or paying taxes .
 The different tribes had cultural, rather than political, common ground . The tribes were divided by their differences in their history .
 The Celts were illiterate, even at their height, but had a powerful oral tradition of storytelling and poetry . This lack of political cohesion was ultimately a weakness . Beliefs and mythology ;
 Noble horsemen may be riding away after rebirth in the cauldron . Epic poems of war exploits and glories are an especially important for the poet . Noble horses may be on their way back to war glory .
 Their helmets have symbolic decoration such as crescent shapes, boars, or birds . Their helmets are decorated with symbols such as boars or boars .
 A godlike figure appears to dip a man into a cauldron, perhaps as an ""Otherworld"" rebirth or initiation ritual . elements of the natural world were central to Celtic beliefs . A god-like figure is seen to be seen in the image of a man being dipped into a
 The Celtic tribes lacked ME with the Carthaginians . The rituals performed by druids often unity and were constantly . constantly . fighting with each other .
 Motifs from the natural world are CARTHAGINIAN COIN IBERIA . It is likely that, during the 4th century important in Celtic art, too .
 By the Ist century ce, the spread of Roman power Germanic tribes fought against both the Romans and the Saxons . Saxons further supplanted the ER — had ended Celtic domination in Italy, Gaul (after and the Celts) and successfully pushed Celts Celts in England
 IRIS the Gallic uprising by Vercingetorix had been put out of the Rhine Valley .
 The Romans fought for control of Iberia from the margins of their former lands . Celtic churches played an important role in the early spread of the Roman empire .
 Gold and bronze were popular for luxury items—the Celts are Gundestrup cauld b d ith » | s a found in a Danish peat bog .
 It dates from about the 1st century acE, and it bands bands with sculpted ends), as well as may have had a ritual purpose . It may have been used as a ritual object .
 STRABO, ANCIENT GREEK HISTORIAN AND GEOGRAPHER, 1ST CENT CENTURY BCE bracelets and impressive brooches .
 Great artistic skill poured into weaponry, armor, harnesses, and chariots . Celtic culture was central to warfare and horsemanship . Artistic skill was poured into weapons and armor .
 Some particularly fine weapons were borne principally as badges of honor and rank, or used for ceremonial purposes rather than in active service . Others were used as badges and rank or as ceremonial purposes .
 Chariots were used widely in earlier times and skilled horsemanship was greatly prized . Chariot was used widely . skilled horsemanmanship was also prized .
 Some Celtic tribes painted or tattooed themselves with plant dyes to look more alarming to their enemies . The dyes were used to look alarming to the enemy .
 Celtic languages are still spoken in Brittany, Wales, Scotland, Ireland, Ireland and the Isle of Man . Celtic culture persists today and Celtic languages still speak in Brittany .
 Gundestrup detail Warriors on foot with Musicians blow on long Celtic Celtic warriors . Gundestru detail warriors on foot and musicians blow on Celtic drums .
 This style of trumpet cauldron, decorated with a scene of gods and men. toward the left, may be dead was held vertically . Celtic mythology linked cauldrons with feasting soldiers approaching a ritual had a mouth shaped like a boar's .
 Ornate items have been discovered at sites in Central and Western Europe . They are distinctively decorated, often with images of animals and plants .
 Dating from the 2nd century Bce, this was probably for display rather than battle, as it was made of thin bronze and intricately decorated .
 Bronze dog figurine probably had some mythological or religious significance . Bronze figurine was found in the Bronze Age Bronze Age Age of Bronze Age .
 Harness decoration was discovered in a grave in northern France .
 Carved metal spoon, dating from the 6th century ce and discovered in Kilkenny, Ireland, was found in the early 1950s . It is believed to date back to the mid-1500s and dates back to 6th Century .
 Base of Gundestrup Cauldron shows the ritual slaying of a bull . Base of the Gundestru Cauldron is shown in a photo .
 Enamel ornament, CEREMONIAL DAGGER JAVELIN HEADS which would have decorated the chariot of a high-ranking horseman . Enamel ornaments would have been decorated by a high ranking horseman in a chariot .
 The Stanwick Horse Mask is a chariot fixture dating to the Ist century CE and discovered in Yorkshire, England . It is believed to be the first chariot to be discovered in the country .
 Enameled chariot hardware found in Wales and dating from the Ist century ce. was found in Welsh . It is believed to date back to the Ith century and is thought to date from the early 1900s .
 The decorated bronze surface of the back of a mirror, featuring a symmetrical clover leaf pattern, possibly belonging to a high-ranking woman, is thought to be the work of a woman .
 Bronze ornament of the Ist century cE discovered in Ireland; its function remains unknown . It was found in Ireland in the early 20th century . It is thought to be the work of a Bronze ornament .
 Gold coins dating from 1st century ce, and probably originating from northern France, probably originating in northern France .
 The steppes and prairies covering much of the Eurasian interior, especially in the west, were suited to varying degrees of farming and grazing . The steaks and prairie plains were best known for their farming .
 Eurasian steppe peoples were living a mainly agricultural life . By the Bronze Age they were living mainly agricultural lives .
 Earthen burial mounds called kurgans were a major cultural feature from central Europe to Siberia . Mounds were a feature of the ancient culture of Europe and Siberia .
 By 2000 BcE a major movement of steppe peoples into adjacent lands seems to have begun . This is linked to altered agricultural practices and a search for better farming conditions .
 Pazyryk is a valley burial site in the Altai Mountains, in modern Kazakhstan, dating from the 5th to 3rd centuries Bce. It is believed to date back to 5th century .
 Much of what we know about the Scythians comes from grave goods discovered in royal kurgans at Pazyryk . Scythian grave goods were found in royal graves at the site of the ancient kingdom .
 The western area begins in Hungary and stretches north of the Black Sea to the Altai Mountains in the east . The Altai mountains stretch north of Hungary and east of Russia to the west .
 The eastern portion of the Altai range runs east from Mongolia to Manchuria in China . The east portion is mostly at a higher altitude .
 The western steppe, such as the fertile lands around the Danube, is wetter and greener . The fertile steppe is wet, greener and wetter than the steppe around the world .
 Moving eastward, summers become hotter, winters colder, and rain more scarce . Summer and winter get hotter, but rain is more scarce in the U.S.
 Tribes of the eastern steppe often migrated west or south to areas of higher rainfall and fresh grazing pasture . Tribes often migrated to higher rainfall or fresh pasture to escape the steppe steppe .
 The Scythians are famed for creating beautiful artifacts, especially in gold, and for being formidable horsemen . Scythian horsemen are renowned for their ability to create beautiful artifacts .
 It dates from the 4th century BCE. skills were supplemented by a talent for fighting . skills were added to the skills required to be a fighter .
 Steppe society was organized into “kinship” groups (effectively extended families) and tribes . Steppe societies were organized into "kinship" groups (affirm families, extended families, and tribes)
 Such gatherings were usually temporary, formed for a specific purpose, such as defense or attack . Such gatherings are usually temporary and usually temporary .
 The early history of the horse’s domestication is unclear, but by 7OOBCE, horses were extremely important on the steppes, and were bred in large numbers . Horses were important in Europe and became important in the early 20th century .
 The steppes-grasslands stretching from Eastern Europe to China are home to nomadic and seminomadic groups for millennia . They were nomads of the Steppes .
 History of steppe people has been influenced by geography, while territorial ambitions brought clashes with a range of powers that changed the world map . Steppe people have been involved in conflicts with a number of powers .
 The steppe steppe peoples have cultural similarities to each other . It also brought various groups in contact with each other, which is why there are cultural similarities .
 We do know that steppe tribes spoke Indo-European languages, and that they kept domesticated animals, such as cattle and sheep . We also know that the steppe tribe kept domestic livestock .
 Nomadic pastoralism involves moving herds of domesticated animals over large distances . They often used animal caravans and rivers to transport goods, and their superb horsemanship . The Mongolian herdsman were often used to carry out their trade .
 In some steppe regions it has changed little in thousands of years. ideal animals for people who had to move over vast distances to find suitable pasture for their livestock . They provided not only transportation but also meat and even milk .
 Steppe peoples were heavily influenced by the expansive skies of the open steppelands, which, as a major navigational guide, played a huge role in their lives . Crucial to the development of their fighting prowess were the composite STEPPE BELIEFS .
 Some peoples certainly believed in a sky deity, a ‘heaven, and an afterlife . shamanistic practices may also have been widespread .
 Shamans are people thought to have the power to cure sickness and communicate with the spirit world . Shamans believed to be able to communicate with spirit world and cure sickness .
 Mirrors, a traditional shamanic tool, are believed to reflect secret truths and ward off evil spirits . Mirrors are a traditional tool believed to be used in shamanic rituals .
 The composite bow is a short bow that is easy to fire from a horse, yet very powerful . It is a very powerful bow that can be easily fired from the horse . The bow is an easy-fire-ready bow that's easy to shoot from horse .
 The stirrup stirrup probably originated on the steppes around the 2nd century BCE . It made it easier to ride well in full armor, making it easier for people to ride in armor . It is the first stirrup to be used in the world since the 2th century
 Steppe armies were skilled at launching sudden mounted attacks, usually raids rather than attempts to territorial conquest . Steppe army overran rival settlements with ease, and overran rivals with ease .
 The popular idea of invading hordes is misleading . A few fierce horsemen galloping in would seem overwhelming to an agricultural village . The idea is misleading.
 They wore felt caps and, except for some members of the aristocracy, no armor . The felt caps were worn by the British aristocracy .
 The Scythians possessed sizable territories at different periods, including a large area of the Middle East . Scythian territory included a large part of the Mideast region .
 One group, the "Royal Scythes, controlled an area around southern Russia, where stunning grave finds of gold artifacts point to a well-developed Scythian culture .
 Greco-Roman legend may have been based on Eurasian steppe women . Some believe some believe they took an active role in raiding and fighting .
 Kushan head shows the mix of Greco-Roman and Indian influences that infused much of Kushan art . This sculpture shows a sculpture of a head by the Kushan artist .
 Steppe nomads often integrated with people living in areas they invaded . Steppia nomads were often integrated into people living with them .
 Some aspects of their culture seem to have been adopted from the Chinese regimes they attacked, such as those they attacked .
 Steppe peoples continued to make their mark on groups across Eurasia, from displaced Germanic tribes to rising Islamic powers . Steppe people have made their mark across the world .
 Huns controlled huge swaths of Europe and Asia, conquering other tribes they encountered, including the Germanic Ostrogoths . Between the Ath and 5th centuries CE, pastoral steppe nomads known as Huns ruled huge swathes of Europe .
 In the mid-5th century, some of those peoples fought back successfully against the Huns . The Eastern Roman Empire also closed its borders .
 By 500ce, the Turkic people (originally nomads in the Altai Mountains) dominated much of the Asian steppe . They were originally nomadic nomads . They are now known as the Huns .
 They played a key role in Middle Eastern history and the rise of Islam . However, they remained a major presence in the Middle East .
 Mesoamerican culture left the most powerful and enigmatic monuments . South American cultures were more advanced in their use of metals, but it was the Maya culture . Maya monuments are more enigmatic than other cultures .
 It flourished over a wide swath of Central America, especially the Yucatán and Guatemala's steamy lowlands . It flourished in a wide-ranging region, especially in Guatemala's highlands .
 Maya built huge, often pyramidal stone temples, such as those at Tikal in Guatemala . Maya showed a great talent plotting the positions of the sun and moon and predicting solar eclipses .
 A great central plaza is surrounded by monumental platforms, pyramids, staircases, and terraces . The site is located in the middle of a desert desert .
 Mesoamericans often built their cities on precise, ritually significant grid patterns . The architecture at Monte Albán shows influences from another significant Mesuamerican city .
 Maya people created one of the most extraordinary early American civilizations . Maya temples and scientific knowledge were among the best known of the Maya people .
 The advanced societies of Mesoand South America in the Ist centuries built on the legacy of earlier cultures . The Olmecs in Mexico, and the Chavín in Peru, were the two most advanced cultures .
 Cities also featured palaces, open plazas, terraces, and courts where a sacred ball game was played . Cities were also known as palaces and palaces .
 This seems to have been a strenuous affair in which the participants used their heads, hips, and shoulders to direct a rubber ball at its target .
 More extreme scenarios involving torture and human sacrifice seem to be highly inaccurate and sensationalized . They practiced forms of .auto-sacrifice"" (selfmutilation involving the piercing of body parts)
 Some believe the Maya should be credited with the first ‘real’ Mesoamerican writing because their writing was more closely connected with actual speech . The Olmecs developed a form of writing, some consider that the Maya were the first to write .
 The Maya also had a sophisticated calendar, probably using earlier Olmec concepts . The Maya calendar was probably based on an earlier calendar system .
 The Moche often combined different animals in their artifacts . This jar has the head of a deer, feline fangs, and a snake's body . This incorporated advanced astronomical knowledge .
 The people of southern Peru’s Paracas peninsula were a mainly agricultural people . They were also extraordinarily talented weavers and embroiderers .
 Their art is preserved in the beautiful cloaks that the Paracas wrapped around mummified bodies . The cloaks were used to wrap bodies of mummies around mummies .
 The Nazca people lived on Peru’s southern coast, with an important center at Cahuachi in the Nazca Valley . They lived on the southern coast of Peru, with important centers in the area .
 They created irrigation systems to support intensive grain production, as well as puzzling ‘lines’ in the desert that remain a mystery today .
 On Peru’s northern coast, the Moche built a great administrative and religious complex at Sipán . The Moche is believed to have built the complex on the Peruvian coast .
 Formidable warriors and inventive artists, they created advanced valley irrigation techniques . They also created advanced techniques .
 Mesoand South America continued to give rise to a variety of new cultures, while Maya civilization underwent a major shift . Meso and South America gave birth to a new culture .
 There are around 6 million Maya in Mexico, Guatemala, and Belize . The Maya culture lived on, and today there are 6 million people living in Mexico and Guatemala .
 In earliest times, much religion seems to have been related to fertility or the seasons . M i ANS Cw before .
 As people's social organization changed, so did their conception of their gods . The gods' conception of gods has changed over the ages of people .
 Male and female figurines with exaggerated features may be related to a desire for fertility and prosperity . Exaggerated features may have been related to desire for prosperity .
 Ritual sites that contain animals suggest worshippers were preoccupied with the supply of animals for food and materials . Ritual sites contain animals, either their physical remains, or images .
 Early religion often involved polytheism -- the worship of many deities . Early religion involved poly-theism, worshiping many deities.
 Individuals with power over others were sometimes given the status of a god . Individuals who had power over other people often had the title 'god' The god was often given the title of god .
 The deified ruler may have been seen as the earthly embodiment of a god in their own right . They may have given his or her subjects protection in return .
 Rulers deified in their lifetime or after their deaths became more common in the Mediterranean world after the 4th century ace . Deified rulers were deified or deified after their death .
 Roman emperor Claudius is being deified right after his death in 54 ce . Claudius was the Roman emperor of the Roman Empire . He died in August 54 ce.
 Found in the Mannella region of southeast Italy, this Greek day sculpture from the first half of the 5th century BCE features the goddess and daughter of Zeus, Persephone, and the god of the underworld .
 Gods and goddesses were believed to be responsible for many aspects of the human experience in the ancient world .
 The importance of a god was determined by their place in a hierarchical order . This was the case in the Roman Empire .
 Some of their many gods held sway over a large area, others were gods of a single city or feature in the landscape, such as a river .
 The deities, who were often depicted with human features, influenced almost every aspect of life . They influenced almost all aspects of life.
 The weather was believed to be the result of the current mood of an individual god or goddess . Even the weather was said to be based on the mood of a god or god .
 Social or political changes could influence the way in which godliness is perceived . Godliness was perceived as being godly in the Bible .
 As societies became more complex, the relationships between the gods became more elaborate . Many cultures developed a belief in a ‘pantheon’ of gods, with gods linked through a hierarchy of power and family ties .
 Where cultures made contact, people often related to each other through shared religious links, typically associating gods of similar character . People often associated gods with similar character.
 The Roman gods Jupiter and Juno were equated with the Greeks’ Zeus and Hera, for instance . The gods Jupiter, Juno and Juno are equated to the Greeks' Zeus and . Hera .
 Seals transmitted religious images across great distances. diviners, and oracles. Seals transmit religious images . Seals . transmitted religious . images across . great distances . diviner, oracles .
 In return, worshippers offered the gods gifts, sacrifice, or ritual tributes to secure their good will .
 A god was recognized as supreme either by being given prominence by a ruler or city, or by being identified with key symbols in human life, such as the sun, sky, ocean, or storms .
 Gods became supreme gods when people came to think of them as ‘father” of a family of gods . People came to know gods as “father’s” when they were thought of as gods of their own .
 Zeus was partfather, part-monarch of a quarreling cohort of Greek deities . One such god was Zeus, who was part father, part king and part king . Zeus was the most powerful god of all gods in ancient Greece .
 A god could also be promoted to supreme deity if their city or people became dominant . The god could be promoted if they became dominant in their country or people .
 A wide world of gods was imbued in the landscape itself, although physical evidence of their worship is hard to find, as it can be nothing more than a cluster of plaques .
 An ancient description of Persian religion revealed the practice of open-air rituals, and many Persian tablets record gods related to nature .
 Fertile places were revered across Asia and were the sites of gardens and Buddhist temples . The most fertile places in Asia were found in China and Japan .
 Mountain sanctuaries could be the MYSTERY RELIGION . One of many diverse religious cults involving a belief in death and regeneration or resurrection .
 Early Christianity included many elements of a mystery cult . cults devoted to an ancient “Mother of the Gods” on mounts Sipylos and Dindymene in Anatolia .
 The towering Buddhas in the cliff face at Bamiyan in Afghanistan were sited strategically to overlook a major road to the East from Rome through Persia .
 Gods could migrate with travelers, soldiers, and merchants across the entire Roman Empire . Gods migrated with travelers and soldiers across the Roman Empire.
 The 5th century Bce temple of Zeus at Olympia in Greece contains a huge goldand ivory-covered statue of the supreme god . In London, temples to a rich variety of immigrant gods have been Zeus’ temple .
 Within pantheons of gods, lesser deities may diminish and disappear . Monothems of gods may diminish or disappear .
 Both Judaism and Zoroastrianism of Persia have roots in earlier, polytheistic religions . Both of these religions have origins in polytheism .
 In antiquity, it was common for people to regard gods as the figureheads of their culture .
 Their religion was part of their ethnic identity, so it was not encouraged in foreigners . They were not allowed to convert to Christianity .
 In multicultural kingdoms, tolerance of many beliefs was a fact of life . In multicultural Britain, tolerance was a thing of life. In multicultural countries, tolerance is a thing to be tolerated .
 Serapis was first popular with the Greeks of Egypt, then hitched a ride with Roman settlement across Europe . The gods were first popular in Egypt and then moved on to Roman settlements .
 Mithras, also worshipped in London, may have begun as the Persian Mithra . Mithras may have been worshipped in the Persian kingdom .
 Such gods with “exotic” or Eastern origins, often the focus of “Mystery” cults requiring initiation, were popular with the shifting populations of the Roman world .
 Faith in a spiritual dimension to human existence probably evolved separately in many parts of the world among bands of Paleolithic hunter-gatherers .
 The earliest belief of the huntergatherers is known as animism . Animism is the belief of animism, a form of belief in the world's first religion .
 In animism, all of physical nature has a spiritual counterpart and everything becomes part of a chain . Everything in animism is connected to a chain of chains .
 A man can become a bird, an animal can be disguised as a rock, and a bird can transform into a cloud . Each object, living or inanimate, is a link, but the links are fluid so that a man can be transformed into a bird .
 The power for these changes stems from a world of vaguely defined guardian spirits, says the author of the book .
 As tribes became settled into farming communities, pantheons of more clearly identifiable gods emerged .
 Each god was responsible for overseeing a part of the temporal world, and still acting as the guardian of his or her domain . Zeus, the Greek god of thunder and lightning, was also the ruler of Mount Olympus . Zeus was the head of Olympus, the ruler and guardian of Olympus .
 The belief in an afterlife may extend back even farther in time than animism, because Neanderthal burial sites sometimes included medicinal herbs and other items .
 A doctrine or belief presenting the natural world, including humankind, as being part of the divine . PANTHEISM is a doctrine that presents the world as part of a divine state .
 Many different religious sects and movements have flourished briefly throughout history . Five great faiths have emerged and spread sufficiently to become major world religions .
 Hinduism has a range of very diverse traditions but no formal system of beliefs . The oldest of these five religious faiths is Hinduism . Hinduism is one of the oldest religious faiths in the world .
 These were the Vedic gods, who feature in the Vedas, the 3,000-year-old sacred texts . The Vedas are central to the development of Hinduism .
 The Hebrews came together under Moses and settled in Palestine . They were later known as Hebrews . James Frazer was born in 1922 .
 Christianity, Islam, and Judaism view this site in Jerusalem as holy . Hinduism and Buddhism spread across Southeast Asia, while the Middle East is holy .
 In the foreground people can be seen praying at the Western Wall, and behind it is the Dome of the Rock mosque . Behind it is Puranic literature, including the great texts of the Mahabharata and Ramayana .
 Buddhism emerged not as a belief in a god, but as an ascetic way of life . Buddhism emerged as a way of living, not belief in gods, but a life of ascetic living .
 Its teachings involve the belief that death marks the transition to a new earthly life—reincarnation . The teachings involve death .
 The only way to escape this painful cycle of death and rebirth, known as samsara, is to achieve perfection . It is accompanied by an extinction of passions, or nirvana, or the death of passions .
 The monotheistic religion of the Jews evolved from the older, ritualistic, temple-based cult attributed to Moses . Judaism evolved from a temple-driven temple cult to a monotheist religion .
 Alexander's successor, Antiochus Epiphanes, tried to introduce aspects of Greek cults . The resulting uprising led to a dynasty of priest-kings, the Hasmoneans .
 Christianity arose from Judaism . The second major monotheistic religion, Christianity, arose from Christianity . Followers of Jesus Christ
 Jesus probably saw himself as a social reformer, but to some Jews under Roman occupation he became the deliverer predicted in Jewish scripture . There is no evidence that Jesus envisaged RELIGIOUS FIGUREHEAD JESUS .
 For much of his life Jesus moved around the Sea of Galilee, accompanied by a local band of disciples and followers . Jesus is believed to have been at sea at the time of his death .
 Only after his journey to Jerusalem and his death by crucifixion did his following grow and his messianic fame spread . Only after he journeyed to Jerusalem, his following grew .
 Tradition has it that this omnipotent deity, also the God of Islam and Christianity, was first recognized by Abraham . Abraham was one of the patriarchal ancestors of the Israelites founding a religious movement .
 It was only through his death on the cross, during which Christians believe he atoned for humanity's sins, that the early Church emerged . The early Church was formed through the death of Jesus Christ .
 The first Christians met in private houses and had no formal dogma . Only after several decades did formal places of worship appear .
 Rather than destroying the religion, persecution had the effect of reinforcing the convictions of its devotees . The persecution of the religion has the effect on those who believe in Islam .
 It recognizes the transcendental god of Judaism and Christianity, but by the name of Allah . The Muslim faith is based in Saudi Arabia and Bahrain . It has been described as a form of Islamism .
 The Prophet Muhammad promoted a doctrine based on personal divine revelation . The doctrine was incorporated into the holy book of Islam, the Qur’an . The Quran is based on the teachings of Muhammad .
 Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam spread out across the globe . From their Asian beginnings, Hinduism was carried out by conquering armies, traders, and missionaries .
 From around 600BCE, belief in reincarnation was established . Hinduism spread on a wave of popular fervor from India into Sri Lanka, Cambodia, and Malaysia .
 One of the many ascetic philosophers of his day, he achieved enlightenment at Bodhgaya . He subsequently wandered for the rest of his life teaching Buddhist philosophy and gathering a community .
 He taught the Eightfold Path to enlightenment . Includes disciplined guidance on all aspects of morality, wisdom, and meditation .
 BUDDHIST WHEEL OF THE LAW devotes itself to a particular deity or aspects of a deity . BUDDIST WERER OF the Law devoting itself to the deity .
 The largest and most universal of these were the Vaishnava and Shaivite movements, worshipping the two main creator deities, Vishnu and Shiva . The largest of these movements were the Shaivites, worshiping the main creator deity .
 Hinduism became a powerful cohesive force among people who were disparate in language, culture, and social position . Despite a multitude of different facets, Hinduism was a powerful force among those who had different backgrounds .
 Gautama Buddha's teachings paved the way for the development of a host of schools . Members of the Indian sanghas elaborated his teachings after his death .
 Hinayana Buddhism arose in the 4th century BCE and spread mainly south and east from India into Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Cambodia, Laos, and Thailand . One of the principal branches, Hinayanas Buddhism, follows the ancient “way of the elders"" or Theravada
 The other main branch, Mahayana Buddhism developed later, in the 1st-3rd centuries CE, and became the dominant element in 300—500 CE, spreading mainly north and east . Mahayanas Buddhism became dominant in 300-500 CE .
 Among Mahayana's splinter sects is the influential Vajrayana school, also sometimes called tantric Buddhism . The school is sometimes known as tantric .
 Other more austere Mahayana schools were carried by itinerant monks through China and then Japan . Further adaptation resulted in Zen Buddhism, where further adaptation followed .
 The faith has been described as the ‘Vagrant Lotus"" because its history has been one of migration from one culture to another . The faith is described as a "Vagant Lotus"
 Buddhism of India stands in sharp contrast with that found in Japan and Korea . As a result, Buddhism of the country stands in stark contrast to that of Japan, Korea .
 The spread of faith often went hand in glove with politics, and Judaism was no exception . Jewish diaspora is one of the world's largest Jewish communities .
 The process intensified when the Roman general Titus sacked Jerusalem in 70CE, causing many inhabitants to Hee. Hee . Many inhabitants of Jerusalem were killed in the process .
 By the end of the lst century the local population had largely recovered, rebuilding its faith through observance of the Torah .
 The emperor Septimius Severus instituted a tax on self-identified Jews and forbade conversion to Judaism . The emperor also forbade conversions to Judaism and a conversion to Christianity .
 Jews continued to use the trade networks of the empire, establishing themselves wherever trade took place . Jews used the networks to establish themselves wherever they found them . Jews were able to establish their trade networks in the empire .
 Jewish populations became particularly concentrated in Asia Minor and Mesopotamia . Jewish populations of Asia Minor, Mesopotamia and Asia Minor concentrated .
 Roman Empire was largely responsible for the spread of Christianity . Roman Empire also responsible for spread of Roman Christianity .
 Paul was able to move freely across Europe and establish Christian cells . Paul established Christian cells in Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia, Thessalonica, and elsewhere .
 Christianity had extended rapidly into Syria and northwest into Asia Minor and Greece . Even before the reign of Constantine, Christianity was expanding rapidly . Christianity had spread into Syria, Asia Minor, Greece and Syria .
 In the 2nd century a thriving community of Greek-speaking Christians was established in the Rhone valley in France . By 200cE the Church was also well established . The Aum symbol represents the sacred Hindu syllable for God .
 The wheel of the law represents the teachings of the Buddha and the cycle of death and rebirth . The wheel represents both the teachings and the cycles of rebirth .
 Muhammad succeeded in ridding southern Arabia of polytheism and replacing it with the worship of a single God, Allah . Muhammad was born in Mecca and died in Mecca .
 In Islamic doctrine he is the “end of a line” of prophets, the ultimate deliverer of divine revelation . He is the end of a series of prophets and ultimate deliverrer of revelation .
 By the 3rd century a church was founded at Edessa in modern Turkey . To the northeast, beyond the imperial frontier, a language barrier slowed progress, although .
 Most missionary work was focused on Italy, France, and Spain . However, most missionary work focused on Western Europe . Missionaries were active in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Britain probably felt little influence until the mid-3rd century, but by 400CE it was largely Christian .
 Originally an opponent of the early Christians, he was converted ¢.33 CE and became the leading Christian apostle, or missionary, especially among the non-Jewish communities . He was converted to Christianity and became a missionary .
 Buddhism evolved into various regional forms as EATI r1 religions were adopted by new cultures . France and Spain had become two of its most its influence extended through Central and Southeast .
 During the 19th century an Asia, China, Japan, and most recently, the West was the focus of interest in the world .
 By the 11th century, Christianity had split into two, arisen, aiming to make its thought more universal . New Hindu schools have — the old European communities were virtually annihilated .
 Pope Francis taught the essential unity of all religions and the population of Palestinians . Pope Francis' visit to St. Peter's in Vatican City taught the unity of religions and Palestinians .
 Its replacement, which is . topped by a magnificent dome designed by Michelangelo, took over a century to build . The replacement of the original structure took more than a century .
 The Hagia Sofía in Istanbul, Turkey, is a magnificent example of Byzantine architecture . It is located in the heart of the city's most famous buildings .
 Mount Kailas, on the border between Tibet and Nepal, is a holy place for Buddhists and Hindus alike . In 1935 ul Was ""rust into the Å "" | Mount was a sacred place for Hindus and Buddhists alike .
 Pilgrims trek up the | Humla valley round the | mot Ini tain In, bt i hy . Ini is the name of the first known name of a Native Indian tribe .
 Lalibela is one of eleven churches carved from volcanic rock high in The city of Varanasi in Buddhism, and Christianity expanded Ethiopia's Amhara Mountains .
 The vast Potola Palace that towers the Indian state of Uttar AO during their early development, 13th-century church is a place of above Lhasa, Tibet, dates from 1645 .
 Pradesh is one of the holiest Borobudur including smaller branches on which Christian pilgrimage and has been Once the seat of the Tibetan government . Pradesh is a pilgrimage site for Hindus, Buddhism and Christianity .
 In most dedared a world heritage site, it houses the tombs of past Dalai Lamas, who come to bathe in the at Borobudur, Java, .
 Much was at stake, but foremost was the struggle for leadership of the western Roman Empire . Much of the Roman Empire was in the midst of a struggle for control .
 Constantine went into the fray inspired by his Christian beliefs, while Maxentius put faith in pagan gods . Constantine was inspired by the Christian beliefs of his pagan beliefs .
 Constantine planned to take the city and claim the western empire as his alone . Maxentius, being in Rome and having senate backing, perhaps had more legitimacy . Constantine wanted to take Rome and claim western empire alone .
 He had a much smaller army than Maxentius, and its strength lay in a mobile cavalry that performed best in the open . He had to rely on his mobile cavalry to perform best in an open space .
 Before the battle, he apparently experienced a religious ""conversion,"" which he may have felt put the Christian God on his side .
 Accounts include visions of a flaming cross in the sky . Accounts include orders to place Christian symbols on his soldiers' shields . Accounts also of visions of burning cross in sky and orders to put symbols on shields .
 Maxentius, fighting in the name of Mars, the Roman god of war, emerged into the open, giving Constantine the advantage . Constantine's victory in the battle was the first of its kind in Roman history .
 Maxentius had already dismantled Milvian Bridge to halt his Fighting for Empire . The 16th-century fresco from the Vatican depicts the events at the bridge .
 Constantine pushed Maxentius and his troops into the Tiber River . In the center, the brightly lit Constantine can be seen pushing his troops out of the river .
 Imperial standards bear crosses and, in the sky above, angels join in the battle. opponent . So he and his troops had to cross the Tiber River using a bridge made from boats .
 Constantine's cavalry disrupted enemy ranks with expert charges . In the ensuing battle, Constantine's horsemen charged the enemy with expert charge .
 Maxentius's troops had nowhere to go but into the Tiber, where many, including their leader, drowned . Many of his troops drowned, including his leader, were killed .
 The next day, a triumphant procession, led by Constantine, marched through Rome with Maxentius's head on a spear . Constantine led the procession to Rome with the head on the spear . The following day, Constantine led a triumphant march through Rome .
 Constantine may have seen his victory at Milvian Bridge as a symbol of the power of Christianity . Some view Constantine's ‘conversion’ with cynicism, but some view it with cynicism .
 The influence of the faith had been gathering pace for three centuries, assisted by imperial edicts of religious tolerance . Imperial edicts had been encouraging tolerance for religious tolerance in the past .
 A few months after the battle, Constantine issued the Edict of Milan, which returned confiscated property to Christians and increased their status and political standing . Constantine issued a few months later, Constantine .
 Under the pax romana, the Romans ruled a Mediterranean empire that was united by -a Greco-Roman classical culture x based on the value of the city . & his classical civilization came to be threatened in places by recurring civil wars, economic pressures, and the wholesale influx of
 Pressure built up along the Rhine and Danube rivers in the 3rd century ce, leading to continual incursions . Pressure built on the rivers led to constant incursions by the Romans .
 The Romans had been fighting against a tide greater and older than themselves for a long time . The Romans were fighting a tide that was greater than themselves . They were fighting against an older tide that had been greater than them .
 Huns controlled a sizable territory in Eastern Europe . By the 400s, the Huns had control of Eastern Europe. Huns also controlled a portion of the region .
 Attila aimed to maintain a steppe empire placed strategically strategically on the Hungarian plains, at the doorway to Western Europe . Attila wanted to maintain an empire strategically placed strategically in the Hungarian Plains .
 He was a 'puppet' child king with a tenuous claim to leadership, and was emperor of only the western empire of Rome . He was, however, a ""puppet"" child king .
 He was removed by Germanic chief, Odoacer, who, though often portrayed as a barbarian warlord, was actually a former Roman commander in Italy .
 Progress often pushed such groups into other lands, sometimes Roman territory, where they helped defend the Romans against Huns and other tribes . Collapse would not occur for some time, and it is important to note that while the western empire declined, progress often pushed them into other areas .
 In fact, it was not unusual for Germanic groups to become official Roman allies, or “federated” people gaining certain Roman-style rights .
 The 5th century ce saw a massive shift in the world's map as the western Roman Empire faded . A patchwork of new ""barbarian"" kingdoms dominated Europe .
 The eastern Roman Empire flourished as the Byzantine culture evolved there . Eastern Roman Empire thrived in the east as a result of Byzantine culture .
 The eastern Roman Empire, established in the early 4th century CE by Emperor Constantine, thrived . It has been viewed alternately as a time of decline or one of transition .
 The time can be seen in a positive light and in some ways as one of continuity, rather than bleakly bleakly as the end of refined ""civilization"" when Europe was plunged into chaos .
 By the 4th and 5th centuries CE, a variety of peoples had gained a strong foothold in European and Middle Eastern territories once dominated by the Romans . People from Eurasia's northern steppe lands had gained strong footholds in Europe and Middle East .
 Hunnic people defeated and forced semi-sedentary people living around the Black Sea area to flee . In the later 4th century CE, westwardmigrating Hunnic . people defeated them and forced them to flee the area .
 Showing Roman soldiers striking heroic poses and in command of the Situation, this is a powerful piece of imperial propaganda . The Roman soldiers strike heroic poses .
 Romulus Augustulus is seen as the last emperor of Rome's western empire . The last emperor was seen as a simple “barbarians versus Romans” scenario where one side rose and the other fell .
 Within the imperial system there were commanders and statesmen of Germanic blood . Within the Imperial system were commanders, statesmen and Germanic statesmen .
 Barbarians either sided with or fought against the Romans, as well as other barbarian groups . At different times, barbarians either fought against or fought for the Romans .
 The Goths defeated Emperor Valens in 378, crushing the imperial army so severely that the Danube borders were left open . Distinctive beards, hairstyles, and clothing mark out the barbarians .
 The 5th and 6th centuries saw incursions from Goths, Visigoths, and Vandals, among other groups, contributing to the pressures on the Western Roman Empire . The Roman Empire was ruled by the Roman Empire from the 5th to 6th century .
 Writhing figures struggling closely together convey the chaos and drama of hand-to-hand battle . The battle is set to take place at the end of the day .
 The carving includes an incredibly detailed rendering of lorica hamata, a kind of metal-link armor worn by certain Roman soldiers . This fine carving is one of the most detailed examples of Roman armor .
 All the Romans in the relief are shown in armor, with clean-shaven faces wearing expressions of calm superiority . The relief is shown in a relief of the Roman Empire .
 Death of imperial general Stilicho, who had kept Germanic tribes at bay . Emperor's death in 4th century AD .
 Romans and Germanic people united to defeat Attila the Hun at the Battle of Chalons in 451 . The Visigoths had been Roman allies while also having a Gallic kingdom, but were then pushed south into Spain by Franks .
 Romans tolerated, or were forced, the settlement of barbarian groups on their lands . Romans tolerated or accepted, the settlements of barbarians on their land .
 Where barbarians took over former Roman territories, they sometimes sought to supplant the old Roman aristocracy . But in other places, they coexisted peacefully with them . The Vandals in North Africa, the Vandals and the Vulcans were peaceful .
 There was much cultural cross-fertilization between the Romans and barbarians . The Romans, barbarians, were Romans and Romans at the time of Roman rule .
 Another factor in the gradual fading of Roman power was the spread of plague and disease from the east . Plague and disease was spread by the east from the Roman empire .
 This led to severe shortages in the army and fewer people in general to support society . The army was forced to rely heavily on the strength of the army . This has led to a shortage of people in society, leading to shortages .
 Various bouts of plague had spread through the empire in the 3rd century . The empire was ravaged by the plague in 3rd Century .
 Other factors include a general decline in population, inflation, civil war, and imperial overcultivation leading to loss of good agricultural land . Roman corruption, imperial over-ultivation and imperial overindulgence led to the decline of good land .
 These have variously been seen as reducing prosperity and resources, hastening the fading of the great urban centers of ‘classical” civilization and learning .
 The rise of Christianity also played a major role in the new order in Europe .
 Germanic peoples was at odds with the more orthodox Christianity traditionally held by Roman peoples . Germanic people were at odds . Roman peoples traditionally held orthodox Christianity .
 The Roman Empire lived on in the east for 1,000 years as the Byzantine Empire . New forces shaped the Western world shaped the Roman Empire in the way it did .
 Distinctive communities that combined Germanic traditions, Latin Christianity, and aspects of Roman culture began to emerge in the post-Roman west, such as in Anglo-Saxon England .
 Warrior tribes founded great empires in China and the Middle East . In Europe, the feudal system took hold, dominated by the might of the Christian church . The feudal system in Europe took hold .
 Byzantine army defeats Umayyads at Akroinon and expels Umayysads from Asia Minor . Byzantine army defeated Umayyaads at Akroininon . Byzantine forces then expelled them from the region .
 Few would have predicted that the states chaotically established across the U.S. would be a powerhouse .
 Other societies—in the Americas, India, and prove anything other than destabilizing. Other societies, such as India, can be destabilized. The U.S. should not be destabilizing, says President Obama .
 Christian Europe would clearly marginalized, an obvious backwater. Yet it was Christian Europe that would clearly marginal itself . Christian Europe was clearly marginalized .
 The process was never certain, but the results Tang and later dynasties, was superior in every sense, a technological were decisive . The result of the Tang dynasty was superior, but it was not certain .
 Magyars destroy Moravia (eastern Czech Republic) and begin to raid western Furope . Magyar raiders destroyed Moravia and began to raid eastern Czech Republic in 1881 .
 Baghdad lose effective fy’s 1044 power to their Turkish troops, the Mamluks . Baghdad loses effective power to its Mamluk forces .
 Battle of Hastings led to Norman conquest of England in 1066 . 1066 battle of Hastings saw Norman invasion of England . Battle was the first of its kind in England .
 Incas under Manco Capac settle in Andes near Cuzco; Aztecs enter Valley of Mexico . Incas believed to have been at the center of the world's largest Incas, Incas .
 Dominican and Franciscan monastic orders founded in China . Order founded by St. Francis of Assisi . Order of Dominican and . Franciscans founded .
 The title Khan means in our language ‘Great Lord of Lords’ Khan . Khan means ‘In our language Khan means 'Great Lord Of Lords.’
 I 1261 Byzantines retake Constantinople from Crusaders. 1261 . 1261 Byzantine Empire . Marco Polo .
 Chinese settlement of Singapore began in 1349 . Chinese settlement was start of Chinese settlement in Southeast Asia . ES Ottoman helmet 1349.
 Prince Henry of Portugal y 1375 Catalan Atlas, the first atlas of known trade routes, was produced . The atlas was produced by the Prince of Portugal of the 13th century .
 Portuguese explorer passes Cape Bojador, to begin period of exploration of West African coast . Portuguese under Prince Henry the Navigator capture 1436 Portuguese explorer pass Cape BoJador .
 The 11th-century Persian scholar Avicenna was a hugely influential figure both in the Middle East and in Europe . His work The Canon of Medicine continued to be used as a standard medical text until the 16th century .
 As the study of the Bible came to dominate intellectual activity in the West, knowledge of classical Greek learning declined . The study of ancient Greek learning has also declined in recent years .
 At Aristotle's Lyceum and Plato's Academy, students listened to their lecturers discuss philosophy and science . Students listened to lectures at the Lyceums and the Academy .
 The dassical approach continued into the early medieval period . By now knowledge of the Greek language had largely died out in the West .
 Some fragments of classical knowledge were preserved in texts such as the 6th century philosopher Boethius’ Consolation of Philosophy .
 Knowledge of classical Greek and Roman culture declined in Western Europe in the early medieval period, but survived in the East . The East was a major source of knowledge in the Middle Ages .
 Before Charlemagne, society lacked many of the basic educational skills . Most priests were barely literate and the royal court had difficulty finding educated men to act as scribes and copy out manuscripts .
 Charlemagne created schools and assembled the greatest scholars of the age at his court . To fix these problems he created schools, he assembled the best scholars at court .
 A Northumbrian scholar, Alcuin of York, was recruited as head of the palace school .
 Latin once again became the formal language of communication across Europe . Latin was once again used as a formal medium of communication . Latin became the most spoken language in Europe .
 Charlemagne's reforms were primarily concerned with creating an educated clergy capable of reforming the Frankish church . The Arab inheritance was primarily concerned about creating a better clergy .
 Works of classical Greek science and philosophy remained essentially unavailable in the Christian Europe . Works of Classical Greek science, philosophy remained virtually unavailable in Christian Europe in Europe .
 Averroes was an expert in Islamic law and Astrolabe manual . Muslim scholars are shown using the astrolabe, an instrument for locating and predicting the position of the Sun, Moon, and stars .
 The astrolabe was introduced into Christian Europe via Muslim Spain in the 11th century . It was introduced to Christian Europe by Muslim Spain, but the situation was very different .
 Arab societies inhabiting these regions had inherited many aspects of classical Greek culture . The Arab societies had inherited some aspects of Greek culture, such as those of Greece .
 To Islamic scholars, Aristotle was ""the Philosopher"" and his works were standard texts . Aristotle was considered a philosopher by Islamic scholars . His works are considered standard texts in Islam .
 In 1153, he was invited to the court — of the Almohad caliphs in Morocco, where he worked as a judge and physician . He wrote — important works on medicine, philosophy, — and law and law .
 The Persian scholar Avicenna produced a huge range of material covering almost every area of knowledge, from metaphysics to medicine . His work includes metaphysics, metaphysics and medicine .
 Averroes composed a series of commentaries on Aristotle that for centuries formed the key source for Aristotle’s philosophy in the West . The commentaries were written by a renowned philosopher, scientist, and lawyer .
 The diffusion of knowledge from East to West accelerated during the 12th century . The 12th-century renaissance took place in the West during the Middle Ages .
 In Spain, the Christian reconquest of lands previously held by Muslim rulers encouraged the spread of Islamic learning . The Spanish reconquest in Spain encouraged Islamic learning in the region .
 In the 13th century, the Spanish king Alfonso X established a program of translation of Greek and Arab texts in Toledo . Toledo was previously capital of the Muslim caliphate of Cordoba . The Spanish king set up the program in Toledo, previously known as Toledo .
 Other important hubs for the exchange of ideas included the Christian crusader kingdoms in the Middle East and the Greek empire of Byzantine Empire .
 Latin translations of the most important classical texts were available to European scholars . By the 13th century, Latin translations had been available to scholars in Europe . Latin translations were available in Latin for the first time .
 The rediscovery of ancient philosophical works combined with the development of Christian theology led to the scholastic movement of the later Medieval period . Scholasticism was a movement of philosophy and theology .
 Scholasticism was not a philosophy in itself, but rather a tool for learning that placed emphasis on logic and reasoning . Scholasticsism is not philosophy but a tool to learn that places emphasis on reasoning and logic .
 The works of Plato are the works of the philosopher and poet . They include works from Plato's writings on philosophy .
 Public speaking was an important art in classical Greece, where public speaking was central to political life . Public speaking is an important part of the art of public speaking in classical Greek life .
 Medieval universities evolved from earlier cathedral schools and monasteries . They were created to study theology, law, medicine, and the arts . Medieval universities were created by medieval cathedral schools .
 Most universities did not have a central campus . Classes were taught at masters’ homes or in churches .
 In a university such as Bologna in northern Italy, where law was the most popular subject, students hired and paid the lecturers . The growth of universities and scholastic movement led to the humanist and intellectual movements of the Renaissance .
 Renaissance humanism emphasized human reason and dignity rather than the Christian humility and obedience to authority that had been the focus of the medieval Church . The key intellectual intellectual component of the Renaissance was the key intellectual PICO DELLA MIRANDOLA movement .
 Renaissance humanists were schooled in Greek and Latin from an early age and often learned Hebrew and Arabic as well . They studied the poetry, grammar, rhetoric, rhetoric and ethics of the classical authors in their original languages . Renaissance humanist writers studied poetry and grammar in the original languages of
 An Old English translation was added in the 10th century . It is the oldest surviving version of the Gospels in English. themselves .
 In Paris, the main subject was theology, the Church controlled the payment of staff . The Church controlled staff salaries in Paris, where theology was taught .
 It took six years to earn a bachelor of arts degree, and a further 12 years for a master and doctorate . It took a further twelve years to complete a doctorate and a master degree .
 By the 14th century, universities had become central to intellectual life . Universities had become a central part of intellectual life in medieval Europe .
 In this way, the universities signaled a move away from an intellectual world dominated by the Church . The universities are moving away from the intellectual world entirely dominated by Church .
 Before paper became common, scribes used parchment or vellum for their work .
 Vellum was created by scraping down calf or sheep skins and smoothing the surface with a pumice stone or chalk . The material was created using calf and sheep skins .
 Buddhism spread quickly, despite attempts to suppress the religion by Confucian officials . During the period of division that followed the fall of the Han dynasty, Buddhism spread rapidly .
 Buddhism was at the height of its influence in China during the Tang dynasty . However, it was not until the Tang Dynasty that it was at its height of influence .
 The first Sui emperor, Wendi, built Chang'an sui pynasry , a new capital FIGURINE city, and enforced a clear legal code . Wendi was the first emperor of the Sui dynasty, and his rule of law was strict .
 His son Yangdi carried out a costly program of canal building and launched ill-fated attacks on Korea . His son, Yangdi, launched an attack on Korea and launched a canal project . Yangdi's son was also involved in a costly canal building project .
 Sui emperor Yangdi commissioned a Grand Canal to run from Hangzhou to Beijing . The Sui Emperor Yangdi ordered the canal to be built in China's capital .
 The total length of the canal was 1,490 miles , and it remains the longest canal in the world . It remains the world's longest canal, with the length of 1,500 miles .
 The reign of the Tang dynasty in China is widely regarded as a golden age of Chinese imperial power and culture . Although judged to be a shrewd and ruthless ruler, she gave extravagant gifts .
 He took the capital Chang'an the following year, though it would be a further six years before the whole of China fell under his control . He would take over the entire of China six years later .
 Li Yuan inaugurated a new dynasty, which ruled over China tor the next three centuries . Under the title or Emperor Gaozu, Li Yuan took over China . Li Yuan was the first Chinese emperor to rule China .
 Emperor Taizong was an intelligent and hard-working ruler . His own reign became synonymous with a period of prosperity . Gaozu's reign was synonymous with prosperity .
 Taizong improved the system of government that his father had established, and reformed the administrative system . He was the first Chinese leader to take over from his father's government .
 Government examinations were designed to ensure that the most talented individuals were placed in the highest official positions . State schools and colleges were set up, and government examinations were . Designed to ensure the most talent individuals were . placed in . the highest . positions .
 Taizong had the advantage of China's Golden Age monk, perhaps curious to hear Xuan Zang's impressions of foreign countries .
 Buddhism continued to have a great influence on Chinese society until its suppression in the late Tang period . Buddhism was a major influence in China until the suppression of Buddhism in the Tang era .
 Tang dynasty saw a remarkable period of Chinese expansion . The Tang dynasty was one of the most successful periods of Chinese rule .
 Taizong also launched expeditions against the kingdom of Koguryo in north Korea, though he died before he had established Chinese control over the area . He died before establishing Chinese control of the region .
 Tang China claimed more land than the previous Han dynasty . Its borders reached even farther west, south, and east than those of modern China . At its greatest extent, in around the year 750CcE, Tang China had more land .
 The peak of the Tang dynasty saw the flowering of Chinese art, architecture, and poetry . The Tang dynasty was one of the most successful periods of Chinese history .
 Silk Road caravans brought exotic goods from distant lands . Chinese culture became the most cosmopolitan in the world . support to Buddhism and other foreign religions, and engaged costly frontier campaigns .
 Career officials had no power base of their own with which to threaten the Tang dynasty . Unlike those drawn from China’s rival aristocratic families, career officials lacked a power base with which they could threaten .
 Large granaries were constructed to stockpile rice . Military campaigns were fought against the Turkish, Tibetan, and Khitan peoples . New network of frontier defenses was introduced, with permanent forces of professional soldiers .
 All of these measures led to a rich, powerful, and cosmopolitan state; China had reached a golden age . China had become a rich and powerful, powerful state; .
 Thousands of merchants, artisans, and diplomats from distant lands took up residence in the capital, Chang'an, which became Buddhist faith the world’s largest city .
 Covering more than 30 square miles , more than one million people lived inside its walls, and another million beyond them . More than 1 million people live inside the walls .
 Chang’an was the terminus of the Silk Road, and traders from across Asia came to its markets . Linked by a network of roads and canals to the rest of the empire .
 Daoist temples, Buddhist monasteries, Zoroastrian shrines, and Islamic mosques were built in the city walls . Foreign cultures were welcomed .
 Xuanzong was a great patron of the arts during his reign . During his reign Chinese painting and literature reached new i e Three-glaze figurine figurine .
 Li Bai and Du Fu, known respectively as the Poet Immortal and the Sage Poet, are the two most famous poets in China .
 Li Bai cultivated a reputation for eccentricity; many of his poems celebrate the joys of wine and women . Li Bai's poems include a collection of works of poetry .
 The poems of Du Fu, by contrast, dealt with more serious moral and historical issues . À M dealt with serious moral issues . Du Fu's poems were published in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Landscape painting evolved under the poet artist Wang Wei, who painted evocative winter scenes . A and Wu Daozi developed a Chinese style of Buddhist sculpture .
 Han Gan was best known for his depictions of horses, a subject that continued to inspire artists in later periods . The court painter was a court painter of the late 1800s .
 In the 730s CE Xuanzong's control over his government began to slip . The decline of the Tang began to be the beginning of its decline .
 The emperor, who was 72 years old by this time, had ceased to play an active role in government . The emperor was 72 when he died, but had stopped playing a role in the government .
 He had become infatuated with Yang Guifei, who was his son's concubine and a famous beauty . Yang was the son of his son, who had a daughter with his wife . He was obsessed with Yang .
 After Xuanzong made her imperial consort, she persuaded him to promote her cousin Yang Guozhang to a senior position at court . When Li Linfu died, Yang took his place in the place of her cousin .
 Among the professional soldiers who had been given commands along the frontier was an officer named An Lushan . The officer was given command over the frontier in China .
 The Diamond Sutra is the oldest surviving example of a printed book . It was found in a walled-up chapel at Dunhuang on the Silk Road .
 Seven strips of yellow-stained paper printed from carved wooden blocks are pasted together to form a scroll over 13 ft long . The scroll is made from yellow-stressed paper printed with carved wood blocks .
 As ambitious officials jostled for power, the Tang dynasty was severely weakened . The Tang dynasty died out of control in the early 1900s .
 After the fall of Xuanzong, successive emperors tried to revive China's fortunes, but to no avail . The late Tang emperors were the last emperor to hold on to the throne .
 Powerful families evaded tax and the burden fell increasingly on those who were less able to pay . Powerful families evade tax and tax burden fell on those less able-to-pay .
 Huang Chao, the rebel 9 | leader, captured Chang’an and forced Emperor Xixong to flee . Huang Chao was the rebel leader of the 9th century . He captured Chang'an and made it into the city of Shangrihen .
 The emperor returned once the rebellion had been quashed, but his authority had collapsed . He returned once his authority was restored, but he had to leave .
 Confucian scholars led a growing campaign of criticism of Buddhism in the early 9th century . The increasing wealth and influence of Buddhism led to a growing criticism of the religion by Confucians .
 His military escort demanded the execution of Yang Guifei, blaming her for the emperor's misfortunes, and Xuanzong had no option but to accept . The emperor was forced to accept the execution .
 An Lushan was eventually defeated and the rebellion brought to an end . The Tang dynasty never recovered its former strength and glory .
 Its achievements in the arts and sciences outstripped developments in Europe at the time . Its extraordinary achievements outstriked developments in European developments at the times .
 Aggressive aggression from Jurchen people to the north led to the surrender of northern China . However, aggression from the Jurchen eventually led to surrender .
 The dynasty continued to rule in the south as the Southern Song, but was finally ousted by the Mongols in 1279 . The Mongols ruled in the southern part of China until 1279, when they were ousted .
 The Qidan Liao controlled the northeast of China, while the south fragmented into the Ten Kingdoms . Between the Tang and the Song dynasties, China was divided between China and the Ten Dynasties .
 Some of the magnificence of the Tang era returned to Chinese culture during the Song dynasty . The Song dynasty came to prominence in China during the Tang dynasty .
 Artists experimented with brush effects, and landscape, animal, and bird paintings were particularly prized . Landscapes, animals, and birds were also prized .
 Song dynasty architecture was also renowned, particularly for its tall structures and pagodas, palaces, and temple roofs . The Song dynasty is also renowned for its high-rise buildings and tall structures .
 The administrative and technological advances made by the early Song led to economic prosperity . The early Song era led to the country's prosperity .
 Sichuan merchants began to trade in bills of exchange . Instead of carrying around large sums of copper coinage, merchants began trading in bills .
 These notes proved so successful that the government issued its first paper currency in 1024 . These notes were so successful they were issued in 1024. The government issued the first paper notes in 1024 after success .
 The country's infrastructure was also greatly improved during the Song period . The country also improved its infrastructure during the period .
 The construction of an integrated system of internal waterways extended both the communications and trade networks . The construction was completed in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Large junks with four or six masts were developed, and the magnetic compass was first used for navigation, and seafaring skills were improved .
 This led to an increase in maritime trade with the rest of East Asia, as well as with India and the east coast of Africa .
 The innovations of the Song period affected China's population and urban growth . The innovations were the key to China's growth in urban areas .
 New methods of rice farming increased food output and allowed the population to double . The population of the country doubled in the early 1900s .
 Kaifeng became the greatest city in the world; in the 12th century its levels of trade were nearly 50 percent more than those of London at the turn of the 18th century . The city became the most powerful city in China .
 Under the Song, the examination system established by the Han dynasty was revived and expanded . Examinations and officials under the Song were expanded .
 Quotas were set for the number of candidates who could pass . Steps were taken to guard against cheating and to ensure the anonymity of candidates . Steps also taken to protect against cheating .
 In 1002, 14,500 men came to Kaifeng to take imperial 1 P examinations . 14,000 men were taken in Kaifang to take the imperial examinations .
 The system attempted to ensure that talent, not birth or wealth, enabled a candidate to pass . The system was designed to ensure a candidate could pass, not born or wealth .
 More than 60 percent of successful candidates for the jinshi degree came from families that had not gained an appointment for an official in the bureaucracy for three generations .
 Poor families were still unlikely to foster a successful candidate, according to the study . Applicants needed to be wealthy or literate to enable them to prepare for examinations .
 From early in the Song period, scholars and officials were constantly proposing ideas for reforms to rectify problems of the day .
 Emperor Shenzong entrusted Wang Anshi, China's most famous reformer, with tackling the nation's problems, with the Emperor in 1068 . In 1068, Wang was entrusted with tackling China's problems . Wang's reformer was the first Chinese reformer to tackle China's
 A 9th-century Daoist text warned mixing charcoal, saltpeter, and sulfur had caused explosions and burned down buildings . He raised money by imposing a government monopoly on tea and challenging wealthy families evading taxes .
 Every household was required to supply men for a local militia . To reduce the cost of the standing army, he required every household to supply a militia .
 Wang Anshi's reforms caused an outcry and he was dismissed . The controversy that his acts had aroused permanently weakened the dynasty . The reforms caused a permanent weakening of the dynasty, and Wang was sacked .
 The dynasty also had to deal with the challenge of non-Chinese regimes to the north . The Southern Song was one of China's most successful dynases .
 Jurchen, a seminomadic people from Manchuria, established the Jin dynasty in 1115 . Jurchen people established the Jurchen dynasty in the early 1100s .
 In 1125 they overran the Qidan Liao, and two years later they captured Kaifeng . The Chinese were able to capture Kaifen in 1125, 1125 and 1125 .
 The Song court was forced to flee south, bringing an end to the retrospectively named Northern Song . Northern Song was also known as Northern Song, but it was later known as Southern Song .
 Although militarily weak, the Southern Song was also a period of continuing economic growth and social change . The Southern Song also saw continued social and political change .
 NeoConfucianists borrowed concepts from Daoism and Buddhism, and their ideas were synthesized by the scholar Zhu Xi . Zhu Xi synthesized ideas from Zhu Xi, a scholar of Zhu Xi.
 Neo-Confucian values were partly responsible for a deterioration in the rights of women during the Southern Song period . Neo-confucian beliefs were responsible for the deterioration of women's rights in China .
 Remarriage of widows was discouraged, and women's property rights were curtailed . The remarriage was discouraged and women were not allowed to own property rights .
 Footbinding is the practice of permanently disfiguring a young girl's feet to produce a supposedly attractive shape in later life . Footbinding became well established during the Song period .
 The Song period is often regarded as the high point of ceramic production in China .
 Chinese porcelain was first manufactured in the 7th century, a thousand years before the secret of its production was discovered .
 True porcelain is made from kaolin, or China clay, the name deriving from Gaoling in Jingdezhen . The name derives from the name of Gaoling, in China .
 Song porcelain was the most refined ever produced, and was characterized by the simple elegance of its shape, and its purity of color . Song porcellain was characterized as the most elegant and pure colorless ever produced .
 The most famous Northern Song wares were created near Dingzhou in northeast China . They were created during the Northern Song era .
 After the fall of the Northern Song, manufacture was transferred to Hangzhou . Production was made in Hangzhou, China, after the fall .
 In the south, Jingdezhen in Jiangxi was designated a center for the manufacture of imperial porcelain in 1004 . In 1004, the city was designated as a manufacturing center for imperial porcellain .
 Mongols destroyed Jurchen Jin dynasty in 1224, gaining control of north China . Mongols took over Jurchen from the Jurchen dynasty of the Jin dynasty .
 The first European to record his journey was the Franciscan monk John of Plano Carpini, who reached Mongolia in 1246 . He was the first European who recorded his journey .
 E Genghis Khan took the title in 1206 to proclaim his leadership of the Mongol tribes . The future warlord and conqueror was known simply as Temujin . He became known as Genghi Khan in 1298 .
 Temüjin was born around 1162 to a minor chieftain in the mountains of eastern Mongolia . Little in his early life to indicate he would one day be ruler of the world's largest unbroken empire .
 When he was just five years old, his father was murdered and his family disinherited by their clan . His father was just 5 years old when he was disinhered by his family . His family is disowned by his clan .
 Temujin was forced to eke out a precarious nomadic existence with his siblings and their indomitable mother, Hoelun . For much of his childhood, he was forced out of his parents' care with their children .
 These early years must have done much to forge the great warrior and leader that Temüjin was to become . The early years of his life must have helped forge him into a great leader .
 As the eldest male, Temüjin was the head of his family and quickly learned to make useful alliances . He learned to use his position to make alliances with his family .
 Temüjin claimed a wife, Bórte, from a neighboring tribe . He claimed her after retrieving some stolen horses from a nearby tribe .
 Toghrul Tar A LP 1 uF i"" d'a ta "" Khan nw li mS N rw I/ jini ia wt / jini . Khan is said to have used her dowry of precious sable furs to win the favor
 Genghis Khan receives the homage of his vassals in this 14th-century Persian miniature . This Is how a 20-century French artist depicted him .
 White horse tails flying from his tent signify peace and diplomacy . The white horse tails fly from his tents signify peace .
 Chinese painting depicts the Mongol cavalry in action on a mountain pass .
 Genghis Khan's highly disciplined army comprised battalions, or tumens, of 10,000 warriors . The army was divided into 1,000-man regiments and battalions .
 AT (also known as Ong Khan or ‘Prince King’), is an old ally of his father’s and leader of the Turkish-speaking Kerait people . AT is also an ally of Ong Khan's father's, an old allies of his own .
 When Borte was kidnapped, Temüjin called on Toghrul for help in rescuing her . Temüjjin called for help from Toghranul to rescue her from the sea .
 Borte had a baby, Jochi, who was acknowledged as Temüjin's son and heir . Jochi was born in captivity, despite the possibility that he had been conceived while in captivity . Soon afterward, Borto had a child, who he claimed to be Tem
 Temüjin began to earn his military reputation . He reclaimed his family's status and secured Toghrul's patronage .
 He harassed the Chinese empire north and west of the Great Wall . Together with Toghrul, he harassed the China empire north of the Wall .
 Sometimes he joined forces against other nomadic tribes, notably the neighboring Tatars, at the behest of the northern Chinese Jin dynasty . Sometimes the tribesmen joined forces with the Jin dynasty, sometimes against the Tatars .
 Another crucial ally was his ""sworn brother"" Jamuka, of the Tangut tribe based in Xi Xia in northeast China . Jamuka was also a crucial ally in his reign .
 Ornate quiver was designed to hold the arrows that mounted Mongol horsemen were capable of aiming and firing at a full gallop .
 Temüjin made himself lord of all the Mongol tribes . Mongol boys received intensive training in both horsemanship and archery .
 Genghis Khan led the Mongol confederation in a string of victories and in campaigns that ravaged large areas of Asia and subjugated many millions of people . For more than three decades he led the Mongols to Asia .
 Marco Polo was the name used by the Venetian traveler Marco Polo to describe northern China when he journeyed through the empire in the reign of Kublai Khan, Genghis Khan's grandson . Chataio was used to describe the region in which he traveled .
 In 1227, Genghis Khan fell from his horse, became feverish, and died . Khan died while on campaign in Xi Xia, China, in 1227 .
 The vast empire he left to his sons stretched from Iran and Kazakhstan in the west to the Sea of Japan . It stretched across central Asia and northern China to the sea of Japan to the east .
 Genghis Khan frequently resorted to psychological warfare, using spies, propaganda, and terror as much as military force . Khan used spies and propaganda to conquer his vast empire . Khan died in 17th century at the hands of the Mongols .
 Genghis Khan introduced a humane law code, the Yassa, across his empire . It outlawed the custom of kidnapping women and outlawed kidnapping women .
 Genghis Khan was grandfather of another Mongolian emperor, Kublai Khan . He was the founder of the first Mongolian YUAN DYNASTY in China . Genghi Khan was also grandfather of Genghas Khan's grandson Kublas Khan .
 While on his deathbed, the old warrior laid a hand on the young Kublai's head, a gesture interpreted as a sign of future greatness . The gesture was interpreted as an indication that future greatness would be possible .
 Kublai Khan added southern China to his dominion . Khan inherited Mongolia and northern China, but added southern part of China . Khan added Mongolia to his domain .
 He is celebrated as a unifier of China and the founder of the Yuan imperial dynasty . He is also celebrated as unifier and founder of China's Yuan dynasty .
 Marco Polo entertained the Venetians and gave them passports for their journey . He is also known as the 'Great Khan' of Marco Polo's travels .
 Temüjin, his siblings, and his mother have to hunt, fish, and gather wild berries for their survival . This means they have to go hunting, fish and gathering wild berries to survive . Temüjin, his mother and siblings have to eat wild berries and fish for
 Temüjin rescues her with the help of his patron Toghrul and ally Jamuka . She is rescued by Temüjjin and his ally Toghul .
 Temüjin acknowledges him as his son, but his paternity is questioned by other members of his family . Temüjjin acknowledges his son as his child, but questions his paternity are questioned by others .
 The Silk Road cities of Samarkand, Bukhara, and Nishapur are utterly devastated . The cities are devastated by the collapse of the Silk Road .
 His supporters slaughter every living creature that crosses the path of the funeral procession . In keeping with his request for a secret burial place, his supporters slaughter all living creatures .
 Each of Genghis Khan's surviving sons inherits his own khanate, which they rule under his third son, Ogedei, the new Great Khan . Each of his surviving sons inherit the khanates, which are ruled by his descendants .
 The earliest Chinese plays, which were sung, spoken, acted, and mimed, were written by Chinese scholars in the Yuan period . The earliest plays were written, sung, acted and acted by scholars .
 Allegedly, the plays contained protests against the Mongol presence in China . The popular response to them contributed to the collapse of the Yuan dynasty .
 According to Mongol law, the indigenous people of China, the Han Chinese were the lowest class within Chinese society . The Han Chinese are the highest class in Chinese society, according to Mongol Law .
 In the 1340s, a disastrous flood of the Yellow River and the conscripton of thousands of Han peasants for forced labour led to widespread rebellion . The Yuan dynasty was overthrown in 1368 .
 During their rule a new capital city was created at Beijing, and the Forbidden City was built within its walls . The Forbidden City is built within the walls .
 China under the Ming enjoyed relative stability and saw the development of a sophisticated bureaucracy . The Ming period also saw China construct a defensive barrier against the outside world—the Great Wall .
 Imperial power under the Ming grew unchecked . In contrast to some Western nations of the time, where royal authority was challenged, imperial power grew unchecked in China .
 Hongwu, the first Ming emperor, began life as a poor peasant . Hongwu was born in a peasant .
 During ft N, reign he reorganized the vj ^ army and attempted to m reform the land and v SRL tax system . During his ft N's reign he tried to reorganize the army and tried to reform land and the land system .
 The distinctive cobalt blue glaze of Chinese porcelain, developed by the Yuan, was perfected under the Ming post of chief minister . In Fer"" 1380,Hongwu Typical Ming vase was created in China .
 This was supported by a surveillance system operated by spies, secret agents, and the “Brocade Guards,"" who carried out major purges of corrupt officials . The ‘Brocad Guards"" carried out a major purging of officials .
 Yongle Hongwu's son usurped the throne in 1403 and reigned as Emperor Yongle . Yongle's son took over the throne from Yongle and ruled the country . Urban growth under Yongle was a major problem in China .
 Beijing began building a magnificent walled palace complex there, the Forbidden City . Nobody was allowed to enter without permission . He transferred the capital to Beijing, and began building the palace .
 Beijing became the main bureaucratic and military center, but other cities and towns also grew apace . Beijing is now the main city center of the world .
 Suzhou and Nanjing became famous for their sophisticated social life and lavish festivals . Nanjing and Suzhou became famous in China for their social life . Suzhou is famous for its sophisticated social activities .
 Jingdezhen turned out blueand-white porcelain and Hangzhou produced silk . Hangzhou also produced silk and blueand white porcelains .
 Many of these cities were connected by the Grand Canal . Linging, one of the main ports on the canal, handled 1. million shiploads of freight annually . The Grand Canal was used by many of the world's largest ports .
 The spread of printing and the demands of a more literate public led to a publishing boom . Publishing boom led to publishing boom in the 1930s .
 Classic novels such as The Romance of the Three Kingdoms, Water Margin and Journey to the West (otherwise known as Monkey) came out for the first time in print . Books with colored woodblock illustrations were published .
 After Yongle's death, the Ming dynasty was threatened by a new group of ethnic outsiders . The Mongol-speaking Oirat peoples began a massive invasion into Chinese territory in 1449 .
 Emperor Zhengtong rashly counterattacked, but his forces were ambushed at Tumu and he himself was taken hostage . Emperor was captured by his forces and taken hostage by his own forces .
 In 1474, construction began on the brickwork Great Wall that we know today . The The Great Wall was built in 1474 .
 The wall stretched from Jiayu Pass in the west to the Yalu River in the east . More than 1,500 miles long, the wall was built in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Zhengtong was eventually released . Oirat failed to take this opportunity to capture Beijing, and was eventually freed . Zhengs was captured by the Chinese army .
 The Tumu incident heralded the end of the expansionist policies of the Ming dynasty . From that point on, frontier strategy became much more defensive . The Ming dynasty's frontier strategy in China became defensive .
 In 1406, Yongle transferred his capital from Nanjing to Beijing . The Forbidden City was built to contain the Forbidden City . Yongle moved his capital to Beijing in 1406 .
 Ming rule saw the creation of a vast imperial navy . Chinese explorer ZHENG He was the first Chinese explorer to explore the region .
 Zheng He commanded seven ambitious maritime expeditions between 1405 and 1433 . The Muslim eunuch commanded seven expeditions . Zheng He was born in 1405 in China .
 On subsequent voyages, he reached Hormuz on the Gulf of Oman, and ships from his fleet put in at Jidda in Saudi Arabia .
 Zheng He's voyages took him to 37 countries, and resulted in increased trade for China . His voyages also resulted in the capture of pirates that had plagued Chinese waters .
 An account of Zheng He's voyages was written by the Muslim scholar Ma Yuan . Zheng He was the first Chinese explorer to sail to China .
 Brick and stone were laid over the earthen walls first constructed by the Qin dynasty (see BEFORE) to create the Great Wall . The Great Wall was laid over by Qin dynasty in China .
 Portuguese merchants first reached China in 1514 . In the 1550s they established a trading station at Macao on the southeast coast . Trade with the West begins .
 In 1604, two Portuguese ships carrying 200,000 pieces of Chinese blue-and-white porcelain were captured by the Dutch .
 The contents of the contents were put up for sale in Europe and the auction set off a craze for Chinese porcelain . The contents were sold in China and the sale set off an international craze .
 The decline of Ming power and authority was a protracted affair . Afterward, the decline of power was a long-running affair .
 By the late 16th century, the Ming dynasty was in decline . The Ming dynasty is in decline.
 Weak emperors were dominated by their advisors, who increasingly influenced political decisions . Weak emperor was dominated by his advisors, and his advisors increasingly influenced their decisions .
 Economic problems prompted peasant rebellions, and in 1644 rebel forces under Li Zicheng took Beijing . In 1644, Li took Beijing from Beijing .
 By 8,000 act they were producing distinctive jomon pottery . It is possibly the first pottery made anywhere in the world .
 Around 3008ce, the arrival of rice from East Asia revolutionized Japan's society .
 Rice cultivation required a peasant workforce living in settled communities . Rice cultivation requires a peasant population to live in settled areas . Rice production required a large workforce of peasants living in settlements .
 Large landowners became regional rulers who fought for access to water and fertile land . Large landowners fought to get access to fertile land and water .
 Japan's line of sacred emperors is historically attested after the 3rd century ce. ce. The line is believed to date back to 3rd and 4th century .
 During the Heian Period, power devolved from the emperor to the Fujiwara clan, which controlled the imperial court and dominated Japan until the rise of the samurai . During the . Heian . Period , power . devolved . from the . imperial court to the . Fujiw
 Japan was a country with an elaborate, subtle, artistic culture that was developed at the imperial court in Kyoto . Bushido sought to unite learning and military prowess, and emphasized frugality and loyalty .
 Among the . most powerful of them were two long-established families of high standing, the Minamoto and Taira . Among the most powerful families of . high standing were two . established families of long-standing . standing in Japan .
 Their ancestors were imperial princes who, in the 9th century, were dispatched from Kyoto to uphold the emperor's authority in distant provinces . Their ancestors had been imperial princes, dispatched to uphold imperial authority .
 The two families became leaders of powerful warrior clans . There, fighting men flocked to serve them, and the two families were leaders .
 The Minamoto and Taira returned to compete for supreme power in Kyoto in the 12th century . From their provincial bases, they fought for supremacy in the capital Kyoto .
 As the dominant family at the imperial court, the Taira at first had the upper hand . The Gempeii Wars were the first two years of the Roman Empire .
 Between 1180 and 1185 a series of fierce conflicts, known as the Gempei Wars, ended with the Minamoto family triumphant . The Minamoto were victorious in 1180-1185 .
 Warfare between samurai and samurai followed brutal but elaborate rules . It was customary to cut off the head of a warrior you killed in battle and return it to his family stuck on a spiked board . The samurai lived in Kamakura, far east of Kyoto .
 The rale of the shoguns, which was to continue until the mid-19th century, established the samurai as the dominant military and social elite .
 The samurai evolved into a striking mixture of the savage and refined samurai . Originally rough fighting men at odds with the elfete culture of the court, the samurai evolved from rough fighting to refined fighting men . The samurai is a striking mix of the brutal and refined Japanese culture .
 The ideal warrior was as capable of dashing off a poem as he was of slicing off an enemy’s head with his two-handed sword . Ideal warrior was capable of writing a poem and slicing off enemy's head with a sword .
 The dominant social position of men who were devoted to war as a way of life inevitably spawned violence in a country that had no external enemies . In theory he subscribed to an 'Fighting men' In theory, this was a society of men dedicated to war .
 In 1274 and again in 1281, China’s Mongol ruler, Kublai Khan attempted to invade Japan by sea from Korea from Korea . The attempt was made in 1274, 1281 and 1281 .
 The samurai united to repel these invasions, of the Samurai Fujiwara fan . Decorating fans was a typical activity of the refined court ladies .
 The samurai, an elite class of armored warriors, dominated Japan from the 12th century . The samurai was a samurai, a class of elite warriors who dominated Japan .
 Their fighting prowess and tradition of loyal service to the death—enshrined in the chivalric code of bushido—are the stuff of legend . The samurai are renowned for their fighting prowess, loyalty, and their service to death .
 Murasaki Shikibu's long novel The Tale of Genji was based on the author's experiences as lady-in-waiting at the imperial court in the early 11th century . Murasaki was a lady in waiting at the Imperial court in Japan .
 It paints a vivid picture of Kyoto courtiers devoted to amorous intrigues and the delicate expression of emotions in verse . The book was published in Kyoto in Japan in 17th century .
 The second attempt by the Mongols to invade Japan met with disaster . The Mongols were defeated by the fall of the Second World War .
 The buffalo horns decorating the helmet are made of carved, gilded wood . It is the first time the helmet has been decorated with buffalo horns .
 Minamoto Yoritomo was involved in the feud between the Minamoto and Taira clans from an early age . He was the son of the first Shogun Shoku .
 In 1160 his father, Minamoto Yoshitomo, was executed by the Taira . He was exiled from the capital, Kyoto, and exiled from Kyoto .
 Although defeated in his first battle at Ishibashiyama in 1180, he went on to triumph both over the Taira and rivals within his own clan . Although defeated, he was defeated in the first battle .
 He became shogun in 1192, marking the beginning of Japan's long feudal age . He was shogun of Japan from 1192 to 1192 .
 The helmet, or kabuto, has a leathercovered sweepback to protect the neck . The helmet is a leather-clad helmet with a sweepback .
 The throat defense Is attached to the mask, or mempo, that covers the lower face . although they were helped by bad weather. although they are helped by . bad weather . Although they were . helped by the . weather, the throat defense is attached to . the mask or mem
 The shoulder guard, or sode, is suspended above the arm defense . For the rest of the time, if the samurai were going to fight, it had The shoulder to be against one another .
 In 1333, a major civil war began when the emperor Go Daigo challenged the rule of the shoguns . The war was a major challenge to the rule by the emperor of Japan .
 Ashikaga Takauji expelled Go Daigo from Kyoto and enthroned an alternative emperor . The most ruthless of the samurai expelled Go Digo and appointed him as the new shogun .
 Go Daigo set up a rival court at Yoshino and samurai across Japan took up arms in favor of him . The arm guard, or kote, combines metal plates with chainmail .
 The resulting civil Dp. i war lasted 60 years, before the third Ashikaga shogun, Yoshimitsu, restored peace to Japan in 1392 . Ambitious and forceful, Yoshinitsu presided over a go S age o Japanese culture .
 Kyoto was the site of a cultural renaissance . Ti patronized the refined, stylized ‘Noh’ drama . He made his court at Kyoto a vr. i i The skirts of the armor are split for ease of movement .
 Samurai fought without shields, depending on armor for protection . Yoshimitsu spent lavishly on armor .
 The magnificent helmets and body armor were intended for display as well as defense . They were intended to be used for display and defense purposes .
 TT dates from the 19th century, when the samurai PTE shi had mostly ceased actual fighting . This fine example TT dates back to the early 1900s .
 SAMURAI building a pavilion coated in gold and surrounded by splendid gardens . The Samuraishi is believed to be the first Japanese temple to be built in Japan .
 In 1402 he negotiated formal trade links with the emperor of China . This enabled him to import Chinese artifacts for his cultured capital . He also negotiated trade links to the Chinese emperor .
 Yoshimitsu, and his equally cultured successor, Yoshimasa, presided over an unstable society . Violence erupts again in Japan .
 The daimyo, powerful and brutal warlords who had little allegiance to the shogunate, controlled vast areas in the provinces . They were brutal and powerful warlords, powerful warlord warlords .
 From 1467 Japan descended into permanent civil war between the private armies of rival daimyo . Kyoto practiced refinement, from 1467 to 1467 .
 In the 16th century, warfare in Japan entered a new era with the introduction of firearms . The introduction of guns in Japan was a major factor in warfare .
 The fighting finally ended under the shogun Tokugawa leyasu, who reunited the country . The fighting in Japan ended in 1883 .
 Europeans arrived in Japan from 1543 bringing guns and Christianity . The arrival of Europeans in Japan brought both guns and Christianism .
 St. Francis Xavier flourished until the 17th century, when Christianity was banned and converts were persecuted . Francis Xavier was one of the world's most famous Catholics .
 In the 16th century, ambitious daimyo sought to end Japan's endemic civil strife by unifying the country under a single strong ruler .
 Odu Nobunaga and his successor Toyotomi Hideyoshi took control of much of Japan in the 1560s-1590s . The Japanese samurai took over much of the country from 1560 to 1590s.
 Buddhism became central to spiritual and political life during this period . Buddhism was also central to political life in this period of Buddhism .
 In 1392, a Koryo general called Yi Songgye seized power, declaring himself the first king of the new Choson dynasty . The new dynasty was the first of its kind .
 Neo-Confucians swept aside the economic power and . political and moral influences of Buddhism . This provided the opportunity for the Neo . Confucians to sweep aside the . economic power . and ""corrupting"" political and . moral influences . of Buddhism.
 Neo-Confucianism was an abstract philosophy that defined the way in which humans should relate to one another socially and the way that society, and the king, should interact with the wider natural world, should do so .
 The ideal Neo-Confucian sage-king was to bring order to heaven and earth according to the requirements of li . Neo-confucian leader was to harmonize all aspects of human behavior with the underlying universal order .
 Sejong ambitiously sought to realize in a way that no other Korean king before or since has done . This was an ideal that Sejong sought to achieve, no other king before has done so .
 This new ruling class was combined pharmacology, agriculture, and astronomy . This new class was created by pharmacologists and astronomers .
 Rain gauges, such as this stone, iron, and bronze example, were designed in the 1440s long before such equipment was used in Europe .
 Each gauge is standardized to 16. in in height and 6. in diameter . Each gauge -— was standardized to . 16.in height and . 6.in diameter . The gauge gauge is 16.6 inches tall and 16.ins wide .
 Sejong had them installed in every county so that local magistrates could record rainfall and contribute to knowledge of the climate and improvement of agricultural techniques . Sejong recorded rainfall and contributed to improved agricultural techniques.
 Sejong placed much importance on ensuring the well-being of his people through innovations that improved their lives .
 King Sejong invented the phonetic alphabet for the Korean language, called han’gul . It is easy to identify his most important innovation .
 As far as contemporary Koreans are concerned, it is a central aspect of everyday life and a source of national pride . But when the king first introduced the alphabet in the mid-15th century, the new writing system seemed to be a vulgarization of written language .
 Writing in Korea had hitherto been limited to complex Chinese characters and was the exclusive property of the yangban . Writing in Korean was previously limited to simple Chinese characters .
 Many yangban resented these simple and relatively easy-to-learn new characters . For a long time, these characters were used mainly by women . They were used by women, but are now used by men .
 The new Korean alphabet, today called han'gul, is thought to have been largely the work of King Sejong . It is based on a careful analysis of the Korean language .
 It was first revealed in 1443 and then formally introduced by the king in 1446 in a ceremony depicted here in a modern Korean painting .
 Han'gul was more than just a project to bring literacy to the lower levels of society . The project was a literacy project for the first time in the country .
 Like much that Sejong did, it was also an attempt to reflect the order of Neo-Confucianism . Like much of Sejong's work, it also reflected the order in which it was built .
 His attention also extended into the reform of court music, the spread of new agricultural techniques to the country's farmers . He also encouraged the encouragement of refined painting that depicted the natural world .
 The foundations of the Choson dynasty rested upon more than just the will of a determined, farsighted king . A society of unequals was built up by a society of . unequals .
 Neo-Confucianism that dominated the thinking of Sejong and his officials reflected the reality of Choson's unequal society . It actually helped reinforce its rigid class structures, says historian . Sejong's officials were able to build a society that was unequal .
 The great majority of the population were peasants engaged in agriculture, paying taxes to the state and rent to landlords . They often found themselves at the mercy of floods and droughts that beset the Korean peninsula's fragile ecology .
 Lowborn groups included those involved in so-called “dirty occupations" such as butchery and leatherworking .
 At Chongmyo Shrine in Seoul, the Choson kings held elaborate Confucian rites as a way of honoring their royal ancestors . There was also a large hereditary ChongmyO ritual .
 The 16th century saw the rise of a vicious rivalry among scholar-officials who vied for position in the state bureaucracy and at court . The rivalry between scholars and state officials was a fierce rivalry .
 Two invasions in six years brought devastation for the country and its people . The invaders were finally slave class that is thought to have comprised in the region of 30 percent of the total population . Slave class remained a notable feature of Choson society until the 19th century .
 In accordance with his ideology, Sejong sought to encourage appropriate relationships between the different classes and cultivate decorum in personal relations . Sejong's ideology was based on his desire for appropriate relationships .
 In 1432, he ordered the publication of a didactic text on Neo-Confucian ethics called the Ilustrated Guide to the Three Bonds . It was reprinted later that century with a han’gul text so that a general readership could benefit from its instructions
 The three bonds of the title were those that occur between parents and children, between ruler and official, and between husband and wife . The bond is between parents, children, and official and husband .
 Each example of bond was illustrated with a series of short biographies and woodcuts depicting the stories of devoted sons and daughters, loyal officials, and faithful wives .
 The less lofty lives of the common people found an expression in the arts of this period, in particular through punch’ong ceramics .
 These developed from the refined celadon ceramics, crackle-glazed porcelain in a range of jadelike colors, favored by the Koryo court in previous centuries .
 The fall of China’s Ming dynasty to Manchu ‘barbarians’ in 1644 was a profound shock . Choson recovered during the 17th century, but the fall of the Ming dynasty was a shock .
 The rulers of Choson then saw themselves as the true defenders of civilization and Neo-Confucian orthodoxy . Chosons were Neo-confucian .
 Two kings, Yongjo and Chongjo, ruled for much of the 18th century and the country prospered . Two kings ruled the country from 18th to 19th century . The two kings ruled for decades of the country .
 A move away from Neo-Confucianism toward solving practical problems and interest in new ideas from China and Europe followed . A move toward practical problems led to an interest in practical solutions .
 The book was first printed in 1446 at the time of the introduction of the new phonetic script for the Korean language .
 The fourth king of a relatively young dynasty, Sejong came to the throne of Choson in 1418 at the age of 22 . Sejong is the fourth king to rule the Korean peninsula .
 He was the grandson of the dynastic founder Yi Songgye . He became the first king to be extensively schooled from an early age in Neo-Confucian philosophy .
 Sejong the Great is a national icon symbolizing Korea's first ""golden age"" and is seen by many millions of Koreans every day on the back of the 10,000-won note . Sejong is seen as an icon and symbolizing the country's first "golden
 Remains of the Dong Son culture that created this drum were discovered near Hanoi in Vietnam in the 1950s . The remains of this drum drum were found near the city of Hano, Vietnam .
 Dong Son culture was centered on northern Vietnam, but remnants have been found across Southeast Asia as far away as Java and Sumatra . Dong Son was centered around northern Vietnam but remnants of the culture have found across the region .
 Dongsonians had an organized society that later cultures in the region would draw upon . Dongsonian culture was an important part of the region's history .
 The Buddhist monument of Borobudur in Central Java remained hidden by jungle until its rediscovery in 1814 . The monument was largely hidden in the jungle until it was rediscovered by the islanders in the 1800s .
 Careful study of carvings and inscriptions around the site suggests that it was constructed under the influence of the Srivjaya Empire in the 8th—9th centuries .
 21,500 sq ft of narrative sculptures provide information about Buddhist worship and daily life in Java in the period . Almost 21,000 sq ft .
 Southeast Asia has also been home to peoples and empires whose commercial, spiritual, and artistic wealth was rivaled by none .
 Southeast Asia's wealth depended on the movement of people, goods, and ideas across the vast waterways and fertile plains of the region . Many people moved from the islands of Java and Sumatra to the coasts of today's Vietnam and Cambodia .
 People set up maritime trading centers that traded spices, woods, metals, and animal products from inland for merchandise from elsewhere in Southeast Asia, India, Persia, and Arabia .
 The Champa kingdom in southern Vietnam became a great empire, lasting from the 7th century CE until its defeat by the Vietnamese emperor 1471 . Many areas grew wealthy as a result of this trade, and the Champa empire was a great power .
 The fertile rivers of the Southeast Asian interior were another source of wealth . Rivers and floodplains were also a source of riches .
 Communities around the river basins of the Mekong, Red, Chao Phraya, and Irrawaddy rivers grew prosperous from rice and livestock .
 The rivers were also a source of conflict as the region's empires fought each other for control of the most productive arable areas . But the rivers also provided a source for conflict between empires .
 ZHOU DAGUAN, CHINESE DIPLOMAT, DESCRIBING KHMER CAMBODIA, 1290 had fought the declining Funan empire and the Champa city-states .
 Champa and Khmer continued to quarrel over the floodplain . Funan ruled Funan and the Champa . The Khmer and Champa fought over the area .
 After 939, the Champa also had to contend with the northern Vietnamese state of Dai Viet . Dai Viet was desperate to find territories south of the crowded Red River valley . The Champa lost territory in 939 .
 The Champa preoccupation with the Dai Viet let the Khmer Empire strengthen its grip on the rice lands of the Mekong . The Dai Viet was one of the most important rice fields in the region .
 Irrawaddy River sustained the growth of a powerful kingdom around the city of Pagan in Burma . At the same time, to the west of the Khmer Empire in Burma, the . Khmer . Empire in the . west of . Burma .
 By the mid-12th century, the Pagan and Khmer empires controlled much of mainland Southeast Asia . By the 12th Century, they had control of much of the region . The Pagan empire was one of the most powerful in Asia .
 The Buddhist monument at Borobudur features 2,672 carved reliefs showing the Buddhist afterlife and the daily existence of the Javanese people .
 In 1238, they established the first Thai nation, the kingdom of Sukhothai, in central Thailand . They established the kingdom in 1238 . The kingdom was established in the early 12th century .
 The peoples that remained on Sumatra and Java set up prosperous trading communities rivaling the coastal states of the mainland .
 By the 8th century, the Srivijaya Empire controlled most of Sumatra o D Al VI Shang Long E AG aS, EC y | Hainan i i Ec. E .
 Confucianism (see 127) from China was also integrated into the daily workings of government and society . In Vietnam, Confucanism was integrated into daily life of society and government . Confucanicism was first introduced to Vietnam in 18th century .
 Trade and agriculture financed the building of huge temples and monuments to the gods . The wealth from trade and agriculture funded the construction of the temples .
 Buddhist monuments such as Malacca and imposing tolls on the highly profitable spice trade . Malacca was the center of the world's most lucrative spice trade in the region .
 Other maritime kingdoms, such as the Hindu Kadiri empire, grew in influence as the Srivijaya empire weakened in the 11th century . The Hindu kingdom of the Hindu kingdom is known for its maritime influence .
 Merchants from India, China, and Sri Lanka brought religion as well as trade to Southeast Asia .
 The great Khmer ruler Jayavarman VII built vast temples and defeated the Champa . His excessive spending also impoverished the empire .
 Both Christianity and Islam were exported to Southeast Asia by merchants and traders . After the trade, Islam was exported to the region .
 Islam arrived in Southeast Asia with Arab and Indian traders from the east coast of India . Islam came to Southeast Asia in the early 1900s with Arab traders . Islam was the first religion to arrive in Asia .
 By the 15th century, Islam was the most popular religion in Java and Sumatra . Statecraft among the sultans and religious custom among the peoples of the islands .
 They sought to channel trade through ports that they could control and convert to Christianity . They also sought to control ports that could convert and convert Christians .
 European influence spread across mainland Southeast Asia as missionaries traveled inland to convert people to Christianity and engage in commerce . European influence was initially limited to the coastal cities .
 Angkor Wat is the largest religious complex in the world . It was built in the 12th century during the reign of the Khmer ruler Suryavarman Il and dedicated to the Hindu god Vishnu .
 The Arabian Peninsula has always been dominated by sparsely populated, arid desert . Before ISLAM, the Arabian Peninsula was largely uninhabited .
 Its early inhabitants were mainly nomads such as the Bedouin, although there were some farmers around the oases .
 Frankincense, a fragrant tree resin, was one of the most important products in the world's history of frankincense . The resin was used to make perfume and was a popular form of medicine .
 Pre-Islamic Arabs spoke a number of languages and followed a variety of religions, most of which were polytheistic, worshipping several different gods . Most of them were poly-theistic and worshipping different gods, most were poly theathes .
 Mecca, later the most important religious site of Islam, was already a center of worship . Mecca was already the first place of worship in Mecca . Mecca is now the world's largest religious site .
 Muhammad was a merchant based at Mecca when he had his first revelation from God . Muhammad was the founder of the Islamic state of Islam in Islam .
 Some people accepted his teachings, but the hostility of others forced him into exile in Medina . Although some people accepted him, he was forced to leave Medina .
 He gathered followers, uniting tribes and raiding caravans until he managed to conquer Mecca itself . There, he gathered more followers and united the local tribes . He then conquered Mecca itself and unrolled his vast force .
 The new rulers were tolerant toward the religions they found in their conquered territories, and did not force conversion . The new ruler was tolerant toward religions found in conquered territories .
 The constantly expanding area of the Islamic Empire was controlled by governors based in armed camps, each taking their instructions from Medina . Governors based on armed camps took orders from Medina to control the area .
 Despite their military successes, the Muslims were soon split by factional differences . The Muslims were divided in factional factions .
 By the mid-8th century, they had reached as far as Spain, stretching the extent of the caliphate to breaking point . The caliphate stretched into Spain and Syria, stretching to the end of the 8th century .
 By 750, these beliefs had become the basis of a religion whose adherents governed an area stretching continuously from the borders of China to Spain .
 By 1450 Muslims were ruling in areas as far east as Indonesia . There was tension between the ""true" followers of Muhammad and those they believed were hungry for power .
 16th-century Turkish tile depicts the Kaaba at Mecca at Mecca . When ‘Ali was Kaaba .
 Originally a site of pre-Islamic polytheistic worship, this square building is the holiest site in Islam, and all Muslims pray toward it . Mu'awiya became the first caliph of the Umayyad dynasty, assassinated in 661 .
 The turbulent period saw the collation and standardization of the Qur'an, the Muslim holy book . This turbulent period also witnessed the standardization and collation of the book .
 The second caliph introduced a new Islamic calendar, which kept time by following the cycles of the moon, and dated its years from the time of Muhammad’s flight to Medina .
 The Umayyad dynasty took their name from the clan to which the first caliph, Mu'awiya ibn Abi Sufyan, belonged . The first UMayyad caliph was the first to become a caliph .
 Syr Day, ÉERG HAN A ^T ASIA century, has been restored and redecorated Tang protectorate ^^^ — several times since . It was established in Tang territory in 18th century .
 The Umayyads continued the conquests of previous caliphs, consolidating power over the former P Suhar ‘Muscat’ Muscat . Muscat was one of the biggest splits in Islam and was closer to fertile farming areas and closer to farming areas .
 The new rulers ruthlessly wiped out Masa a of Islam across North Africa . WU persian os M id N Persian Empire and extending the rule — 'Ali's followers ultimately became the .
 Several anti-Umayyad factions replaced the old Umayyads officials with ;Yamama worship to emphasize Islamic power . They built Shia branch of Islam. anyone they perceived as a threat, and built Shia shrines .
 Abbasids used Peninsula including the Dome of the Rock, on site in Jerusalem where Muhammad is believed to have ascended to heaven, rulers. The Abbasids were rulers of the region .
 The leader of the revolt was descended from another relative of Muhammad, named 'Abbas' a system of intelligence to spy on officials in far-off countries .
 The Abbasid dynasty Islamic law to justify their claims to E no still by choice, special taxes on non-Muslims . The family of ‘Abbas was largely based power and to secure their Shibafn i Muslims .
 Senior government positions encouraged modern-day Iran, Iraq, and more formal system of taxation to o o YEMEN . They also introduced a Najran * senior government position .
 Abbasid period is generally particularly in the east of the empire, new city of Baghdad, considered a golden age of ad “aden in what are now Iraq and Iran’s . Despite all this, factionalism remained rife, with several groups trying to seize power from the
 One major group still believed that only the descendants of ‘Ali’ who had lost in the civil war that brought the Umayyads to power, should rule .
 The Arab astrolabe was an astronomical device developed in the Islamic world that used the position of the sun and stars for navigation, and as a tool to locate Mecca . Muhammad's successors as leaders of Islam were known as caliphs .
 Arabic became increasingly important as both a religious and political language . Arabic has been increasingly important in the Middle Ages . Arabic is now an increasingly important religious language .
 The Battle of Badr was crucial to the foundation of Islam . Without these copies, the modern world would probably know very little about Greek and Persian literature .
 Qur'an battle is one of the few few battles mentioned in the Qur'An . Battle of March 17, 624 is the most significant battle mentioned in Islam . Battle was fought in 624 .
 The Quraishi rulers of Mecca were soundly defeated in the battle . They were frustrated by early Muslim ambushes on caravans .
 This illustration of the pursuit of the defeated army comes from a later account of the battle .
 Victory consolidated the political position of Muhammad and forced the surrounding areas to take him seriously . technological advances of the scientific revolution might have been much delayed .
 Abbasids were unable to prevent further revolts and uprisings among their subjects . Despite their best efforts, the Abbasids failed to prevent more revolts against the Abbasid .
 Buyids, a group of professional soldiers employed by the Abbasids, staged a coup and took over the caliphate in the mid-10th century . The Buyids staged a revolt against Abbasids and took control of the caliphate . Buyids were professional soldiers and professional soldiers .
 The Abbasid caliphate survived in name until the arrival of the Mongols in the 13th century .
 By the 15th century it had traveled as far east as Indonesia and the Philippines . Having been spread mainly by missionaries and trade contacts, it was spread by trade and missionaries .
 The Islamic world was united by culture and trade throughout the whole medieval period . It did not always have one government . A preacher pilgrims traveled in large groups for protection .
 The areas farthest from the new caliphate began to break away from the Abbasid dynasty . The areas of the caliphate were ruled by the Abbasids in the east .
 Independent governors also arose in Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Egypt, Tunisia and Egypt .
 By the 10th century, Islam had developed into three separate caliphates . People who lived under Islamic rule were not forced to convert .
 Many were converted by traveling preachers such as the one depicted in this 13th-century manuscript . The manuscript is believed to be one of the oldest manuscripts in the world .
 E is now taken by the self-appointed head of any major Islamic community who felt the right to take it .
 In addition to the Abbasids in Baghdad, there was a Fatimid caliphate in Bgypt, and an Umayyad caliphate in Spain . The Abbasids were the first to hold a caliphate in Baghdad .
 The Fatimid dynasty was founded in the early 10th century by an Isma'ili Shia Muslim named 'Ubaydallah . Fatimids were founded by a Shia Muslim Shia Muslim in the 9th century .
 The Isma'ili Shia branch of Islam probably started as a secret movement in Iraq . Its missionary activity soon took its members all across the Islamic world .
 From then they went on to conquer Syria and Palestine, reaching as far as Aleppo and Damascus . From there, they went onto conquer Syria, Palestine and Palestine . From then, they reached as far away as Aleppo, Damascus .
 Cairo became the center for a trade network that extended throughout the Mediterranean, the Red Sea, and the Indian Ocean . Cairo, meanwhile, became a center for trade networks that extended through the Mediterranean and Red Sea .
 Goods such as porcelain from China and spices from Southeast Asia were brought in by ship to the Egyptian Red Sea ports .
 Gold and slaves were brought down the Nile from Ethiopia and the Sudan, to be traded in Cairo . Gold was brought down from Ethiopia, the Sudan and to Cairo, Egypt .
 Harun al-Rashid was the fifth Abbasid caliph, ruling in Baghdad from 786-809 . He ruled in Baghdad between 786 and809 .
 Harun was the first caliph to appoint a vizier (from the Arabic wazir, meaning ""helper") with many administrative powers . His own vizier was removed from power in 803, but his own was removed .
 He presided over part of the ""Golden Age"" that saw the emergence of classical Islamic culture . He was also an important patron of the arts .
 The Alhambra was built in the 14th century at Granada in southern Spain . It is one of the world's most famous palaces .
 The palace buildings are covered in tiles and plasterwork bearing Islamic geometric designs and inscriptions . They are covered with Islamic geometric geometric designs .
 The Arabic word for ""the" forms the prefix of many scientific words that were adopted by medieval Europe along with the scientific knowledge of the Islamic world . For example, alkali, algebra, alchemy, algorithm, and almanac are among the words used in medieval Europe .
 Most merchants were Muslim, although some Europeans from Venice and Genoa also involved . Most of the merchants were Muslims .
 Cairo was an important trading center and religious learning center . Cairo was also a site of religious learning during its heyday .
 Great Mosque of Djenné in Mali is just over a century old . It stands on the site of a mosque first built in 1240 . It attracted scholars from scholars from the Great Mosque .
 Djenné became West Africa's most important seat of Islamic learning after its construction of the city . The city is now the most important Islamic learning center in Africa .
 Syria, Ethiopia, and the Maghreb are still considered the most prestigious site of Islamic learning in the world .
 The Fatimid dynasty continued to rule Egypt until their conquest by the Kurdish warrior Saladin in 1171 . They were defeated by Saladin's forces in the Middle Ages .
 Saladin used his Egyptian base to retake the Holy Land from the crusader settlers . The Ayyubid dynasty fell within a century, overthrown by the Mamluks, originally Turkish slave soldiers .
 AAA UR caliph was taken by 'Abd al-Rahman III al-Nasir in 929, possibly as a reaction to the claims of the Fatimids . The title of AAAUR caliph is taken by Abd al-Rasir .
 The blending of Islamic ideas with Christian and Spanish influences produced a unique cultural fusion across the areas ruled by the Umayyad and the Almoravids, their successors .
 The visual arts of Islamic Spain are expressed most fully at the Alhambra . The palace was built for the rulers of the kingdom of Granada in Granada .
 Toledo on the Moorish-Christian frontier was a center for the translation of Arabic texts into Latin . The availability of Islamic scholars and Arabic-speaking Christians made cities such as Toledo center for translation of texts .
 Islamic belief moved east as traders carried their religion across the ocean with their goods . Islamic belief also moved east with the trade, and Islamic belief followed .
 From here Islam spread into Southeast Asia and the Indonesian archipelago . Islam spread to Indonesia and Indonesia .
 The hajj, or pilgrimage to Mecca, is one of the key duties of all Muslims . Pilgratration to Mecca is a key part of the Muslim faith .
 Certificate dated from 1207 was proof that its owner had completed the pilgrimage to the Kaaba shrine . Certificate dated to 1207 believed to be proof of the pilgrimage .
 Islamic empires never extended their influence to China, but strong trade links between the two cultures ensured that Islam gained a foothold in East Asia .
 Hassan tower at Rabat in Morocco was designed as a minaret for an enormous mosque that was never completed . The 12th-century tower was designed to be a mosque that never was completed .
 The Qutb Minar in Delhi, India, is the world's tallest brick minaret . It is located in the city of Delhi .
 The tower and mosque complex were built in the early 13th century by the founder of the Delhi sultanate . The mosque complex was built in 13th Century .
 After IBS Islam has continued to play an influential role in world history until the present . Islam has played an important role in the history of the Islamic world .
 After 1031, the Spanish caliphate dissolved into smaller states that were slowly conquered by Spanish Christians . The last of the caliphate fell in 1492, the last of its kind in Spain .
 Many different materials were used, including wood, metal, and ceramics, to create the artwork .
 Stone figure, dating from the late 12th-early 13th century prosperity, power, joy, happiness, stability, permanent stability."" century .
 Persian military helmet, dating from the late the late Fatimid caliphate, which ruled over North Africa, Egypt, 15th century and fashioned from tron and silver .
 It is a mixture of gold and enamel and dates from — dinar coin from Sicily . The coin dates from Sicily and dates back to the 1950s .
 Enamel bowl from Persia dating caliph al-Mustansir in the 11th century .
 Qur'an stand, mosques to indicate the direction of Mecca, Islam's holiest dating to 1360, and made from carved and inlaid wood . city . city. city .
 Glass bottle, dating from the late 13th century, and Brazier in cast bronze, probably made in Syria . Glass bottle dates from the second half of the century .
 Enameled and gilded glass the 13th century, dedicated to the Sultan al-Muzaffar, features images of warriors wielding maces, swords, lances, ibn Umar .
 Gold armlet, dating from 1030 ce silver and bitumen, and inscribed with the words “Glory, and made in Persia.” It was inscribed with ‘Glory’ and ‘Made in Persia’
 The empire was a crucial staging post for Chinese and Arabic merchant ships . It was a vital staging post in the early years of the empire .
 Arab traders had introduced Islam to the region by the 8th century . There were incursions by Muslim armies from Persia and Ghazni (modern Iran and Afghanistan) in 8th and 11th centuries .
 Islam was present in parts of South Asia from the 8th century . The establishment of the Delhi Sultanate marked a new era for Islam .
 Immigrants from Central Asia and Persia brought concepts of kingship, built cities, and founded empires . Immigrants brought concepts to kingship and empires .
 India was incorporated into the cultural scope of Islam . Muhammad of Ghur advanced into India in 1175 . The nomadic Muslim chieftain Muhammad of ghur advanced .
 The nomads had the advantages of horses and a centralized army . Although the Indian armies were bigger and richer, the nomads were stronger and richer .
 Muhammad's armies sacked Delhi in 1193 . Sweeping eastward over modern-day Turkestan, Pakistan, and northern India . Muhammad's army sacked Delhi .
 The Qutb Minar is the tallest minaret in the world . It was built to symbolize the assimilation of new territory into the wider Muslim world .
 As the empire expanded, successive sultans sought to demonstrate their power by building grand monuments around it . The Sultan's palace was built around it, with the help of the Sultan .
 This map highlights the areas where the major States of the period first originated . It also highlights the regions where major States first originated from .
 The sultan's army defeated the rebels, but some managed to escape and regroup . Some of the rebels were able to regroup and escape the sultan .
 When the sultan left to quash a rebellion in Gujarat, the Deccan rebels seized their chance and defeated the imperial army . The sultan's army was defeated by the rebels when he was forced to leave .
 Alauddin Bahman Shah established the Bahmani kingdom at Daulatabad Fort in 1347 . Their leader was declared Sultan Alauddin Bahman Shah at the Fort of Daulaabad Fort .
 This was the end of the Delhi Sultanate's expansion, and the start of its long decline . The Sultanate was the most powerful and most powerful of the Western world .
 The early sultans ruled over a fragile kingdom, and their authority was concentrated in a series of fortified towns . Their authority was based in fortified towns across the world .
 Nomadic tribes who made up the nobility did not have a strong tradition of hereditary kingship . The nomadic tribes were not strong enough to have hereditary kingships .
 Military slaves frequently became sultans, such as Iltutmish in 1211 or Balban in 1266 . Military slaves often became rulers of the Middle Ages .
 Razia Sultana became a sultan in 1236 . Razia had the support of the nobility, and she became the first sultana to become a sultan in 1237 . Raza Sultan was the first woman to become the sultant in 12
 Amir Khusrau was court poet for several of the Delhi sultans . He was a follower of the Sufi (Islamic mystic) saint Nizammudin . Succession to the throne at Delhi was often secured through violence .
 His poetry is sung today in the devotional music called Qawwali . 11 of the 11 sultans were assassinated .
 Imperial authority grew stronger as a result, but tribal loyalties and intrigues remained divisive . Imperial authority became stronger in the 17th century, but tribes remained divided .
 Throughout the period of the Delhi Sultanate, the sultans based their policies on pragmatism, rather than Sharia law . The sultan's policies were based on the fact that they were pragmatic .
 The inscribed iron pillar in the courtyard of the Qutb Minar complex has survived in the open air without any sign of rust . Some Hindu temples in zones of military conflict were destroyed . This had been a military tactic in India before the arrival of the Muslims .
 The great pillar dates back to * the pre-Islamic empire of the Guptas . not seem to have been a policy of temple destruction . Not seem to be a policy . of destruction .
 In settled areas, temple building and renovation was sanctioned by the state . The state also sanctioned temple building in settled areas .
 Subjects were permitted to practice their own faiths, and the Jizya tax, which non-Muslims are supposed to pay in an Islamic state, was only enforced sporadically . Subjects were not subject to the tax, and subjects were allowed to practice freely .
 Between 1299-1305, sultan Alauddin Khilji launched a series of successful military expeditions against the various rich kingdoms south of Delhi . The Somnath temple in Gujarat, Chittorgarh in Rajasthan, and Mandu in central India,
 In 1311, Alauddin sent his favorite slave, Malik Kafur, on a series of raids into the Deccan (the vast plateau region that covers much of southern India) in search of plunder . The raids were the first of the 13th century raids in the De
 The Lodi Dynasty, the last dynasty of the Sultanate, ruled from 1451 to 1526 . The Yadavas of Devagiri, the Kakatiyas of Lodi Tomb, are the last of the Lodi dynasty .
 Their kings were reinstated, but had to acknowledge the sultan's overlordship and send him an annual tribute . Their kings had to send annual tributes to the Sultan .
 Sultan Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq sent his son Muhammad to annex them in 1321 . After Alauddin's death in 1305, the southern kingdoms stopped paying tribute . In 1321, Muhammad took over the southern kingdom .
 In 1327-28 he forced the elite to relocate to Daulatabad, but within two years the inadequate water supply compelled him to reinstate Delhi as the capital . Within two years he had reinstates Delhi as Delhi, but the water supply was inadequate .
 New kingdoms and political elites, both Hindu and Muslim, came to power in the Deccan region of south India . New kingdoms, both Hindus and Muslims, were established in the region .
 By the end of the 15th century, the Bahmani kingdom had fragmented into five rival sultanates, constantly at war with each other .
 In 1565 the Vijayanagar Empire was defeated by a rare combination of these five provinces . The Vijayangar Empire defeated in 1565 by a combination of the five provinces.
 The last of the sultans, Ibrahim Lodi, was defeated at Panipat, but was by then one of many states contending for power in northern India . It continued until 1526 when the last sultan was defeated .
 The Quwwat-ul-Islam mosque in Delhi was constructed by Qutb-ud-din Aibek, founder of the Delhi Sultanate, as a symbol of his power .
 The sandstone base of the Qutb Minar is visible in the background . e South of the Sahara formation of more centralized states south of Sahara desert, such as the Ghana Empire, is visible .
 The introduction of camels to Africa by Muslim Arabs made travel possible through the desert . Arabs and North African Berbers opened the first regular trade routes between North Africa and regions south of the Sahara .
 Muslim traders created trading networks throughout the sub-Saharan regions of East and West Africa . Muslim traders used to create trading networks in the region of East, West and East Africa .
 The Ghana Empire of West Africa grew powerful on the transSaharan gold trade . In the 8th to 11th centuries, the Ghana Empire grew powerful .
 The wall of the Great Enclosure has a marble core, and is bounded on each side by horizontal, free-standing masonry . VICENTE PEGADO, CAPTAIN OF the PORTUGUESE GARRISON at SOFALA, 1531,
 The wall contains 900,000 large granite blocks, and is decorated with a chevron pattern along the top . The wall is decorated by a pattern of chevrons on top .
 Muslim trading cities such as Kilwa, in presentday Tanzania, were at the center of a highly profitable mercantile network . They imported textiles, spices, and ceramics from Asia and exchanged these for African gold, iron, ivory, and slaves .
 Swahili ports did not produce the goods themselves, but traded with states from within the African interior . Great Zimbabwe was the first African nation to produce goods from Swahililand ports .
 Great Zimbabwe was the hub of a prosperous trading empire that thrived in southern Africa during the 11th—15th centuries . At one end of the supply chain lay the settlement of Great Zimbabwe, an important source of gold, and an important trade hub .
 In the language of the Shona people of the region, the word Zimbabwe means “houses of stone” A term applied to the hundreds of stone-walled enclosures found throughout the Zimbabwe plateau . The word Zimbabwe is Zimbabwe .
 Great Zimbabwe is the largest of the Zimbabwean plateau . It is located on the southern edge of the plateau . Great Zimbabwe was one of the first to be built on the Great Zimbabwe .
 The spectacular stone ruins today cover nearly 1,800 acres . They are divided into hilltop and valley complexes . The spectacular ruins are located in a valley complex .
 Built at the head of the Sabi River valley, Great Zimbabwe was well placed to control the passage between the gold fields in the west and the trading cities along the Swahili coast .
 An inner wall runs along the outer wall, and forms a narrow passage that leads to the conical tower . The inner wall is part of the inner wall and part of an inner wall .
 In the 12th-13th centuries, Great Zimbabwe profited from taxes on the trading caravans that passed through the area . Great Zimbabwe also profited .
 In the 13th-14th centuries, the people living in and around Great Zimbabwe probably numbered between 11,000 and 18,000 . Most would have lived in huts, situated closely together, situated close together .
 The ruling elite led a more privileged and comfortable existence, supported by the wealth provided by their control over the export of gold and ivory to the coast . It was supported by . the . wealth provided . by their . control over . their control of the export .
 Local granite was used to enclose the hilltop at Great Zimbabwe with stone walls, perhaps as a fortification . Local granite may have been used as a means of protection .
 Buildings above the Great Enclosure may have been built as fortifications . The walls offer no access to the top from which to repel attackers .
 The mysterious conical tower at Great Zimbabwe is 33 ft high and 16 ft in diameter . It is 33ft high and is 16 ft diameter .
 Its purpose is unknown, although it has been suggested that it was a symbolic grain bin . It is thought to have been used as a symbol for grain .
 Drystone walls of the Great Enclosure probably served as a palace . Set in the valley below the hill, the drystone walls are thought to have been drystone drystone .
 As well as local pottery and ornaments made from copper, bronze, and gold, archaeologists have found many objects of Asian origin . This suggests the settlement’s prosperity and extensive trade links with Asia .
 These include 13thcentury glazed Persian earthenware, 14th-century Chinese dishes and fragments of painted glass from the Middle East .
 The end of Great Zimbabwe coincides with the vast conquest by the king of the Karanga, Mutota . Mutota sought to extend his rule over the whole plateau between the Zambezi and Limpopo rivers .
 Mutota's expansion policy was probably not a result of Mutota’s expansion policy . Great Zimbabwe has declined since Mutota took control of the country in the 1970s .
 More likely the land could no longer support the concentration of population, forcing many inhabitants to find new areas of woodland where plots could be cleared .
 The Mali Empire was the first great empire to be established after the decline of Ghana in the 12th century . The Mali empire was established in the Mali .
 Mali Empire was based in the Sahel, the savanna region running along the southern border of the Sahara . The Mali Empire, like that of Ghana, was based on the region .
 From the Sahel, it was possible for Mali, like Ghana before it, to exploit the trade across the Sahara to North Africa . Mali was able to control the exchange of gold for salt mined in the desert . The exchange was exchanged for gold in exchange for salt .
 Mansa Musa was the best known of the Islamic emperors of Mali, largely because of his hajj to Cairo and Mecca in 1324-25 . The first capital of the Mali capital was the capital of Mali .
 He was said to have taken 60,000 porters and hundreds of servants decked in gold . He took the country's gold-studded servants and porters .
 Mansa gave away or spent so much gold that it apparently took the economy of North Africa a decade to recover . Mansa's trip took place in North Africa, where the economy was recovering .
 Musa established sound economic and cultural relations with the countries he traveled through . Musa set up sound economic relations with countries he visited through .
 He brought back with him an Arabic library, religious scholars, and the Muslim architect al-Sahili, who built the great mosques at Gao and Timbuktu . He also brought back a library and religious scholars .
 Other trade goods included slaves and kola nuts . Glass beads and cowrie shells were used as currency .
 Mali state was founded in 1235 by Sundiata Keita when he united the 12 Mandinke clans of Mali . The Mali state is named after its founder, Sundiata Kita .
 Musa is renowned for his spectacular ‘Pilgrimage of Gold’ to the holy city of Mecca . Musa was a devout Muslim and a member of the Muslim community .
 Musa also extended the boundaries of the Mali Empire, uniting much of the Western Sudan (the huge West African savanna region to the south of the Sahel) under his rule . Musa extended the borders of Mali Empire to include much of Western Sudan .
 Ibn Battuta traveled through Mali in the 1350s, writing that he had enjoyed ‘complete and general safety” in the area . The Moroccan traveler wrote that the area was safe . The area is now a UNESCO World Heritage Site .
 Musa Musa had the great Jingereber mosque built in Timbuktu . It still stands in the city today . Musa also had a great mosque built there .
 Musa exchanged ambassadors with Egypt, Morocco, and Arabia . North African and Egyptian scholars visited Musa’s court, and he exchanged ambassadors .
 Songhay king Sunni Ali took control of much of the Mali Empire in the 1460s . He took over the city of Timbuktu and the crucial trade routes .
 The Songhay Empire depended for its great wealth on the goldfields on the Niger River and the trans-Saharan trade in salt and slaves . Like the Mali and the Mali, the Songhays depended for their wealth .
 At its height in the 16th century, the Songhay Empire would exceed even that of the Mali in size and wealth . slaves dressed in gold 5 and carrying golden staffs as well as 80 camel-loads of gold accompanied Mansa Musa on his pilgrimage to Mecca .
 The Sankore Mosque in Timbuktu was one of the most important centers of learning in Africa . The mosque is located in the heart of the city .
 From the 15th century, European traders and colonists became ever more involved in African trade and politics . Portuguese and other European traders became increasingly involved with African trade .
 The empire of Benin rose to prominence in West Africa during the 15th century . Benin is the name of a West African kingdom that was founded in 15th Century . The empire was the largest in West African history .
 Benin was well known for hand-cast bronzes, which could only be made with royal consent . Benin is famous for its hand cast bronzes .
 The first Portuguese traders arrived in about 1485, and a strong political and mercantile alliance was formed .
 Many of the people of Great Zimbabwe settled on the northeastern edge of the Zimbabwean plateau close to the Zambezi River . They formed the Mutapa kingdom in Zimbabwe's northeastern edge .
 In 1628, the Portuguese replaced the king with a puppet ruler . The puppet ruler later signed a treaty giving the Portuguese free rein to mine minerals . The treaty was signed by the Portuguese in 1628 .
 The knowledge he brought back of kingdoms to the west led to the opening of new trade routes . He brought back knowledge of the west to help open trade routes to the east .
 Buddhism traveled north to Central Asia and then east along the Silk Road to China, where it was firmly established by the 4th century ct.m. The Silk Road was established in China by the late 4th Century .
 It must have been on the ships of Arab traders that Chinese goods from this era were transported to the east coast of Africa .
 Narratives of 13thand 14th-century travelers transformed European maps of Asia . Narratives from 13th and 14th century Europeans transformed Asian maps of Europe .
 The Silk Road was one of the world's most important routes . Political instability was a constant threat to the Silk Road's routes .
 It was in periods of relative peace, during the rule of the Tang dynasty and later under the protection of the Mongols, that trade along the Silk Road truly thrived . The Silk Road was in a period of peace during the period of relative prosperity .
 Under Mongol protection the Silk Road flourished as a 4,000-mile trade route, along which travelers and traders were able to move in unprecedented safety .
 Kublai Khan became Great Khan of the Mongols in 1260, later declared himself emperor of China . He declared himself Emperor of China after becoming a Mongol leader .
 Baghdad was a major entry to Europe for silk and spices, Baghdad > onstantinople . Genoese or Venetian traders shipped to the west . He founded the Yuan dynasty .
 A subsidiary trade route ran north of the Caspian to Astrakhan in the Mongol Khanate of the Golden Horde . Then on to ports on the Black Sea, then on to the Mongolian Khanate . The route was used by the Mongols during the Golden Age .
 The Silk Road was the world’s greatest thoroughfare in the 13th-14th centuries . A web of caravan trails, mountain passes, beacon towers, oases, and garrison forts fringing the most inhospitable parts of the planet . The city of Ahmadabad
 Before the 13th century, the idea of a journey from Europe to China was unheard-of, but taking advantage of the Silk Road, a few merchants and missionaries traveled all the way to Kublai Khan's capital .
 Venetian merchants Niccolo and Maffeo Polo were among those who reached Dadu in 1266 . They included the Venetians Niccolo, who reached the island of Dadu .
 The Great Khan wanted to learn about Christianity and Western science . There were apparently well received by the Great Khan, who wanted Christianity .
 Marco Polo reached Kublai’s court five years later . Marco Polo was Niccolo and Maffeo's nephew, Marco Polo, who was born Marco Polo .
 Also in the 13th century, Rabban Sauma, a Chinese Christian, made a pilgrimage in the opposite direction, from Dadu to Jerusalem, and then on into Western Europe . The Chinese Christian made the pilgrimage to Western Europe in the same way .
 The accounts provide a fascinating glimpse into life along the Silk Road in medieval Asia . The accounts of both journeys provide a unique glimpse of life in medieval times .
 To the west of the desert and the Himalayas lies the important oasis town of Bukhara . Delhi, Delhi was a major center of Delhi .
 Capital of the Islamic Sultanate of for the exchange of goods and ideas . CUBO Bukhara was the capital of the Sultanate .
 From China, caravans carried silk, paper, weapons, lacquer, and even rhubarb . Caravans also brought silk and paper, and weapons, from China .
 Goods were sold or exchanged for other commodities en route in staging-post bazaars . Bazaars were set up in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Products were carried on camels, horses, bullocks, and yaks, depending on the location . The products were carried out by camels and horses, horses and bullocks .
 The two-humped Bactrian camel was Central Asia's hardiest beast of burden . The camel was a two-month-old camel . It was the world's largest animal of its kind in the world .
 It could withstand the searing heat and biting cold and survive without water without water between oasis towns . It could also withstand the heat and cold without water .
 The Id Kah Mosque, in Kashgar, was built in 1422, but includes older structures dating back to the 8th century . It began as a mosque in 996, and began as an Islamic state mosque in the 996 . It was first built in the 14th century
 Kashgar is situated at the meeting point of the northern and southern Silk Roads, and was the gateway to the West . Kashgar was a gateway to both the north and the south of the Silk Roads .
 Set up as a garrison town at the foot of the Pamirs by 76 CE, it gave access to the mountain passes into Central Asia, India, and Persia .
 The Taklimakan desert was a major obstacle between China e E and lands to the west . It was the main obstacle to China e-E and lands beyond China's borders .
 Dunhuang's hoard was discovered in a cave in 1900 . A hoard of fascinating l collected over the centuries by Dunhuangs .
 Marco Polo accompanied his father and uncle on their second expedition to China, where they reached the fabled court of Kublai Khan . Marco Polo was a teenager when he joined his uncle and father on the expedition . He was a member of the Venetian merchant family .
 Marco learned the Mongol language and the Great Khan employed him as roving envoy and governor for three years in eastern China . Marco traveled to eastern China and learned the language of Mongolian .
 He returned to Venice in 1295, but the following year was captured in a naval battle against the Genoese . The next year he returned to the city, Venice, but was captured again .
 In captivity, he dictated an account of his travels to a fellow inmate . In captivity he dictated his account to a prisoner inmate .
 Marco Polo's Travels was the most detailed account of East Asia available to European readers . Marco Polo was the world's first European traveller to travel on the continent . The book was published in 17th Century Europe .
 The Mongols under Kublai Khan did not complete their conquest of China until 1279 . They had already won control of the north by the death of Genghis Khan in 1227 . The Silk Road was printed in 1483 and influenced the thinking of many later explorers .
 Lanzhou on the Yellow River was a major trading hub for the Silk Road under the Han dynasty . The geometrical center — — of China, Lanzhou is a major city of Lanzhou .
 The Silk Road did not survive into the 15th century . A number of factors contributed to the decline of the Silk Road .
 Chinese joined Arab, Persian, and Indian merchants trading in the Indian Ocean in the early 15th century .
 The Silk Road was rediscovered by European explorers in the 19th century . It was discovered by Europeans in the early 1900s .
 Ferdinand Von Richthofen was a German geographer and geographer . He gave his name to the city in the 1930s . The city is the site of the first city to be built in the 1920s .
 His head appears to show skin lesions similar to those caused by smallpox . His head also appears to have smallpox-like lesions .
 In ancient China it has been claimed a lucky day was chosen on which to blow crusts from the skin of a smallpox sufferer into a patient's nose through a tube or quill .
 If the Chinese did inhale a powdered material from the sores of smallpox victims, this would be the first recorded form 1 of vaccination . This would be a form of form 1 vaccination .
 Thucydides left a harrowing account of the death and despair that the disease caused, accounting as it did for some 60,000 lost lives .
 The Black Death was not the first such plague in Europe . 6% of Europe's population died from the plague in the 14th century, according to some of the highest estimates .
 Historians studying medieval parish registers have uncovered abnormally high mortality rates . The plague spread to Europe from central Asia, where it had already left a trail of devastation . Historians have brought together random pieces of plague's timetable and destinations .
 Plague may have first reached Europe in the fall of 1346, when an army of Muslim Tartars laid siege to the Christian enclave of Caffa (the modern-day Ukrainian port of Feodosiya) on the Silk Road . Plague struck the besieging troops and plague struck
 Stories of infected corpses being catapulted over walls into Caffa to spread the plague are probably unreliable . Stories of the plague being thrown over the walls are unreliable .
 Infected fleas on rats accompanied Christian merchants when they fled by boat back to the Mediterranean via Constantinople in 1347 . Towns and villages of medieval Europe became littered with corpses, and death carts carried so many bodies that they could only be buried in deep pits .
 The medieval world had very little protection against the plague that was to wipe out one in three, and maybe more, of the population . One in three of the plague victims took the bubonic plague with them . The plague wiped out one third of the world's population .
 The most virulent epidemic then known, and still ever recorded, spread rapidly—and fatally—through much of the Western world . Thus, it spread rapidly, and fatally, through much of Europe .
 Plague is caused by a bacterium called Yersinia pestis, which is carried by fleas on wild rodents . Plague caused by the bacterium which is passed through fleas from wild rodents in the wild .
 Transfer of bacterial infection occurs when fleas feed on human blood . Transfer of bacteria occurs when the fleas eat human blood, transfer of infection occurs .
 It took 3-5 days to incubate, then within a further three days caused death in 80 percent of victims . It took three days to kill, then caused death within three days causing 80 percent to die .
 The pneumonic strain, with or without the boils, was 90-95 percent lethal within a few days . Today, with treatment, that percentage would probably survive . The strain could be transmitted directly from person to person—by sneezing, for example .
 The septicemic variant, though the least common, led to virtually instantaneous death . Septicemic is the most common form of death in the world .
 This most virulent form also caused a victim’s skin to turn dark purple, almost black, and may account for the plague's epithet “black” The plague's skin may have turned dark purple and almost black . This type of form may have caused the plague
 How many perished under its macabre shadow is not known, but it is estimated that in Europe more than 25 million died from this plague pandemic .
 Other estimates rise to 50 million out of a population of 80 million in the 1300s . The population in 1300s is thought to have peaked at 80 million .
 The plague returned repeatedly over subsequent generations, but never again with such devastating loss of life . Seaborne transportation carried the plague over vast distances . The plague was first recorded in 1347 .
 This map shows the spread of the plague through Europe, year on year from 1347 . It shows the plague's spread in Europe from the 1347 to 1348 .
 The Black Death had a huge impact on medieval society . Only Iceland and Finland remained unscathed .
 But it was not the last plague to strike Europe, and there may be others in the future . The plague is not the first plague to hit Europe, but it may be a harbinger .
 The traumatic decline in population led to a shortage of labor and a sudden rise in prices, as well as irreversible social changes . The decline in labor led to the sudden rise of prices and irreversible changes in society .
 Over the next four centuries, another nine major plague pandemics hit Europe . Another nine major plagues hit Europe in the next century .
 Precautionary measures now help to control the spread of disease . Precautionsary measures are now being used to control disease spread .
 In Hong Kong in 2003, tissue-paper masks were used to avoid contact with SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome) -——a variety of pneumonic plague . In 2003, for example, in Hong Kong, for . example, . tissue paper masks were
 Drug-resistant infections may cause devastating pandemics in the future . Scientists predict that drug-resistant infection could cause pandemic outbreaks . Scientists warn that drug resistant infections could lead to pandemic illnesses .
 Black Death touched every level of medieval society, lords and ladies, clergy, and the poor alike . The Black Death is a modern plague of medieval medieval times .
 This Danse Macabre, a reminder of the universality of death, was a recurrent moral and artistic theme in post-plague Europe . The Danse macabre was a theme of art and culture throughout Europe in the aftermath of the plague .
 Frankish ruler Charlemagne and the Saxon Otto I both held territory that approached the size and power of the Western Roman Empire . Most successful of the new states to emerge in the period after the end of the Roman Empire was the kingdom of the Franks .
 The Franks were a confederacy of Germanic tribes from the area around modernday Belgium and Holland . They were a Germanic confederation of tribes around Belgium and the Netherlands . The Franks may have been the largest confederation in Europe .
 Under their leader Clovis, the Franks conquered most of the old Roman province of Gaul . The Franks laid the foundations of an empire that would dominate Western Europe for centuries .
 This silver container was made in the shape of a bust of the emperor . It was reputed to have contained parts of his skull . Clovis also used as a reliquary for the future of Europe .
 As the power of the Roman Empire came to an end, other leaders took control of the areas that had been controlled by Rome . The Roman Empire was ruled by Rome until the end of its reign .
 Power was delegated to a series of commanders from beyond the frontiers . They established themselves with their followers .
 Rome lost control of Britain in around 410, Southern and Western Spain in 413, Southwest France in 418, North France and North France after 451, and most of the rest of France in 473 . Rome also lost control over most of Spain in 451, 473, and the rest
 In doing so, Clovis ensured that Catholicism, rather than the Arian form of Christianity, would eventually prevail through Western Europe .
 On his death, Clovis’s kingdom was divided among his sons, and it continued to expand in the 6th century under his descendants, known as the Merovingians .
 The power of the Frankish kings # declined in the late 7th century . The Carolingians were known as the Carolinges .
 Charles Martel defeated Arab raids from Spain and reimposed Frankish rule east of the Rhine . He defeated Arab raiders from Spain, reimposed the Frankish kingdom east of Rhine in 12th century .
 St. Boniface were encouraged to set up monasteries and promote conversion in the conquered territories . Bonifaces were encouraged by the Roman Catholic Church to establish monastic institutions .
 Charles Martel’s son Pippin III deposed the last Merovingian king in 751 . He became the first ruler of the new Carolingian dynasty . The king's son was the first king of the Caroling dynasty .
 Pippin’s son, Charles the Great or Charlemagne, reigned for almost half a century from 768 to 768 . Charles reigned from 768 until the end of the medieval period .
 The king met with the leading lay and ecclesiastical nobles in an annual assembly each spring, in which new laws were agreed and plans made for campaigning later in the year .
 Frankish society was organized for almost continuous warfare, and the nobles depended on conquest for a continuing supply of treasure and new territories with which to support and expand their own followings .
 Under Charlemagne, the Franks undertook 30 years of warfare against the pagan Saxon tribes to the east of the Frankish lands, forcefully converting them to Christianity . The Franks were forced to convert the Saxon to Christianity in order to keep their pagan traditions alive .
 Charlemagne invaded northern Italy in 773 . Invited by Pope Hadrian I to save Rome from conquest by Lombard king Desiderius . Involved in the invasion of northern Italy .
 Following capture of the capital, Pavia, he proclaimed himself King of the Lombards . He proclaimed himself king of Lombards after capturing the capital .
 He acquired the enormous treasure they had built up over the preceding three centuries . He used it to pay for new churches and monasteries, as well as building a new capital at Aachen .
 Contacts with Italy and the AngloSaxon kingdoms enabled Charlemagne to attract scholars to his court . Alcuin of York, Visigothic poet Theodulf, and the Lombard historian Paul the Deacon were among those to study .
 The Frankish court became a center of learning to which the leading aristocratic families sent their sons . Charlemagne also helped carry out a program of reform of the Frankish church .
 New laws were issued throughout the reign to counter errors and abuses in the Frankish church . Higher levels of literacy were imposed on the clergy, and new laws were also issued .
 A reformed and more legible script known as Caroline replaced that used in the Merovingian period . It continued to be used throughout Western Europe until the 12th century . A reformed version of the script was used by the Carolines .
 Use of oaths to create a direct relationship between ruler and subjects reflects the lack of more complex administrative structures, such as the Roman Empire .
 Charlemagne made many administrative reforms and created a more efficient bureaucracy than had existed under his predecessors . He continued to depend on a handful of officials drawn from the local aristocracy, but he continued to rely on a few .
 Military action, in particular, required a large degree of consensus among the nobility . Military action was required to be agreed with by the nobility.
 Charlemagne also sought to develop the imperial dimension of his rule, borrowing from the authority of the Roman emperors . The French king sought to borrow from the Roman emperor's authority .
 Charlemagne said he did not want to be crowned by Leo, perhaps because by ""giving"" the emperor the crown, Leo appeared the more powerful of the two . adoption of the title was justified by the fact that the throne of the Eastern Roman Empire in Constantinople was held by a
 Charlemagne's seal included the Latin tag renovatio Romani imperii (^renovation of the Roman Empire"") and he is portrayed on coins, in deliberate imitation of Roman emperors, wearing a military cloak and laurel crown .
 After Charlemagne Louis the Pious was an intelligent and well-educated man . He lacked his father's leadership abilities, but lacked leadership abilities . He was born in France and died in France in 1283 .
 When he died in 840, the empire was divided between his three sons, who quarreled and in turn had multiple heirs, so the great Carolingian empire was further split . The empire was split between his sons and his other sons .
 Security of Europe was threatened by invasions from several directions . Vikings from the north, Arabs from the south, and Magyars from farther east . Magyar who had moved into what is now Hungary from the east .
 Over the course of the late 9th and early 10th centuries, Western Europe fragmented into many small states . The Vastor the easier Carolingian rulers, Louis the Child, died, and a group of German dukes banded together to choose a king for their lands .
 Basing his style of rule on that of Charlemagne, he strengthened his kingdom against further attacks . Building fortified towns and establishing a naw, he fortified towns .
 He left his kingdom much stronger than he found it, and he laid the foundations for his successors to unite England under a single ruler . He laid the foundation for the future of his successors, and left England much stronger .
 The battle ended the threat from the Magyars, who had taken advantage of divisions in Western Europe to mount their invasion . most of whom were from Saxony in eastern Germany, grew steadily more powerful .
 Otto benefited from a discovery of silver in the Harz Mountains in 938, which gave him the wealth to pay for a huge army and build a string of fortified towns . Otto was the first German king to find silver and build fortresses in the region .
 Like Charlemagne before him, Otto cultivated the church, encouraging conversion of non-Christians in his realm and founding new bishoprics . Otto was the first king to establish bishoprics in his kingdom .
 He sought to strengthen the authority of the church at the expense of the secular nobility . He appointed his own nominees as abbots and bishops and appointed himself .
 The term ‘feudalism’ is used to describe the system of relationships between kings and nobles in northern Europe during much of the medieval period . The term is used in the context of the relationship between king and nobles .
 In many ways it was the same system used by the Carolingian emperors, who appointed noblemen to administer areas of their empire in return for a certain amount of power and land .
 The feudal system that evolved in England and France worked much the same way as the Carolingian example . The system evolved in France and England and England in the same manner .
 England's first Norman king, William I, built a castle at Dover following his conquest in 1066 . But the massive stone tower and inner walls were the work of Henry Il, who upgraded the building in the 1180s .
 The stronghold was designed to guard the country against invaders arriving by ship across the English Channel . Its thick walls made it one of the strongest castles of its time, and its thick walls were made of thick walls .
 King's gateway gives access to small walled area called the North Barbican, where attackers could be trapped . The king's gateway is located in a walled part of the Barbican where attackers are trapped .
 First, he had to devote a set number of days each year to military service for the king .
 He was obliged to attend the king’s court, where he would give advice on matters of policy and justice . He would give his advice on issues of policy or justice .
 He would also be asked to contribute payments for certain royal expenses . The king would also contribute payments when he was building a new castle or a royal wedding .
 A nobleman who entered into this kind of feudal relationship with the king was termed the king’s vassal . He referred to the king as his lord, and referred to them as his lords .
 Battlements protect defending archers and provide a safe refuge . Many noblemen T a al” aat Ll Nera Knight's helmet . Battlements are protected by the Battlements of the Lera Castle .
 The wearer looks out through a narrow slit and there are tiny holes for ventilation . There are also tiny holes in the tiny slit for ventilation.
 The main floors of the great tower contain a ceremonial hall for the king and smaller private rooms . Subtenants apportioned part of their land to subtenants, who performed duties and swore allegiance .
 The feudal system developed into a hierarchy of lords and vassals . This meant that the feudal system became a hierarchy . It was also known as a system of lords, vassalists .
 The social networks that were involved could become very complicated, because it was possible for a vassal to accept lands from several lords . The social network that was involved could be very complicated .
 This kind of arrangement could lead to conflicting loyalties, especially if two lords were on different sides in a war . It could be especially dangerous for two lords to be on opposite sides of the war .
 Vassals identified one of their superiors as their liege lord, the lord who took precedence over others . So vassals identify one of them as their Liege lord .
 The feudal system was most highly developed in France and England . It was the most developed in England and France .
 Walls of the great tower are up to 21 ft thick to protect the royal apartments from attack . Feudalism was already well established in France by the 10th century, when a
 The forebuilding and entrance were guarded, acting as a barrier between the lord of the castle and intruders . The foreopening and entrance to the castle were guarded by the king .
 In return for protection and the right to work their lands, peasants worked for the lord of the manor for an agreed number of days per year . The peasants were given a share of their produce in return for their protection .
 Rollo became a vassal of the Carolingian ruler Charles the Simple . His people became known as the Normans . Rollo and his people are now known as Rollo .
 In 1066, Duke William of Normandy invaded England and granted lands to many of his Norman followers in return for their fulfillment of feudal obligations . Duke William invaded England in 1066 and became its king, becoming its king .
 Much of the rest of northern Europe was made up of a patchwork of smaller states, particularly those that formed part of the mainly Germanic Holy Roman Empire . The rest of the continent was made of smaller smaller states .
 The overlapping rights and responsibilities of emperor, dukes, and other secular and ecclesiastical princes made the political system more complex .
 The medieval knight fitted broadly into this system of feudal obligation . Knighthood and chivalry was a key part of the medieval knight's life .
 The inner bailey walls or courtyard housed the hall and other buildings to provide accommodation for the king's household, guests, and armed garrison . By 11th century the knights had come to represent a distinct caste of professional fighting men .
 Their status was confirmed and enhanced through symbols and public ceremonies such as the “accolade” -- a girding with a sword or hand on the shoulder .
 In return for this special status, the knight was expected to fight for his lord and defend those groups, such as the clergy and the poor, who relied on his protection . The knight's special status means he is expected to defend his lord .
 feudal obligations superseded “l y"" onetary arrangements . feudal obligations were superseded by feudal obligations in the 19th century .
 By the 74th century, knights would expect to be paid for their service and could themselves often pay a shield tax dn lieu of service . Knights would expect o be paid .
 FULBERT OF CHARTRES, LETTER TO DUKE WILLIAM OF AQUITAINE, 1020 ce family, and his servants, was written by Fulfbert of Charot .
 It was where business was done, the lord met his vassals, and the courts of justice met . It was the place where business and justice was done .
 It was also a military base and a fortified building from which a whole region could be defended . The building was also known as a military headquarters and a fortress .
 The best way for a monarch to exercise power in the kingdom was to travel continuously, so rulers usually had castles around the kingdom . In a period when communications were poor, the best way of exercising power is to travel .
 Other strongholds were held by vassals on the king’s behalf, who ruled as a part of their feudal duties . The king ruled as part of his feudal duties, and ruled by his vassal son .
 A castle usually had a courtyard surrounded by a strong, fortified wall . A castle was usually surrounded by an open courtyard . The castle was built around a strong wall or a strong courtyard .
 Inside the bailey was the main accommodation, a grand hall and private rooms for the lord or king, heated by open fires and decorated with tapestries . The bailey is located in the middle of a medieval bailey .
 In the towers or outer buildings, outer buildings were less luxurious rooms for the stables, garrison, and service buildings . The rooms included stables and garrison buildings .
 He introduced feudal government to England and appointed many French noblemen as his vassals . The ruling class of England was mainly Norman for many years, meaning that the ruling class was Norman .
 The halberd was carried by footsoldiers, who inflicted serious injuries with its sharp point . Footsoldiers were injured by the sharp point of the weapon, which was used to carry it .
 The feudal system gradually died out as traders and merchants grew more powerful, and printing led to greater exchange of ideas . The weapon was used to trip or maim a horse or pull a knight off his mount .
 Horseman’s hammer was used to penetrate gaps between armored areas or to smash straight through armored plate . The hammer pick or spike was also used to hit straight through armor plates .
 During the 14th and 15th centuries social changes made feudal relations decline in importance . Social changes in feudal relations led to the decline of feudal relations .
 Increasingly, vassals paid feudal dues in money rather than by military service . Increasingly . vassal . dues in the feudal age were paid in cash rather than military service.
 At the same time, the middle classes, who made their living by buying and selling goods, became more powerful . The middle class, who make and sell goods, also became powerful .
 Writers and artists began to look back to ancient Greece and Rome for inspiration . Writers began looking for inspiration for their work .
 With its pointed blades, or flanges, a mace like this was a powerful weapon . It could even piercing plate armor if swung with enough force . The mace was a weapon that could even hit plate armor .
 Johannes Gutenberg invented a method of making metal printing type . Gutenberg invented printing type in 1438 . Gutenberg was the first to print metal type type .
 This allowed printing of books and the rapid circulation of ideas in Furope . This allowed the printing of ideas and printing of new books .
 The Battle of Hastings was fought in southern England between an Anglo-Saxon army under Harold of Wessex and a force of invading Normans led by William of Normandy . William led the Normans to Hastings in 1066, and Harold led the Anglo Saxon army .
 The Normans were victorious and their leader became William | of England, known ever since as William the Conqueror . William was the son of the Normans, who became William of England .
 In 1051, Edward told William of Normandy that he would be king after Edward's death . Edward made a pledge to the Danish Svein Estrithsson too when a Viking invasion looked likely .
 Harald Hardraada of Norway had also been promised the throne by an earlier English king . The king promised the Norwegian king the throne in his first year of his reign .
 Edward made yet another oath to Harold of Wessex . However, English nobles wanted a native ruler, and Edward made another oath . The oath was made to Harold, the son of Edward III .
 Harald Hardraada invaded northern England in 13th century . Harald's invasion of northern England was the first of its kind . But he soon faced a challenge, with the help of the Vikings .
 Harold marched north to face his rival in battle and emerged the victor . Harold was victorious in battle against his rival .
 William of Normandy set sail across the English Channel with an invasion force, and landed on the south coast of England . At the same time, William of Dormormen invaded Normandy, France, landing on south coast .
 Harold marched south, hoping to take the invaders by surprise . As soon as he heard the news, he marched south .
 William's scouts were watching for Harold's army, and soon after his arrival the Normans attacked . William's army was attacked by Harold's son, William's wife, Harold's father, William .
 Two armies are well matched in numbers, with around 8,000 men each . The two armies are expected to be well-matched in numbers .
 Their footsoldiers fought in close, efficient formations and their axmen dealt fearsome blows . Their foot soldiers fought close-up combat and dealt with deadly blows .
 When a rumor spread that William had been killed, the Norman soldiers started to break up in disarray . The Norman soldiers broke up after the rumor spread .
 Norman archers and mounted knights dominated the English, who were exhausted after their long march south . From then on, the Norman archer and mounted knight dominated the kingdom .
 Harold was wounded and then, after being set upon by Norman knights, he was killed . Harold's death was the result of a battle with Norman knights .
 Norman king granted lands to his nobles, thereby ensuring the spread of Norman power across the country . He quickly strengthened his position by granting lands to nobles, which he quickly granted . Norman lands were granted to Norman nobles .
 For many generations, England was ruled by kings from Normandy or other parts of France . England has always been ruled by French kings in the past .
 The ruling class of England was Norman, the language of government and the court was French, and many senior churchmen were from Norman families . Many of the ruling class were Norman .
 Although it is thought to have been created in England, it tells the story from a Norman perspective . The Norman-era-era version of the book is believed to be based in Norman England .
 The dedine of the Western Roman Empire and the barbarian peoples in the 4th-6th centuries cE did not spell the end for Christianity in Western Europe .
 Many of the Germanic tribes were Arian Christians, a variant of Christianity at odds with Roman doctrine . The Arianism was an Arianic variant of Christian doctrine .
 Others, such as the Franks, entered as pagans but were converted to Christianity .
 Latin Christianity triumphed over Arianism by the 6th-7th centuries . Latin Christianity survived throughout the Roman Empire in Western Europe .
 Christian missionaries began to spread Latin Christianity into remaining pagan areas of Europe, such as Anglo-Saxon England, Denmark, and the Slavic territories of Central Europe . From the late 6th century under Pope Gregory the Great, and throughout the 7th-10th centuries, Christian missionaries
 The Eastern Church under the Patriarch of Constantinople became gradually more estranged from the Latin Church, culminating in the Great Schism of 1054 . The Eastern church under Patriarch of . Constantinople became increasingly estranged from . The Latin Church .
 Charlemagne made the church central to his government, using clerics as teachers and administrators . He used the spiritual authority of the church to enhance his own authority .
 Medieval Western Europe was dominated by a common religious culture . Medieval Europe dominated by religious culture. Medieval Europe is now dominated by the rise of Christianity .
 Under a series of strongwilled, reform-minded popes, the Church became more centralized, powerful, and assertive . The Church is now more centralized and powerful than ever .
 At the start of the 11th century, Western Europe was emerging from a long period of raids by tribes outside its borders . But over time, the Church grew increasingly intolerant and politically divided .
 An unidentified bishop shaped band of white wool embroidered with crosses . The band was embroidered in white wool .
 Freed from the threat of pagan and Muslim aggressors, the Church grew more prosperous, selfconfident, and assertive . The Church grew prosperous and self-confident as a result .
 The church reform movement is a desire for reform in the church . The church has been in touch with the world for more than a decade .
 Images show monks and nuns from Augustinian, Benedictine, Carmelite, Dominican, and Franciscan orders engaged in prayers and debate .
 Prior to the 1 1th century, individual monasteries spread across Europe tended to follow their own interpretations of the monastic rule, often under the control of secular lords and benefactors . Monasteries in Europe were often ruled by secular lords .
 The reform movement centered on the Burgundian Pope Benedict XI dominates the piece . As pope he is God's representative on earth and the supreme spiritual authority . Benedict XI was the first pope to be elected to the Vatican .
 The sheep symbolize the pope's human flock and are guarded by black and white dogs that represent the Dominican order . The dogs represent the Domini canes, Latin for ""Lord's hounds.""
 Under the influence of Cluny, Europe's monasteries merged into more uniform “orders” with a renewed commitment to discipline, prayer, and study .
 Other new monastic orders emerged in the period following the Clunaic reforms .
 In 1098 an abbey was founded at Citeaux in France that gave its name to one of the most significant of these movements, the Cistercians . The abbey is located in France and is one of France's most important religious movements .
 The Cistercians rejected Cluny's wealth to focus on manual labor, strict discipline, and austerity . Under the influence of the charismatic preacher Bernard of Clairvaux, the Cisterscians were known for their austere lifestyle . The C.C.Cisterci
 The Holy Roman Emperor Charles IV holds the orb, symbolizing the emperor's special responsibility for the security of the Church . Cistercian monks played a vital role in the creation of the Holy Roman Empire .
 The laity fills the right-hand side of the picture, with representative of various secular occupations . The laities fill the right hand side, with representatives of various occupations .
 The man in white wears a golden garter showing he is a knight and a member of the English Order of the Garter . He is pictured in white and wearing the garter .
 King Charles V of France stands to the left of the emperor, representing the other secular rulers of Latin Christendom. role in the settlement and cultivation of inhospitable lands along the borders of medieval Europe .
 Several influential popes of the late 11th century wished to see a Church in which the sacred was more clearly separated from the worldly . This reforming impulse also drove the agendas of several influential Popes . The papal reform of the 11th and 12th century was also influential .
 He also attempted to extend papal authority by making ceremonial journeys and summoning bishops to synods held at major towns .
 The Italian Dominican friar Thomas Aquinas was the medieval Church's greatest thinker . Theologian Thomas Aquina was the Church's most influential thinker .
 His key contribution to theology was to reconcile the newly rediscovered work of the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle with Christianity .
 Summa Theologica provided the intellectual foundation of the medieval Church and still forms the basis of Catholic doctrine today . His most important work provided a systematic synthesis of Aristotle's theory and Christian tradition .
 A fat and amiable man, the ‘angelic doctor’ was well liked even by his intellectual adversaries . He was well-liked even by intellectual adversaries, according to his friends and family .
 Thomas Aquinas was canonized in 1323 . One of his reformers, a Clunaic monk, later became Pope Gregory VII .
 Gregory VII was determined to promote the authority of the papacy in both spiritual and temporal spheres . The investiture controversy was the result of a clash with secular kings and princes . Gregory VII wanted to promote his authority in the spiritual, temporal spheres of power .
 In 1075, shortly after he was elected, he composed a detailed statement outlining his status as the spiritual head of Christendom . The king was elected in 1075 .
 Gregory claimed that since the pope owed his position to God, he was superior in authority to all earthly rulers . In it he claimed that, since God had given him the title to the pope, he had superior authority to any earthly ruler .
 A major area of dispute between the resurgent papacy and secular rulers was over the appointment of bishops and other senior church officials . A major issue of dispute was over bishops' appointment .
 Since the time of Charlemagne, secular rulers had used their right to be involved in this process to ensure a compliant and sympathetic church .
 Gregory was determined that control over investiture should lie with the Church and, ultimately, with himself . Gregory decided to take control of investiture over the Church .
 A gargoyle looks out from Notre Dame cathedral in Paris . The gargoyle is a gargoyle of the cathedral .
 In the drama of medieval Christendom, demons and devils battled angels and saints . In the play, the battle was between demons and angels .
 The Church Militant and Triumphant by Andrea da Firenze is a 14th-century fresco . It presents an idealized view of the medieval social order . The fresco was painted in the 14th century by the Italian artist .
 The pope presides over the representatives of the Church to his right, and State to his left . Enthroned in the center, the pope is seen in the image of the papal Throne Throne .
 Gothic stone angels were symbolic of the joys of heaven as well as consolation for the sufferings of the faithful on earth . Serene figures such as this one from Reims Cathedral, France, are symbolic of heaven .
 A clash between the uncompromising pope and the formidable emperor seemed inevitable . The pope and emperor were seen to be at odds with each other in Rome . A clash was inevitable .
 Henry persuaded the bishops of the German empire to declare the pope deposed . Gregory retaliated by excommunicating (excluding from the Church) Henry . Gregory then excommunicated ( excluding from Church)
 Henry decided to appeal to the pope to lift his excommunication . When the German princes rebelled and elected an alternative emperor, Henry decided that he had no option but to do public penance and appeal .
 After four days of penance, Henry was granted absolution, but conflict between papacy and empire rumbled on . Henry was given absolution by the papacy, but the conflict continued .
 In 1122 a compromise was reached at the Concordat of Worms, but by then the controversy had divided Europe and caused almost half a century of civil war inside Germany . The Concordat was reached in 1122, but the controversy caused a civil war in Germany .
 All over Christendom, the stage was set for a series of clashes between Church and State . Popes and antipopes clashed between the church and state in Europe .
 The shrine containing his relics at Canterbury became a center of pilgrimage for people all over Europe . His relics were found at Canterbury Cathedral in Canterbury Cathedral .
 By the late 14th century, the Church and the papacy itself were divided . The papacy and the Church were divided in the 14th Century .
 Pope Urban VIL elected in 1378, alienated his supporters in the papal court, and the cardinals responded by electing a rival pope . The cardinals elected a new pope, Pope Urban IVIL .
 Clement VII established his papal court at Avignon in France . This “antipope,” Clement VII, established his Papal court . Clement VII was Clement VII .
 A European crisis developed as the German emperor recognized the Roman claimant . The French king supported his rival, and other states and kingdoms took one side or the other .
 The resulting split, or “Great Schism,” undermined the prestige and authority of the papacy . For several years there were three rival claimants . The resulting schism was known as the Great Schism .
 The schism was resolved in 1414 at the Council of Constance, with the pope in Rome recognized as legitimate . The pope's legitimacy was recognized in Rome as legitimate in the 1414 .
 The established Church was cut off from the spiritual life of the growing urban classes . For all its power, the established church was increasingly cut off .
 Merchants, craftsmen, and their families could now read and write, ending the clergy’s monopoly on the transmission of ideas . Merchants and craftsmen and families were able to write and communicate .
 These people were often better educated than the clergy, and more open to new forms of religious devotion . These people often were better educated and open-minded to new religious devotion.
 Thomas a Kempis’ The Imitation of Christ was published around 1418 . The growing impulse for a more personal, informal relationship with God is expressed in spiritual works such as Thomas Kempis . The Imitations of Christ is published around 1515 .
 These ideals also permeated poetry and art, which began to focus more on ‘Our Lady,” the Virgin Mary . Poems and art were often focused on the ideals .
 Such holy relics were considered miraculous, capable of inducing cures for all manner of physical and spiritual ills . Such relics were believed to be capable of curing all manner ills, including physical, spiritual and physical .
 For the well-to-do, a pilgrimage to a shrine was also a relatively pleasant way of doing penance and earning remission from time in purgatory . For many, the pilgrimage to the shrine was an easy way to do penance .
 The son of a wealthy merchant in the Italian town of Assisi, Francis led a carefree youth . Francis of Assisia was born in Assisi and died in his native town .
 He began to live like a beggar, traveling barefoot, preaching repentance, and aiding the poor . He traveled barefoot and traveled bare-footed . He then became a preacher who preached repentance .
 In time he was joined by two companions, and they determined to live by the rule of poverty and simplicity that Christ had given to his apostles . In time they were joined by the two companions .
 In 1210, Francis gained the blessing of Pope Innocent III for his new order, the Franciscans . In 1212, he gained the approval of the order from Innocent III . Francis is credited with saving the life of his life .
 The medieval Inquisition operated mainly in France and Italy . Staffed by Dominicans, the medieval Inquisition worked mainly in Italy and France . The Inquisition was founded by the Dominicans .
 The systematic persecution of heretics was the dark side of the highly organized and efficient medieval Church . Heretics were among those who diverged from strict strict Roman Catholic orthodoxy .
 Amauricien heretics are burned outside Paris in 1210 . King Philip II Augustus watched the burning of the heretics .
 Philip II's reign also saw the launch of the Albigensian Crusade against Cathar heretics in southern France . Personal property was not attached to wealthy abbeys .
 Friars built churches and schools in the middle of towns and preaching in public squares . The friars were a part of the new urban culture, building schools and churches .
 To support themselves, they depended on charity, putting them more closely in touch with ordinary people . To support them, they depend on charity to support themselves .
 The Franciscan friars sought a return to the simplicity and poverty of the early Church, living among the people, caring for the poor or needy and preaching repentance . The friars, in particular, sought to live among the poor and the needy .
 The Dominican order had its roots in the campaign against the Albigensians, or Cathars, a heretical (holding beliefs contrary to the established teachings of the Church) movement in southern France . The existence of evil contradicted the notion of one benign God .
 Dominicans were dedicated to teaching and preaching, and emphasized religious orthodoxy and obedience to the papacy . Wearing black and white habits, Dominicans wore black and black habits . Dominicans are dedicated to religious orthodoxy .
 By ù the Synod of Toulouse in 1229, the ecclesiastical tribunals ES known as inquisitions had developed into a more formal institution charged with the suppression of heresy .
 Large stained glass windows let light and color flood in to the building, a feature typical of Gothic churches and cathedrals . Stained glass windows are characteristic of Gothic architecture and Gothic architecture .
 A group of pilgrims leave Canterbury, site of the shrine of Thomas Becket, in a version of the prologue to Geoffrey Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales . The story is set in the Prologue to The Canterbury Tale .
 A portion of Chartres was built in 1194-1220. buildings such as Chartres taller and lighter than any previous structures . The main Gothic buttresses are making Gothic buildings taller than any other structures .
 Ribbed vaulting helps to support the weight of the high, wide nave ceiling, the highest in France at the time it was built . The buttresses at Chartres cathedral are turned into a decorative feature .
 The royal portal features intricate carvings of religious scenes including Christ sitting in judgment . Carvings include scenes of Christ in judgment and Christ sitting on judgment .
 The spacious nave is the widest in France and permits an unbroken view along the entire length of the cathedral . Allegations of corruption and excess in the Church, as well as new ideas and forms of religious belief, undermined the unity of the Church .
 The catalyst for the Reformation came in 1517, when a priest nailed a list of propositions to the door of the Castle church in Wittenberg, Germany . Martin Luther nailed the propositions to a church door in the city of Wittenburg, Germany, on the door .
 He intended to start a debate and, thanks to the printing press, his ideas for reform of the Christian church were being read and discussed throughout Germany within two weeks and Europe within a month . The new technology of printing press enabled the idea to be read and debated throughout Europe .
 By 1600, Lutheran churches were established in Germany and Scandinavia . Calvinist churches in Scotland, Switzerland, and the Netherlands were established . Anglican churches in England and Wales were established by 1600, and by 1600 .
 For Luther, as for other Protestant reformers such as Calvin and Zwingli, the authority to oppose the Church came from Holy Scripture, the direct word of God . Luther: For Luther as for Calvin, as . Calvin and . Calvin, Luther, Luther wrote that God's authority
 To make holy writ readily available to ordinary men and women, it had to be translated from Latin to the vernacular, the spoken languages of everyday life .
 This Bible facilitated the spread of Lutheranism from Germany to Scandinavia, Poland, and Hungary . The Bible was published in Germany in 17th century .
 The first authorized edition of the scriptures in English, the Great Bible, was produced by Miles Coverdale and published in 1538 . The Great Bible was the first authorized version of the Bible in English .
 The Byzantines, however, called themselves Romans and their realm Romania . The Byzantine Empire ruled the Roman Empire .
 The Hagia Sophia church (meaning “holy wisdom") was converted into a mosque in 1453 by the Ottomans . Built by Justinian, the church was converted to a mosque by the Ottoman Empire .
 Constantinople stood for more than a millennium at the heart of its empire, a center of religion and culture . A great metropolis when the capitals of Western Europe were little more than villages . The Byzantine Empire formed a protective barrier that allowed Europe to emerge .
 Located above the imperial bodyguard's Vestibule of the Warriors, which today serves as the exit, the Mosaic of the Donors illustrates the consecration of the Hagia Sophia, its dedication to Christ, and Constantinople's status as capital .
 Heraclius won a decisive victory over the Persians in 628 . There followed an exhausting series of military clashes until the emperor won the war .
 The city stood at a strategic position that controlled the trade routes between Asia and Europe . The city controlled the passage from ihe Black Sea to the Mediterranean .
 In 395ce the Roman Empire was definitively split into eastern and western divisions by Emperor Theodosius . The eastern empire was ruled from Constantinople, the eastern empire being ruled from . Constantinople .
 Emperor Justinian offered the Church of Holy Wisdom to the Virgin Mary and the baby Jesus . The Hagia Sophia was the birthplace of the Roman Catholic Church .
 Theodora proved herself a talented ruler in her own right in 527 . She was emperor of Byzantine Empire from 527 to 528 .
 She is regarded as an advocate for women's rights who used her position to help her society's oppressed . She is venerated as a saint in the Orthodox church .
 One of his most significant acts was to persuade the Ostrogothic leader Theodoric, who was threatening to do in the east what other barbarian tribes had done in the west, to take part of the eastern empire .
 His armies won back North Africa from the Vandals and reconquered much of Italy . His armies also won back much of North Africa and Italy .
 Justinian left a substantial cultural legacy in the form of magnificent churches and a thorough codification of Roman law . Justinian's conquests included the creation of the Roman Catholic Church .
 The Persian Sassanids broke a treaty made BYZANTINE . The word was not used regularly to indicate the eastern Roman Empire until after its fall .
 This gilt enamel reliquary is said to contain a fragment of the cross on which Jesus Christ was crucified . It is also applied to the empire's style of architecture .
 The empire faced many enemies besides the Arabs, including the Lombards in Italy and the Bulgars in the Balkan peninsula, but somehow survived . The empire was founded in the Byzantine Empire of 5th century .
 Heraclius introduced a system of government, in which the empire was divided into military provinces, called ""themes" Each province was governed by an independent strategos or general . The provinces were each governed by a general .
 The city of Constantinople was the largest in the world . Despite the chronic instability of its empire and periodic outbreaks of plague, the city was the world's largest .
 Byzantine territory is evident through centuries of invasion from both the east and the west . The Byzantine church was the “Orthodox” church—in contrast to the Orthodox church . A shrinking empire is evident throughout the centuries .
 Christianity that it considered heretical. Christianity . Christianity . was considered heretic.
 This became known — > x ""ferr g EDS i a g'a as the Iconoclast controversy .
 The empire AFRICA — | Ptolemais, gApollonia Alexandria; Ne erupted in protest, and the icons were dia ‘Tripolis A — oMemphis restored, to be ‘venerated” but not ee — m
 The empire's fortunes revived under the ""Macedonian"" emperors of the late 9th-early 11th centuries . The empire collapsed in the 9th and 11th century after the collapse of the empire .
 It regained control of the Adriatic Sea, southern Italy, and all of Bulgaria, after losing control of southern Italy and Bulgaria .
 Cities grew and prospered, trade increased, and artistic and intellectual life flourished . Cities thrived in the early 1800s, and cities flourished .
 A string of weak rulers after Basil II allowed the once-formidable armed forces to fall apart . The once-dominant armed forces fell apart during the reign of Basil II .
 At the same time, the empire was faced with new, ambitious enemies, such as the Normans, who had taken southern Italy by 1071 . The empire faced new enemies, including new enemies such as Normans .
 By 1080, most of Asia Minor had been lost and Byzantium's fatal decline had begun . Byzantine Empire was losing Asia Minor by 1080 .
 Emperor Alexius sent embassies to Western Europe asking for help . Desperate for help, he sent embassies seeking help .
 Instead of helping their eastern brothers, the crusaders mostly pursued their own interests . However, instead of helping them, they were pursuing their own interest .
 The Virgin Mary and Jesus are depicted in the highly stylized form of Byzantine icons . The Virgin and Jesus were intended to be depicted by the Virgin Mary .
 In 1204 a crusader army that was supposedly on its way to defend the Holy Land brutally sacked the city of Constantinople and dismantled the empire . The city was sacked by the crusaders in 1204 and was eventually destroyed .
 Bronze horses stolen from Constantinople . Horses once adorned the Hippodrome erected by Constantine in Constantinople . Horse stolen from the Hipporome .
 In 1204 much of the Byzantine Empire was divided up between its crusader conquerors, but it survived and limped on until the fall of Constantinople to the Ottomans in 1453 . After 1204, the Byzantine empire was divided into two parts, but survived .
 After the Fourth Crusade Constantinople was left underpopulated and in ruins . The Fourth Crusade left the city of Constantinople in ruins after the Crusades .
 Venetian Republic took over much of the Byzantines' trade as well as shipping huge amounts of loot back to Venice . Chief beneficiary was the Venice Republic, which took over the trade .
 Once Byzantium had fallen, the Ottomans completed their conquest of the Balkans with ease . Once the city was conquered, they were able to take over the Balkans .
 He called for a military expedition to liberate the holy city of Jerusalem and free Christians from Muslim rule .
 Urban stated that any soldiers who died fighting fighting the enemy would earn remission from all sins . In exchange, Urban said that any soldier who died in battle would be given remission of sins .
 Over the next two years alone, thousands of crusaders took the cross and joined this pilgrimage to the Holy Land . Thousands of soldiers became known as crusaders, as these soldiers .
 By the 11th century, as opportunities for territorial expansion within Western Europe declined, an aggressive warrior society began to turn its attention to the lands outside Europe's borders .
 This type of broad-bladed sword, with simple crossguard and pommel, became popular back in the 1930s . The sword was made of broad blades with simple pommel and crossguard .
 Urban saw the proposed expedition east as a chance to flex papal muscles and check the expansion of Islam, as well as an opportunity to conquer what he perceived as pagan areas . The papal saw the proposal as a way to flex his papal powers and check expansion of Islamicism .
 The huge popular response to his appeal was the product of a number of factors, including the growth of a fervent lay piety over the preceding centuries and the need of a land-hungry warrior class to find an outlet .
 The crusades united these impulses by legitimizing the concept of religious warfare, author says . "The crusades unified these impulses," he says .
 Mounted and heavily armored knights formed the heavy shock troops of the crusader armies . Mounted knights were heavy shock forces during the Crusades .
 The first of the armies to enter Anatolia, in modern-day Turkey, met with disaster . The First Crusade was the first of its armies to invade Anatolia .
 The band was massacred soon after entering Seljuk Turk territory . Lacking military discipline and blinded by religious fervor, the band was blinded to religious zeal .
 By the end of 1187, Saladin recaptures Acre and Jerusalem . The Christian Byzantine empire at Constantinople at Constantinople . Saladin captures Acre, Jerusalem and the Christian Byzantine Empire .
 Patriarch of Jerusalem was the spiritual leader of the kingdom and representative of the pope in Rome . He was spiritual leader, spiritual leader and representative to Rome .
 As the traditional site of Jesus's crucifixion and burial, this was the physical destination for pilgrims and crusaders alike . Jesus's burial was the traditional destination for crusaders and pilgrims alike .
 He dies before with the Ayyubid Sultan of Egypt. He dies . He can set sail for the Holy Land. He can . set sail . for the holy Land. he can .
 German emperors led armies to the east in 1145, 1189, and 1228 . in 1098. in 1097 . in 1111 . in 1228.
 After a lengthy siege, the city fell, The -— crusaders slaughtered all Muslims and Jews in the i city . Aa that set the tone for al much that was to follow . After a bloody climax, the bloody climax Aa was set to follow. Aa .
 The crusaders now held a thin strip of coast in Palestine along which they established various crusader States, including the Kingdom of Jerusalem, the Counties of Edessa and Tripoli . In time, the crusaders built huge fortresses to defend .
 The period also saw the formation of the military orders, the Templars and the Templar seal . United in the service of Christ, two knights are shown sharing one horse .
 Founder of the Ayyubid dynasty and unifier of Muslim states in the Middle East against the crusaders . Saladin was also renowned throughout Christendom as an honorable and chivalrous leader .
 When Jerusalem fell three months later, he allowed neither massacre nor looting . When the city fell, Jerusalem was the only city to fall again .
 Saladin paved the way for the later elimination of the Crusader states . He failed to expel the crusaders from the Holy Land, and was defeated at Arsuf in 1191 .
 During the 12th Hospitallers, members took vows of poverty and chastity to dedicate their lives to the defense of the Holy Land . Members of this group took vows to live a life in poverty and to defend the land .
 These warrior monks were the closest thing the crusaders had to have to a standing, professional army . The monk monks were closest to the Crusaders' standing army .
 After the battle of Hattin in 1187, the Sultan Saladin allowed the ransom of all prisoners except for the Templars and Hospitallers, whom he had executed . They often pursued their own interests at the expense of their fellow Christians .
 Never again would the Muslim states of the Holy Land be so unprepared as they had been at the time of the First Crusade . The later crusades would see the region of the Middle Ages fall victim to the First Crusades .
 A second crusade was organized in 1145, following the fall of Edessa, but failed to retake the city from Nureddin, a Muslim ruler who had united much of Syria against the crusaders . The second crusade failed to take Edessa back from the Muslim ruler .
 Most of the Muslim inhabitants of Syria and Palestine were united under Nureddin's successor, the sultan Saladin . By the 1180s, most of the Syrian and Palestinian inhabitants of the region had united under Saladin's successor .
 In 1187 Saladin destroyed the armies of the crusader kingdoms at Hattin and seized Jerusalem, sparing the lives of the Christians in the city . Saladin's capture of Jerusalem in 1187 was captured by the Crusaders .
 The crusades to Egypt and the Holy Land enjoyed some success but many setbacks . Subsequent crusades were successful but many were unsuccessful .
 The fortunes of the crusader states altered with the balance of power in the east . Major expeditions from Europe were sporadic, and the fortunes of crusader .
 After the fall of the port of Acre in 1291 defense of the mainland territories became impossible . The fall was the first attempt to take control of the region .
 The remaining Christian cities were abandoned and the crusaders expelled from the Holy Land . The remaining remaining Christian towns were abandoned . The crusaders were expelled and the Crusaders were forced to leave .
 Long sieges, such as Antioch and Jerusalem in 1097-99, were common during the crusades . Siege machines were used during the Crusades .
 Siege machines such as this trebuchet were used by both sides to bombard opposing soldiers, fortifications, and siege towers . Greed and political expediency gradually came to undermine the ideals of the early crusades .
 The crusading ideal of war against the enemies of Christianity in the Holy Land soon lost focus . The Crusades in Europe were meant to be Christian crusades in the Middle Ages .
 As early as 1195 Pope Celestine III proclaimed a crusade against pagans in northern Europe . The crusade was declared in 1195 as a result of the Pope's crusade .
 Innocent III announced a crusade against heretics within France in 1209, 1209 . The Albigensian Crusade was part of the crusade to rid of heretics in France .
 By the 1230s popes were using crusades as a political weapon against rivals . The crusades were used as a weapon against political opponents .
 Military orders such as the Templars grew immensely rich and powerful, attracting much criticism . End of the Knights TEMPLAR .
 Philip IV of France charged the Templars with heresy in 1507 . Philip IV wanted to seize their assets, intending to seize them . The Templars were charged with heresy by Philip IV .
 Many small kingdoms, principalities, and lordships were now more vulnerable to raiders . Without Rome's protection, many small kingdoms were now vulnerable to raidsers .
 Viking helmets were similar to those used by other cultures at this time . Viking war helmet was similar to the helmets of other cultures .
 The myth that their helmets had horns attached to them probably came about because Vikings were often compared to demons and devils . Viking helmets were often thought to have horns attached .
 The Vikings raided and traded across an enormous geographical area . The Vikings were known for raiding and trading across the vast expanse of land .
 We know this through the types of coins found at Viking sites, in graves and in graves, and connected to towns . The coins were found in Viking sites and towns, and have been found in the past .
 Most historians believe there was rapid population growth in Scandinavia during the 7th and 8th centuries . Because of the harsh cimate and rough terrain, there was limited land suitable for farming .
 Local rulers began to fight among each other in order to expand their control over resources . This competition for land meant that not only was food in short supply, but local rulers also began fighting for control of resources .
 One alternative, especially to a warrior society such as that of Scandinavia, was raiding . One alternative to the warrior society was raiding.
 The situation was so bad that monks prayed for stormy weather so the ""Northmen"" would be unable to set sail . Monks prayed for a stormy winter so the "Northmen" could not set sail on the ship .
 The Vikings' focus on monasteries meant that contemporary writers, all of whom were monks themselves, often portrayed them as enemies of God . The Vikings were often portrayed as enemies to God .
 They recorded the calamities that befell their brothers with genuine anguish and horror . The brothers recorded their brothers' calamities in genuine anguish, horror .
 Viking attacks were vicious and ruthless, but they and their sailors were highly skilled . Viking attacks on Viking ships were vicious, ruthless and skillful .
 The ships were light, with shallow bottoms, and could be sailed far inland on rivers and lakes . They could be taken out of the water, and dragged across land to another river to another .
 The nature of Viking involvement outside Scandinavia began to change during the 9th century . Viking involvement in Scandinavia outside of Scandinavia changed dramatically in 9th Century .
 Vikings began to overwinter on islands in the Seine and at the mouth of the Loire River in France . Charles II of France gave a group of Vikings land to settle on in exchange for aid in a conflict against his brother, Emperor Lothar .
 Scandinavians were both the terror of Europe and its most active traders and explorers . Events like this gave the Vikings influence over local power . Vikings were both terror and active traders in Scandinavia .
 These people swept through the treasure houses of monasteries, founded towns and cities, and even became rulers in England and France . They swept through treasure houses and founded towns, founded cities and became rulers .
 The first Viking raids were carried out against soft targets, such as villages and monasteries, on the coast of Frisia and eastern England . Viking raids carried out on soft targets such as village and monastery buildings .
 Monasteries were particularly attractive to the Vikings because they were rarely fortified, and were filled with spectacular treasures donated by local Christians . Vikings were particularly attracted to the monasteries because of their rarely fortified buildings .
 The monks were unable to defend themselves, and the Vikings, who were not Christian, had no qualms about sacking monasteries . Vikings made off with gold and silver chalices, crosses, and book covers .
 The monastery at Lindisfarne was not deliberately anti-Christian, as some of the records suggest . The monastery was built in the 13th century .
 Vikings threatened the Carolingian empire in the last years of Charlemagne's reign . Vikings also threatened the relatively powerful Carlesian empire .
 His death marked a decline in central power and a rise in political instability . His death marks a decline of central power in the Middle East .
 By the 830s CE, they were able to raid the important town of Dorestad on the Rhine River three times . The raiders raided the town three times, including three times in the city .
 Viking raids were so effective because they struck unexpectedly . Early Viking raids struck unexpectedly because of the element of surprise . Viking raids are so effective that they strike unexpectedly .
 By the time locals could organize their defense, the Vikings were gone . The Vikings won't be able to organize a defense until after the game .
 They fought using the same basic weapons as their opponents, such as swords, spears, and axes . The battle was fought using swords and spears as well as axes, spears and axes.
 Viking war spear was attached to a pole, and thrown at the enemy, much the same way a modern javelin is thrown . Viking longships were superior in design in design, but were superior to longships in design .
 Viking swords were often buried with their owners to accompany them on their journey to the hall of the dead warriors, Valhalla . Viking swords often encouraged them to settle outside Scandinavia .
 From this point on, the Vikings became much more interested in acquiring land and establishing trade . The Vikings were often involved in raids, but they were much more focused on acquiring land .
 Many kingdoms paid them off with huge amounts of silver and land in order to stop attacks . Many kingdoms were paid off with large sums of silver .
 A band of Vikings established the Duchy of Normandy in France when a chieftain named Rollo was given Rouen and the surrounding area . Viking war ax is the weapon that Vikings are most identified with .
 Viking origin with Eastern elements demonstrates how Scandinavian craftsmen adopted the styles and techniques of the various cultures they came in contact with .
 Iron trading weights found in Hemingby, Sweden . Brass-covered Pd l weights were found in the Swedish town .
 Each has a different number of circles corresponding to its weight . Each has been stamped with a different weight corresponding to the weight of the item .
 Viking Age came to an end during the to this mast 11th century . After Viking brooch -i Brooch is frequently a square sail found in Vik was attached ae pu .
 The kingdoms of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark evolved into more centralized states, as was happening elsewhere in Europe . Denmark, Norway, Denmark and Norway were among the early Scandinavians .
 Launching a lightning raid on a centralized state did not have the same effect as it did in the 9th and 10th centuries . By 1500, these states had developed organized armies and navies . By that time, the states had already developed armies and armies .
 Communities were able to defend themselves against attacks of the kind that the Vikings carried out . This meant that communities could defend themselves from attacks like that of the Vikings .
 Gold bridle Viking metalwork was complex and often consisted of intertwining animal shapes . Viking metalworks were complex and were often made of intertwined animal shapes. Viking metal work was often intricate and intricate .
 Raid tactics similar to those of the Vikings were used during the same period in the Caribbean . Furopean navies, privateers, and pirates preyed on shipping routes . 15 oar ports were located on each side of the longship .
 They traded between the Baltic, the Netherlands and England, and England . They carried goods from Arabia and beyond across the Russian steppes . They traded from the Baltic to the Netherlands .
 Between 1016 and 1055, Cnut the Great ruled Denmark city of York and England . He ruled Denmark and England from 1016 to 1055 .
 The Vikings also became great traders, credited with being gateways to the East . Vikings are even Novgorod, founded by Vikings, became a city of the same name .
 At its height, merchants sailing from Iceland to Russia and the founders of the Grand from over 60 cities had joined . But by the end Islamic empire, Islamic empire had been ruled out .
 By 1260, they had conquered an area stretching from the Pacific Ocean to the Mediterranean Sea . They were considered invincible and considered invincible by 1260 . They had conquered a vast area of the world, stretching from Pacific to Mediterranean .
 On September 3, 1260, the Mongols reached ‘Ayn Jalut in Palestine, where they were met by the Mamluk Sultans . The Mongols arrived in Palestine in 1260 and fought for control of Palestine .
 Children and grandchildren of Mongol leader Genghis Khan took control of Mongol tribes on his death in 1227 . Genghi's children and grandchildren took over control of the Mongol tribes after his death .
 Hülegü Khan was given power over part of the Mongol army . One of his grandchildren was given control of the army . He was also given power in the Mongol empire .
 He took this army into northwest Persia in 1255, raiding and looting as he went . He raided and looted as he made his way to northwest Persia . The king's army raided and raided northwest Persia, looting as they went .
 They overran Palestine and Syria, capturing the main city, Damascus, in 1259 . They captured main city of Damascus, captured by them in 1260 .
 With Palestine and Syria conquered, Hülegü turned his attention to Egypt, the next major power to the west . Egypt was the first major power in the Middle East .
 He sent a message to its rulers, the Mamluks, asking them to surrender without a fight . He sent the message to them, asking for their surrender without fight .
 Mamluks had overthrown the old government and taken power for themselves . Originally slaves taken from Turkish tribes and formed into an army by the previous rulers of Egypt .
 Mongolian government was based on military principles, making it ideally suited for Mongol soldiers waging war . Mongol soldiers are unlikely to give in to threats and unlikely to surrender to threats .
 Mamluk response was to kill Hülegü's envoys and march toward the Mongol army in Palestine . Mamluks killed envoys in order to march toward Mongol army . Mongol army was in Palestine in the 17th century .
 At the same time, Hülegü was informed that his brother, the Mongol Emperor, was dying . At the time, he had been informed that he was informed of his brother's death .
 Hülegü took most of the army with him and headed back to his brother . With ambitions to gain control of the Mongol Empire for himself, he headed for his brother's side .
 The Mamluks entered Palestine with an army equal in size to the Mongol force Hülegü had left behind . Meanwhile, the Mamluk entered Palestine in the same way as the Mongol forces HüLegü left behind.
 At 'Ayn Jalut—also known as Goliath’s Spring, they defeated the Mongols, using their heavy cavalry to great effect . The heavy cavalry was used in the battle .
 The Mamluks took control of Syria and Palestine in 1291 . They expelled the remaining Crusaders from the region . Mamluk took control in 1292 .
 Mongols had never been so emphatically defeated before, and this halted their conquests to the west . The Mongols were defeated by the Mongols .
 The internal fighting that followed split the Mongol tribes into different sections . The Mongol tribes split into different groups .
 In Iraq and Persia, they became the Illkhanid dynasty . They gradually took on the customs, religion, and language of the people they had conquered .
 At its height, it included territories from East Asia to central Europe . At the height of its influence in Europe and Asia, it was known as Yugoslavia . At its peak, the territory included East Asia and Central Europe .
 The Rise of Ottoman Power made early contact with the Islamic whose power and influence spanned the globe . areas . areas, which brought opportunities for expansion . n the lOth century, the branch of the Seljuk dynasty .
 13th-century stone relief depicts Seljuk soldiers into separate political entities, to an influx of semi-nomadic tribes . until it controlled only the provinces immediately around it. until the invasion .
 At the end of the 10th century, the remains or the caliphate were conquered by Turkish tribes from Central Asia . The remains of the caliphate have been conquered by the Turkish tribes .
 Seljuk family who led the tribes took power as sultans . They restored political authority to the caliphate, while exercising real power through the figurehead caliphs .
 Mongols invaded most of Asia and parts of Europe . Although the Seljuks took over the existing system of government, their power was limited . The Mongols were the most powerful group of nomadic peoples from Central Asia .
 Ottoman war helmet was inherently unstable as I EET by the Byzantines . It relied heavily on their from 1500. The Turks in Anatolia were forced to move westward into areas previously ruled by the Turks .
 Ilkhanid hold over nomadic warriors gave the Anatolia was never strong, frequently clashed with Ottomans an edge in battle . In 1071, the Seljuks defeated the multiple tribes and principalities . The peninsula soon settled peoples .
 Seljuks were Byzantine emperor in eastern Anatolia, of these small groups was led by a Sunni Muslim dynasty that ruled parts of Central Asia . Byzantine rule was replaced by Osman, son of Ertughrul, after whom and the Middle East in the 11th14th
 From here, the Ottomans managed to take over many Byzantine cities in Anatolia, which brought them more wealth and resources . From this, they were able to take control of many of the most important cities .
 The Ottomans annexed land along the Dardanelles, which allowed them to control the crossing to Europe . The Ottoman Empire then annexed land in the region, allowing them control of the crossing .
 Ottomans aided the Byzantine emperor John VI Kantakouzenos in a civil war . They were rewarded with their first lands in Europe, on the Gallipoli peninsula . In the mid-14th century, they helped the emperor win the civil war and were rewarded .
 At the same time, the Ottomans expanded their lands in central and western Anatolian Anatolia . The Ottoman Empire expanded its land in Anatolia during its reign .
 After this, they spread into Europe, moving through eastern Thrace and across the Balkans . After that, they moved across the region, moving into Europe .
 It was then that they probably encountered artillery for the first time . It was probably their first encounter with artillery, and they encountered it again .
 Ottoman Empire was very extensive until the end of the 15th century . Nucleus of Ottoman Empire 1300 Conquests of Osman I, 1300-26, 1300/1515 . Further Ottoman conquest by 1481 Vassal of Ottoman empire .
 At the center was Constantinople, whose fall to the Ottomans in 1453 is shown opposite . The fall of the Ottoman Empire was shown opposite to the center of Constantinople .
 Ottomans used Siege towers to try to get the attackers to the same height, but these were also repelled . Siege towers were also used in the battle, but were eventually repelled by the Ottoman forces .
 Constantine XI Palaeologus, the last reigning Byzantine emperor, personally led the final defense of the city . He died in the final attack . The last reigning emperor of the Byzantine Empire died in attack .
 The Ottomans tried to mine under the walls, but were thwarted each time . The walls were built in the 16th century, and the walls were later destroyed .
 16th-century fresco shows the 1453 siege of Constantinople . The Siege of Constantinople was captured in 1453 . The fresco depicts the siege of the city .
 The Ottomans had besieged Constantinople twice before but failed each time . The Ottoman Empire had besieged the city twice before, but failed to reach it .
 Sultan Mehmed II, who led the attack, spent much of the rest of his reign restoring and repopulating the city . Three days of looting followed its fall on May 29, 1453, and the city was restored .
 Huge cannons eventually breached the city walls, allowing them to enter . Huge cannons finally breached the walls allowing them into the city .
 Hagia Sophia Church in Constantinople was converted into a mosque after capture of the city . The church was converted to a mosque in the aftermath of the capture .
 Mehmet II fortified castles on either side of the Bosporus to prevent reinforcements . Mehmet I fortified castles in order to prevent reinforcement of the Turkish border .
 Mehmed II was sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1451 to 1481 . Mehmed Iyad II was Sultan of Ottoman Empire between 1451 and 1481. He was the first sultan to rule the Ottoman empire .
 Mehmed had his infant brother strangled to prevent further civil wars . Mehmed's first act as sultan was to strangle his brother to prevent civil war .
 His reign extended the empire to include most of the Balkans and Greece, Anatolia, the upper Euphrates valley, and sections of the Black Sea coast . His reign was one of ceaseless campaigning, extending the empire across the Balkans, Greece and Anatolia .
 Later wars with Hungary, which was threatened by Ottoman expansion, led to the adoption of artillery-based tactics .
 The Ottoman conquest of Constantinople was made possible by this development . It was this development made it possible for the Ottoman conquest .
 Attacks by a neighboring principality in Anatolia in 1397 forced the Ottomans to take action, resulting in the conquest of most of eastern Anatolia . Attacks by neighboring Principality in 1497 caused the invasion .
 Timur's empire stretched across Central Asia, southern Russia, Iran, and Azerbaijan . This bordered on the territory of the Mongol warlord Timur, whose empire was known as Timur .
 In 1402, Timur invaded Anatolia, capturing Bayezid, the Ottoman leader, and plundered Anatolia for a year . Timur captured the leader of the Ottoman Empire, capturing him and plundering Anatolia . The Sultan of Anatolia captured the Sultan Bayez
 The remaining small portion of Anatolian territory, and Ottoman lands in Europe, were split between the sons of Bayezid and his sons . The remaining part of the Ottoman empire was split between Bayezids sons .
 Fritware combined ground glass with clay to produce white ceramics generations . Civil war ensued for two Fritwa potters in the 13th century .
 Murad II spent most of his life fighting to restore the lands the Ottomans had lost to Timur . The eventual winner, Murad I, spent his entire life fighting for his country's borders .
 He abdicated in 1444 in favor of his 12-year-old son, but was recalled by his viziers when the king of Hungary attacked the empire . He was recalled when the Hungarian king attacked Hungary .
 At Murad’s death in 1451, the Ottoman Empire dominated western and northern Anatolia and a large part of the Balkans . The Ottoman Empire was dominated by Murad, who died at Murad's death .
 He laid siege to the city of Constantinople in 1453 . After securing his borders, he laid siege there .
 The Ottoman Empire continued to be a preeminent cultural and military power into the 17th century and beyond . The Empire was a pre-eminently pre-eminent culture and military force .
 Large towns were built near the frontiers of the empire, such as at Trier in Germany . Large towns built even near the . frontiers . of the . empire .
 Political insecurity meant people hoarded their money rather than using it for trade . The economy became reliant on bartering . Political insecurity forced people to hoard their money and use it to barter .
 Urban populations remained low in the early part of this period of the 20th century .
 Some old Roman towns developed into religious centers, with bishops becoming the most powerful of the local lords . Some bishops were most powerful in Roman towns .
 Trading continued, but widespread unrest disrupted travel across Europe . The unrest continued to disrupt travel across the continent .
 With fewer coins being minted, people had to rely on exchanging one thing for another, or bartering . With fewer silver and political instability, fewer coins were minted . People had to use bartering or exchanging things for each other .
 The supply of silver increased when deposits were found in the German province of Saxony, Saxony .
 This meant that more coins could be produced and trade could be carried out more easily . This led to more coins being produced and more trade being carried out . This meant more coins were made and trade was carried out easily .
 The towns of the Italian peninsula were the first to benefit from these developments . However, it was the towns of Italy that were first to see the benefits of the developments .
 In Northern Europe, the towns of Flanders became centers of manufacturing . Flanders is one of the most important cities in the world .
 Map from 1572 shows all the principal towns in Flanders, including Bruges and Antwerp . Map was created by a 14th-century French diplomat .
 These towns were major manufacturing centers and, in the medieval period, specialized in processing English wool . The towns were important manufacturing centers .
 Mediterranean was the natural crossroads for goods coming from east and west . Mediterranean was a natural cross-roads for trade and commerce between Europe and Asia .
 Many of its towns were effectively independent of overlords and emperors . Most importantly, many of these towns were independent of their overlords . Many of the towns were essentially independent of the emperor .
 Italian cities were left free to run their own affairs and concentrate on trade . This left the Italian cities free to operate their own businesses and concentrate trade .
 Textile production, banking, and shipping made enormous fortunes for the Italian cities and the families involved in these occupations . Italian city-states made fortunes in textile production and shipping .
 Tuscany, especially the cities of Florence and Siena, produced fine woolen cloth that was exported across Europe . The cities of Sienas and Florence were particularly famous for their woolen clothing .
 Milanese gold ducat could be transported more easily than the equivalent value in silver . Milanese bankers lent money to rulers across Europe .
 The Riccardi family of Lucca effectively financed the reign and costly wars of Edward I of England . The family would later go bankrupt when subsequent English kings refused to pay back the loans . Edward I's reign and wars of England were financed by the family .
 Oil painting by Matsys depicts a Flemish moneychanger and his wife in Venice . Matsys painted the couple in Venice, Italy .
 The clothes, books, and glassware indicate the prosperity of the new merchant class. also managed to build an empire in the Balkans and Greece, making the city the principal maritime power in Europe .
 Florence's fortune was built on textile production and banking, and on its central position on the Italian peninsula . Florence's great success of Italy was Florence's success in textile and banking .
 Florence was an oligarchy, a society ruled by the wealthiest merchants . Florence was ruled by wealthy merchants . It was a society of oligarchy .
 During frequent struggles between the Germanic Holy Roman Empire and the Papacy in the 11th12th centuries, it always backed the popes . The papacy gained privileged access to the lucrative Roman market as a result .
 The city aggressively guarded its position within Tuscany and eventually came to dominate the other banking cities of Siena and Lucca, and the port of Pisa . Pisa was the first Italian city to hold a city of its own .
 The Battle of Legnano, on May 29, 1176, marked the point at which the city-states of northern Italy gained autonomy from the Holy Roman Emperor, Frederick Barbarossa . They issued gold coins, which made it easier to deal in goods of a high value than
 Lombard League, supported by Pope Alexander Ill, rebelled against emperor's interference in their internal affairs . A group of towns, called the Lombard league, objected to Emperor's interference with their affairs .
 The emperor looked sure to triumph when he laid waste to the city of Milan . The emperor laid waste of the city during the siege .
 Lombard League defeated his armies at Legnano, northwest of Milan, and he was forced to make peace using silver coins . However, his armies were defeated and he made peace with the League .
 They invented the modern financial practices of accounting and insurance to keep track of complicated transactions and prepare for losses due to shipwrecks . Shipwreck survivors invented accounting, insurance and insurance .
 In northern Europe, the Flanders region grew rich and powerful during the 13th century . Flanders became a powerful and powerful region in the Flemings region .
 It was ideally positioned to benefit from trade with France, England, and the Holy Roman Empire . It straddled an area of modern Belgium and the Netherlands that meant it was ideal .
 Flanders was ruled by the counts of Flanders and Hainault, who encouraged trade by giving generous privileges to manufacturers . Flanders is one of Belgium's most important cities .
 Huge annual fairs took place in the Flemish towns of Lille and Antwerp and farther south in the Champagne region of France .
 Flemish merchants could sell the cloth that Flanders was famous for producing . Flanders is famous for its cloth, and the cloth is thought to have originated in Belgium .
 Known simply as the Three Cities,” they housed the workshops where wool was processed into cloth and the homes of the great merchants and guilds . The Three Cities were known as the "Three Cities"
 The woolworker and merchant guilds became very powerful and came to dominate politics in the trading cities . The woolworkers and merchants guilds were very powerful . The guilds dominated politics in trading cities and dominated politics .
 50,000 workers invotved in rorences cloth industry in the 1330s, according to the Florentine chronicler Villani, out of an estimated population of just 100,000 . The number of workers in the cloth industry was 50,500 .
 Bruges’ North Sea port and canals formed vital arteries for trade, linking the town to England, Genoa, and other trading centers . The town’s canals and North Sea ports were vital arteries to trade, connecting the city to England and Genoa .
 Flanders imported most of its raw materials, including wool to make cloth, from England . Most of the raw materials were imported from Flanders . Flanders is one of the world's largest cities .
 Flanders grew corn and rye, which it exported, and plants to make dye for cloth manufacturers . Flanders itself grew corn, rye, and rye which was exported to Flanders .
 Trade was often damaged by regulations brought in by English kings, who sought to encourage home-grown cloth production . However, trade was often hampered by regulations bringing in by kings .
 From 1277, Flanders began to look elsewhere and started to trade more extensively with Genoa and other Italian cities . Flanders looked elsewhere in 1277 and began to trade extensively with Italy .
 Towers of San Gimignano were not built to protect the town from outsiders, but to defend rival family factions within the town . The towers in Tuscany were built to defend family factions from each other .
 The great centers of trade shifted away from Flanders and Italy during the 16th century .
 A dispute between the French and Spanish over the Duchy of Milan turned Italy into a battlefield, damaging Italian trade . A dispute in Italy turned the city of Milan into a battleground, damaging trade .
 By 1527, the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V captured Rome and the city was sacked by his mercenaries, the Landsknechts . Charles V's forces captured Rome in 1527 and sacked the city .
 After the discovery of America, the focus of trade shifted from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic .
 Countries such as England, Portugal, and Spain benefited, while Italian trade declined . Italy's economy has been hit hard by the recession .
 English manufacturers began to process their own wool, helped by Flemish immigrants . Flemishes trade suffered as English manufacturers started to process wool .
 The Hanseatic League, a trading alliance of northern European towns, began to operate through the Baltic as far as England . It provided a great stimulus for the northern economies in the 1930s .
 The Aztecs are thought to have arrived in central Mexico in the 13th century . They are either from northern Mexico or from the southwest United States . Their exact origins are unclear .
 The Incas began as a tribe in Cuzco in the 12th century . They spread throughout the Andes regions of modern-day Peru, Ecuador, and Chile .
 Carving on stone lintel at Yaxchilan shows accession rituals of the ruler Bird Jaguar . Carving shows the accession ritual of Bird Jaguar at the time .
 His wife Balam-lx, sitting opposite, performs a blood sacrifice by drawing a rope through her tongue . His wife performs the blood sacrifice in front of him .
 The pyramid of Kukulcan at Chichén Itzá is a solar calendar . It was built on top of an earlier lunar calendar . The pyramid was built in the area .
 The facing of each terrace contains 52 panels, representing the 52-year cycle during which the solar and religious calendars become realigned . Each terrace is made up of 52 panels and contains 52 solar panels .
 Maya, Aztecs, and Incas had the richest and most complex societies in pre-Columbian America . Maya and Aztec societies were among the most complex in the Americas .
 Maya never formed an empire, nor did they have a single ruler or dominant capital city . Although distinct cultures, they shared similar traditions, including ritualized religious worship .
 City-states bound together by a common language, culture, and religion . They were a loose federation of city-state city-states . City-state cities were bound together .
 Maya priest-rulers maintained power through superior education and contacts with the gods . Maya priests led the Maya to extraordinary achievements in mathematics, astronomy, architecture, architecture and engineering .
 Maya had a pantheon of gods, and their religious practices were based on their interpretation of the cycles of nature . Along with the Aztecs and Incas, the Maya had an interpretation of nature's cycles .
 These gods were rarely discrete entities but instead combined a wide variety of forms and ideas . These gods combined a variety of ways and ideas to create gods .
 They could be both young and old, take both human and animal forms, and often had a counterpart of the opposite sex . They often had to be both old and young, and could take both humans and animals as well as animals .
 The supreme deity of the Maya was Itzam Na, who was represented iconically as an old man . He was the inventor of writing and patron of learning and sciences . The Mayan god was represented as a patron of science and learning .
 His wife, IxChel, was goddess of the old moon, as well as of weaving, medicine, and childbirth . Her husband was also a goddess of weaving and medicine .
 Religious rituals were performed to satisfy the gods and ensure order in the world . Rituals were believed to have been performed to appease the gods .
 This mask is thought to represent the Aztec god Quetzalcoatl, who is often depicted as a feathered serpent . Ceremonies usually began with fasting and abstinence, followed by offerings of food .
 During ceremonies the priests might impersonate the gods, or use hallucinogens to enhance their powers of divination . During the ceremonies they may impersonate or use hallucinations in order to enhance divination powers .
 Many explanations have been proposed for this, ranging from natural causes, such as disease or climate change, to soil exhaustion, war, or loss of control by the priest-aristocracy . No theory can be proven absolutely .
 One Chichen Itza, was founded in the second half of the 8th century by a confederation of groups drawn from the Maya lowlands and the Itza people, whose origins are unknown .
 The city appears to have experimented with new rituals and forms of shared government . It was a thriving community in the 9th and 10th centuries, but collapsed after 10th century .
 TENOCH TITLAN, 1519 extensive cultural and trade links across central and southern parts of Mexico at this time . BERNAL DIAZ DE CASTILLO, on entering the AZTEC CAPITAL TENoCHTITLAN, ON ENTERING THE AZ
 The Aztecs were the most powerful people in the Valley of Mexico during the 15th and 16th centuries . The Aztec Empire was one of Mexico's most powerful cities .
 Tenochtitlan (now Mexico City) was founded in the 14th century on an island in Lake Texcoco . Their capital, Tenochoitlan, was founded on the island in the lake, now Mexico City .
 Aztecs were expert managers of water . The marshes that surrounded the city might seem an unpromising environment, but the Aztec were experts .
 They built dams to trap fresh water from rivers that flowed into the lake . They also grew a wide variety of crops on chinampas, fertile artificial islands created in the shallow lake .
 Aztec society was class-based, with nobility at the top and slaves at the bottom . Aztec slaves were slaves in the Aztec state of Aztec culture .
 The cuauhxicalli, which translates as “eagle gourd vessel,” was used by Aztecs to make their most sacred offerings . Education seems to have it been universal, with schooling provided for both boys and girls .
 Aztecs were a culture with a proud warrior tradition . A boy’s education included training to fight in wars because of the Aztec culture .
 By 1520 they had an empire that stretched across Mexico from the Gulf of Mexico to the Pacific . The empire stretched across the entire country, stretching into the Pacific and beyond .
 Like the Maya, the Aztecs had a large number of gods, related to the creation of the cosmos, to the sun, and to fertility, death, and war . The Aztec gods are related to fertility and death, according to the Aztec .
 The two main temples on the pyramid in Tenochtitlan were dedicated to Huitzilopochtli, the god of war and Tlaloc . The main temples are dedicated to the gods of war, rain and water and war .
 The beating heart was lifted into the air by the priest, who pronounced it ‘precious eagle cactus fruit” as an offering to the sun god . Another important god was the god of the sun .
 The fire in which the heart was burned was contained in a special vessel carved to represent an eagle . The heart was then burned in a vessel carved in a specially-carved eagle .
 Pyramid temple represents the Sacred Snake Mountain, where Huitzilopochtli dismembered his sister, the moon goddess Coyolxauqui . According to Aztec mythology, the god of war and the sun dismembers his sister . The sacrifice is believed to have
 Quetzalcoatl, the feathered serpent god of wind, creativity, and fertility, is a god of creativity and creativity .
 Aztecs had a rich culture that showed particular respect for poetry and song . They are remembered more for their human sacrifices than their human sacrifice .
 They believed that if they did not satisfy the gods with sacrifices, the sun would not continue its journey across the sky . They believed they would not be able to continue their journey .
 One performed for the fire god, Huehueteotl, involved captives being anesthetized and thrown into a fire . Another performed for Huehuetotl involved being thrown into the fire .
 Before they died, priests retrieved them using hooks using hooks and removed their hearts . The hearts were removed from the bodies of the dead .
 Incas occupied Mexico Chichén Itza the Andes mountains A of South America . Civilizations of America, 1520 Gulf of tae E .
 The El Trapiche Maya inhabited the Yucatán Peninsula . Salinas La Blanca Mexico City was the birthplace of the Maya Maya . The Maya lived in the Caribbean Sea Salinas .
 The sacrificial victim was stretched out on his back over a stone by a number of assistants, usually four . The Inca Empire 7 Maya cultural region .
 The prisoner's last month was spent in the company of four ‘goddesses’ who met his every desire . After a year of being pampered, the prisoner spent his last month with four 'goddess'
 In South America, the Incas used both conquest and peaceful assimilation to expand their empire . The Incas were the largest in pre-Columbian America, until it was the largest .
 Expansion was remarkably rapid, only starting in earnest in the reign of Pachacuti, which began around 1438 .
 He and his son, Tupac Inca, created a huge federal system consisting of four provinces . Each province is overseen by an Inca governor, each overseen by a governor . The Inca Inca system was created by the Inca empire .
 Machu Picchu is the best preserved of the known Inca settlements . Following each new conquest, magnificent roads, many of them paved, were built to link it to the capital Cuzco .
 Abandoned in the 16th century, it is a fine example of Inca architecture and planning . It is a well-preserved site in Peru .
 High-quality building work and numerous shrines suggest that the site had religious importance. and the rest of the empire. and . The site is believed to have been the birthplace of the Roman Empire .
 The Incas had no horses, nor had they discovered the wheel . Messages were carried by relays of runners, while llamas served as pack animals .
 Chimor is Chimor on the coast of northern Peru, home to the influential Chimú culture . Their superior organization enabled them to absorb many existing states, including Chimor .
 By Tupac Inca's death in 1493, Inca rule reached north to Quito in Ecuador . Inca ruled north to Ecuador's capital .
 Incas built temples to their gods, including Inti, the sun god, Inti . Like other American cultures, Incas temples were built to honor their gods .
 Human sacrifice normally involved children taken from villages around the empire . Although fairly rare, human sacrifice was extremely rare .
 Incas used collections of knotted colored threads, called quipu, to record information . The Incas were known for their use of colorful threads to record messages .
 llama and alpaca hair is spun into quipu quips . Quips are made from llama hair and llaca hair . Quipu is made of llama, alpacas and llama wool .
 Quipucamayocs would use the quipu to perform simple mathematics, calculate taxes, and keep records of labor or livestock . The Inca accountants were accountants in Inca society .
 They were used for censuses and for tax accounting, and to track events and time . They were also used to track censuses, tax accounting and track events .
 Inca historians used them to tell the Spanish conquistadors their history . It is unknown whether the strings simply recorded important numbers or contained the history itself .
 Elaborate architecture is one of the most important legacies of Inca civilization . Inca architecture is an important part of the Inca culture . The Inca empire was one of its greatest achievements .
 Final adjustments were made by lowering the rock onto the one below, raising it again, and chipping away any sections on the lower rock where marks in the dust indicated that the fit was not perfect .
 This attention to detail meant that buildings constructed by this method were extremely stable . Building was constructed by the same method as the other .
 At the spring and fall equinoxes, the sun creates undulating patterns of triangles of light on the temple stairway .
 Thought that Machu Picchu is a relatively recent construction, dating perhaps from the mid-15th century . Carvings of snakes' heads at the foot of the stairs suggest a giant serpent zigzagging down the face of the pyramid .
 The quality of the stonework, the high altitude of its position, and the many shrines that have been identified among its ruins seem to indicate that this settlement was much more important than a mere rural village . It is thought to have been the largest settlement in the world .
 Machu Picchu may have been one of a number of royal estates built by Pachacuti . It has been suggested that the site may have belonged to a royal estate .
 These settlements were used as country estates when the Inca ruler traveled out of Cuzco . According to Spanish chroniclers, these settlements are believed to have been used by Inca .
 Machu Picchu is the most complete remaining example of the Inca's careful planning and building techniques . The most complete example of Cuzco is that of Machu .
 Their civilization owed much to the earlier Moche . of the Mississippi River and spread to much of central, eastern, and southeastern North America . The Moche were first inhabitants of the area and lived in the area .
 Key settlements were created at Spiro Mounds in eastern Oklahoma, Moundville in Alabama, and Etowah Mounds, northern Georgia . Cahokia Mounds was based in Collinsville, Illinois, with the most elaborate center based at Cahokia .
 Cahokia was inhabited from the 7th to the 14th centuries and at its peak had around 30,000 inhabitants . Cahokia is located in modern Cahokia, Illinois .
 The inhabitants made flat-topped mounds on which they built houses, burial buildings, and temples . The inhabitants built flat-top mounds to build houses and burial buildings .
 Cahokia went into a gradual decline beginning around 1200, and was completely abandoned by 1400 . Cahokia is thought to have been completely abandoned in 1400 .
 Excavations carried out at the Spiro Mound have produced shell gorgets (decorative disks worn around the neck) with representations of warriors and snakes .
 Mississippian settlements were dominated by massive pyramidal mounds of earth that served as bases for temples or residences of the more powerful individuals . Monks Mound, Cahokia, was a base for temples where people could observe celestial events .
 The arrival of the Spanish conquistadors had far-reaching effects on the peoples of Mesoamerica and much of South America, devastating traditions and ways of life that had existed for hundreds of years .
 With a group of Spanish soldiers and some local enemies of the Aztecs, he took control of the city in 1521 . He took control with the help of some Spanish soldiers, and some Aztec enemies .
 Most of the city was destroyed, but it was rebuilt by the Spanish as Mexico City . Mexico City was the capital of the Viceroyalty of New Spain . The city was the center of the New Spanish Viceroy's New Spanish empire .
 The Maya often put up a fierce fight against the conquistadors . Individual independent centers did fall to the conquistsadors, but the Maya often fought back .
 Ornaments inserted through a hole pierced through the skin below the bottom lip . These ornaments were inserted into the skin through the flesh below the lip .
 Toltec mask inlaid with mother of pearl from the Toltec city of Tula, 40 miles northwest of modern-day Mexico City . The mask is believed to have been in use for centuries .
 Zapotec vampire bat mosaic mask carved of 25 pieces of Jade, with yellow eyes made of shell shell . It is carved of . Jade, made of . 25 pieces .
 Carved round stone found at Templo Mayor, Mexico City, showing the separated limbs, head, and torso of the Aztec goddess Coyolxauhqui .
 Peruvian fan made from macaw feathers, with a handle of braided brown wool, is made from brown wool . Fan is made of macaw feather feathers .
 Maya ball marker, consisting of a disk with a whorled emblem on top of a pillar, is a Mayan ball marker . Maya ball markers were used in the Maya art form .
 It was used for ball-court games, which were played by all Mesoamericans .
 Aztec feather shield was stretched with spotted jaguar skin and decorated with strings of feathers . Aztec shield was made from jaguars skin and covered in feathers .
 This may have been a portrait of a real person and used for ceremonial purposes . The portrait may be of a man and a woman . It is believed to have been of a woman and a man .
 Maya incense burner in the form of Chaac wearing an elaborate headdress . Chaac is believed to be the first Maya to burn incense .
 Aztec funerary urn made of clay, found at Templo Mayor, Mexico City, depicting a bearded god .
 Today's Polynesians are linked by language and DNA evidence to two prehistoric peoples . Polynesian ancestors are believed to have lived in the region of Papua New Guinea .
 In the early centuries ct. ct, these people split into many tribes and explored the South Pacific . These people split up into tribes and explore the region .
 The enormous moa was one of many victims of the Polynesian expansion . The moa is one of the largest birds in the world . The bird was the largest bird of its kind .
 These giant, wingless birds, up to 12 ft tall, were hunted to extinction by Maori settlers © of New Zealand . The wingless bird was hunted to death by the Maori in New Zealand in the 1800s .
 Later European expeditions collected remains for study by scientists such as Richard Owen .
 The islands never formed a single empire of the type found elsewhere in the world . Each group of settlers lived mostly in isolation, occupying territories that ranged from a small portion of an island to a whole group of small islands .
 Polynesia is home to an incredible range of diverse cultures across the world . Polynesia has its own way of life, customs, and tools . The island nation's culture is unique and unique .
 Some built huge stone cities, while others lived in villages on the beach . Some of the world's largest stone cities were built on the beaches .
 Contact with other groups among the isolated islanders was rare . War was frequent among groups sharing an island, while war was frequent on other islands .
 The Polynesians were great shipbuilders, navigators, and sailors . They probably reached America more than a hundred years before the Vikings .
 The number of Moai statues found across Easter Island is 87 . They sailed on long voyages, Bü 8 87 . The Moai statue is one of the largest statues on Easter Island .
 Polynesian pendant they were able to create intricate tools and jewelry . They often TEL against the prevailing winds .
 An entire family traveled with all the possessions, tools, animals, and plants they would need to make a distant island their new home . Often they brought their whole world with them .
 Some have argued that the colonization was largely accidental . Without even a compass to aid their navigation, the Polynesians must have been blown off course .
 Polynesians explored the ocean more extensively than anyone before in vessels like this . However, recent studies have shown Double-hulled canoe — 4 . The Polynesian explored the sea more extensively .
 Ancient Polynesian methods of navigation using the stars, birds, winds, currents, and tides would have been surprisingly reliable when crossing even the widest gulf of ocean . Although the Polynesians did not use metal, the ancient navigators used the stars and birds to navigate .
 Some explorers have even repeated these epic journeys in replica boats . Some recent explorers have repeated these journeys in replica boats .
 Polynesian islanders often depicted as living at one i with nature, in reality they altered simple Square Sail a e & LT | A ^d are) NonU E ^ jai ay .
 Made of sticks and shells, it is a representation of local tides and currents . It is made of little resemblance to a normal map .
 Rather than taking the chart on voyages, Polynesian navigators memorized them prior to departure, often with the aid of chants. their environment just as much as any other group of settlers.
 Polynesians arriving on new islands brought with them domesticated animals, such as dogs, chickens, and pigs . They (along with the rats which stowed away) were highly destructive animals .
 Polynesians also brought new plants for farming, and chopped down trees to make boats, tools, and fire . The Polynesian also chopped trees down to make tools, boats and fire, among other items .
 One reliable method for dating the Polynesian expansion across the Pacific is to look for archaeological evidence of large flora and fauna extinctions . In fact, one reliable method is to find evidence of the expansion of Polynesia .
 Each of the Pacific islands today has its own unique ecosystem, consisting of the different plants and animals that survived the arrival of the Polynesians, mingled with whatever invading species were introduced to the island with the colonists . Because of this, the islands today have their own unique ecosystems,
 Rapa Nui is one of the most isolated islands in Polynesia . The island is located in the middle of the world's most isolated region .
 It lies 1,290 miles from the nearest island and is believed to have been named Easter Island because the first European visitor arrived on Easter Sunday in 1722 . The island is thought to be named Easter because it was named because of the arrival of European visitors in the year of the year
 Archaeologists do know that around 1000-1200 cE, the trees of Rapa Nui began to disappear . Archaeologists believe the trees began to vanish around 1000 cE .
 These were carved in one piece from compressed volcanic ash and required wooden frameworks during the carving process . Wooden rollers for transport from quarries to ceremonial sites along the coast .
 No one knows for certain why the Moai were built, or what they represent . As they were built over a long period of time, the tradition may have been influenced by a variety of changing factors .
 Colonists crushed indigenous cultures with weapons, gods, and diseases . Colonists soon followed, crushing indigenous culture with weapons and gods .
 The spear is from the New Zealand Wars fought between the Maori and the British . Some went down fighting .
 Rapa Nui's ecosystem collapsed after environmental disaster struck . The heads replaced the trees, but the heads were removed, and the ecosystem collapsed . Environmental disaster struck when the heads replaced trees .
 The inhabitants could not even build boats for fishing—they resorted to cannibalism to stay alive . They began to tear down and deface the heads that had affected their environment so much .
 Those Moai that made it to their final destination were erected along the coast of Rapa Nui, facing inland . Moai heads were erected on the coast along the eastern coast of New Zealand .
 According to one theory, they represent great chiefs from the island's history . One theory is that they are representing great chiefs .
 Within 30 years of Columbus's first Atlantic crossing in 1492, a Spanish expedition had circumnavigated the globe . 1450-1750 was a Spanish revolution in Spain .
 As European explorers set sail in search of new lands to conquer and colonize, commerce and trade expanded internationally . Commerce and trade grew internationally .
 It was an age in which established beliefs were questioned, leading to conflict and change . It was also the age when established beliefs could be questioned and questioned .
 Marriage of Ivan III of Russia to Zoe, niece of Byzantine emperor; Ivan takes title of czar . Inca army j Ni m. Inca Army was defeated by Inca warriors .
 Charles the Bold killed; Habsburgs acquire most of the Burgundian territories . Charles died in 16th century . Charles was killed in 17th century in France . He died in 18th Century of France . Habsbergs acquired most of Burgundy territories .
 Henry VII of England defeats Richard Ill and establishes Tudor dynasty . Henry VII was Henry VIII of England . Richard III of England defeated Richard Ill of England in 16th century .
 Christian reconquest | of Spain completed as Muslim Granada falls | to Spain . Spanish conquests of Granada were completed in 16th century .
 Christopher 4 Columbus makes first Atlantic crossing and lands in Caribbean . Islands off the coast of the Americas divided between Spain and Portugal .
 Charles VIII's invasion of Italy to lay claim to Naples began in 15th century . Charles VIII invaded Italy in 16th century to claim the city of Naples . Italian wars began in 17th century, with Charles VIII invading Naples .
 1497 John Cabot reaches Newfoundland . 1498 to India around Cape of Good Hope, Vasco da Gama . 1499 to India . 1497 to India. 1498 .
 First shipment of African slaves sent to Cuba to work in Spanish settlements, beginning triangular slave trade between Europe, West Africa, and Americas . W Columbus's landing 1502 . Columbus landed on the island of Cuba in 15th century .
 Peace of Cambrai relinquishes France's rights in Italy, Flanders, and Artois . France relinquishes control of Italy, Italy, and Flanders .
 Europe after 1450 benefited from a scientific as much as a philosophical colonization, that underpinned the voyages of exploration that established revolution . E Martin Luther was the first European explorer to explore the continent .
 The Renaissance was more than a matter of the rediscovery of mid-18th century Europe as the world's first global power . It was also the discovery of the world as a global power in the early 1800s .
 This expansion the continent's ancient learning—it sparked a spirit of scientific inquiry that was made in the face of formidable opposition . This expansion was made against formidable opposition, but it was made despite the opposition .
 Ming provided key technological advantages over the rest of the world until 1700 . Ming had key technological advantage over the world . Ming was the world's first major city of culture .
 Qing, China; Mughal India; and Safavid Persia were Europe's equals . Ottoman Turkey presented a persistent threat. It was later Qing, India, and Mughar India .
 Charles V concedes “Accord of Augsburg’s” giving German princes freedom to select protestant or Catholic religion . Sultan Suleyman pe 1555 .
 Wales and England formally united under Act of Union in 1556 . Wales, England and Wales formally united in Act of 1556. Wales and Wales were officially united in 17th century .
 Henry VIII begins dissolution of monasteries in England; crushes Catholic rebellion . Henry VIII was king of England in 16th century . He was monarch of England .
 1532 Francisco Pizarro lands in Peru and encounters, captures, and kills Inca emperor Atahuallpa . 1532
 Elizabeth becomes Queen of Gwalior in central India in 1558 .
 Mariner's Mirrour b Battle of Lepanto e 1590 m rH og 1595 . Beginning of ""Long Turkish War"" between Habsburgs and Ottomans . Battle of Lepanto was the first battle of the Long Turkish War .
 Spain establishes first permanent European colony in Philippines, Cebu . Spain established first permanent colony in the Philippines in 15th century . Spain was first to establish a colony in Cebuan .
 Treaty of Nonsuch provides English military assistance for Dutch rebels in their fight against Spain . Treaty was signed in 17th century by the Dutch Republic .
 Protestant and catholic intervention sparks off the 30 | Years War across Europe . Protestants and catholics were involved in the 30-year war .
 1622 1620 Mayflower sets sail from England with the Pilgrim fathers; arrives in Plymouth later that year . One year later they celebrate the first Thanksgiving with American Indians .
 Shah Abbas retakes Baghdad and extends Safavid empire deep into Anatolia . A First Thanksgiving 1624 . Shah Abbas took over Baghdad and extended his empire into the region .
 Gustavus Adolphus consolidates position of the Swedes in Germany and restores Protestant fortunes after a decade I of defeats . Gustavus Adolphus consolidates position of the Swiss in Germany after a decade I of defeats and restores Protestant
 1635 French intervention in 50 Years War prevents pro-Habsburg settlement at Peace of Prague . Gustavus Adolphus > 1635 . Gustav Gustavus Adolphus adolphus: The Habsburgs were victorious in the war of the 16th century .
 Treaty of Aix-laChapelle concedes French gains in the Spanish Netherlands . Treaty was signed in 17th century . Treaty signed in 18th century by Napoleon III of France .
 1682 La Salle navigates Mississippi; claims Louisiana for France . 1682 "La Salle" navigated Mississippi and claimed Louisiana for French territory .
 P | Opticks, written by Isaac Newton, explores theories of light . North American colonies map North America's map of North America .
 Sultan of Bornu becomes ruler of neighboring Kanem; forms major subÍ Saharan trading state . Bornu was ruler of Kanem, a major trading state in the region .
 Nadir Shah becomes ruler of Persia, and begins Persian expansion . He is the first Persian ruler to become ruler of Iran .
 Lancashire cotton mills supplant South Asian textile trade in Western Furope . Lancashires cotton mills will supplant the trade from South Asia .
 Prince Henry of Portugal captured Muslim Ceuta on the north coast of Africa in 1415 . Prince Henry was eager to extend his knowledge of the continent .
 The next year he set up a navigation school at Sagres to provide Portuguese sailors with a center for exploration . He set up the school in Sagres, Portugal, to provide sailors with an exploration center .
 They learned navigation, seamanship, and cartography to enable them to venture overseas . They learned the necessary skills of navigation and seamanship .
 Henry's navigators discovered the Madeira Islands in 1418-20 and the Azores in 1427-31 . Each year he sponsored a voyage south to explore the African coast, each voyage sailing farther south than its predecessor .
 The navigators returned home with gold and slaves, African exploration became very popular . African exploration was very popular in the 1800s .
 By the time he died in 1460, the Portuguese had discovered the Senegal River, rounded Cape Verde, and sailed east toward the Gulf of Guinea .
 This map shows the major European ocean voyages of the 15th and 16th centuries . The map was created by Henry the Navigator .
 European navigators left their continent and sailed the world, opening up new sea routes . Arrows indicate the direction of travel, and major ports .
 They discovered a continent previously unknown to them, and began a process that eventually resulted in the total European colonial and economic domination of the world .
 Magellan was a Portuguese soldier and adventurer who had taken part in four expeditions to India and Malaya . Magellan took part in the first expedition to India .
 He quarreled with the Portuguese king, Manuel | and left the country in 1514 to enter the service of Spain . He left Portugal in 1515 and joined the Spanish army in 1516 .
 In 1519 he proposed a voyage west to the Spice Islands, which promised great wealth to Spain if successful . If successful, the voyage would bring great wealth back to Spain .
 He sailed south across the Atlantic, and in November 1520 through the straits that now bear his name and into the Pacific . He sailed through the Atlantic and the Pacific in 1520 .
 He then crossed the ocean, the first European to do so, reaching the Philippines in April 1521 . He was killed in a local war in the Philippines .
 Africa was vague in shape, as no one knew how far south it stretched, and the Americas were missing altogether . Europe, the Mediterranean, and western Asia were reasonably well mapped, but Africa was not well mapped .
 Poor ship design restricted oceangoing voyages and primitive navigation instruments kept ships close to the coast . Poor ships design kept ships away from the coast of the world .
 At best, navigators used dead reckoning—intelligent guesswork based on speed through the water, winds, and currents—to assess their location . This is today as calm and benevolent as it is today, but not as calm as it was today .
 The development of the oceangoing caravel by the Portuguese and new navigation instruments transformed this situation . FERDINAND MAGELLAN on first entering the PACIFIC OCEAN .
 The astrolabe measured the height of the Sun at noon and the cross-staff and quadrant measured height of a star . The magnetic compass helped navigators determine their latitude or how far north or south they were .
 Lack of accurate marine chronometers meant that longitude—distance east or west—was not accurately calculated until the mid18th century . Lack of accuracy marine chronometer meant that . longitude was not accurate longitude until the 18th century.
 Armed with this new maritime technology, the Portuguese tentatively explored the coast of Africa . Armed with new technology, Portuguese explorers tentatively explore the African coast .
 Diogo Cao sailed around the Gulf of Guinea and then headed south, exploring the Congo River . He made his final landfall at Cape Cross in what is now Namibia in 1486 .
 In 1498 Vasco da Gama crossed the Indian Ocean to Calicut in southern India . Bartolomeu Dias rounded the Cape of Good Hope and sailed into the ocean . Two years later Bartolomus Dias crossed the world's first Indian Ocean in 1498 .
 Columbus 1492 fo San Julian cm m T Strait of Magellan N Cape Horn . Columbus opened up a new trade route to Asia by sailing east around Africa .
 Portugal's neighbor and rival Spain was anxious to share in this potential source of wealth . Portugal's neighbors were anxious to see if they could share this potential wealth .
 In 1491, Christopher Columbus, Genoese by birth, persuaded Queen Isabella to support a voyage across the Atlantic in order to find a westerly route to Asia . The voyage took place in 1491 .
 He set sail in 1492 with three ships, using dead reckoning to calculate his position . He used dead reckoning for his position to calculate how far he reached .
 It is a myth that the common belief of the time was that the world was flat—but accepted Ptolemy's incorrect calculation of its size . Like other navigators of his day, he knew that the . world was round .
 When he stumbled upon the islands of the Caribbean he assumed these were outlying islands of Asia .
 Three further voyages, in 1493—96, 1498-1500, and 1502-04, failed to convince him that he had found not Asia but the Americas .
 Europeans viewed Columbus's journey as a success, since he had ""discovered"" a new world . But it was in fact the beginning of an extended period of hardship for the people of Central and South America .
 Columbus not made this first landing, another navigator would have done so within a few years . Columbus landed in 17th century on the island of Spain .
 Hé opened up the prospect ol European expansion overseas . But he was first, and asa pioneer, hé opened the prospect of European expansion .
 The desire to seek new trade routes to Asia continued to preoccupy European sailors and merchants . Around the world, European sailors sought to find a new trade route to Asia .
 Caravel was lighter than its predecessors and more seaworthy, enabling it to venture far from land . The caravel is lighter than the previous generation of cars and can reach speeds of up to 100mph .
 English and Dutch navigators also sought a northeast passage around the top of Siberia . The feat was not achieved until 1879 by Finn Nils Nordenskjöld, a Finn .
 The treaty was useful when the Portuguese began to colonize Brazil . Problems arose in the Spice Islands of Southeast Asia, but problems arose in Southeast Asia .
 Isabella’s father, John II of Castile, died when she was three . Her depressed mother shut herself away from Isabella .
 Her brother died of a plaguelike illness in 1468, and her older half-brother, the mentally unstable Henry IV, perceived her as a threat . Henry IV's mentally unstable brother Henry IV was perceived as a potential threat to her .
 Isabella emerged from this Cinderella-like childhood an extremely strong-willed and intelligent young woman . However, Isabella's childhood was a Cinderella--like experience .
 17th-century altarpiece from Guatemala reveals the impact of Spanish culture in the Americas . Isabella L 4 n Catholic New World was born in Spain in 16th century .
 Isabella regarded it as her sacred duty to bring Christianity to her subjects in the New World . risked the wrath of Henry, who had not given his consent . Henry was not happy with Isabella's actions .
 Isabella knew that this was the marriage most likely to bring her power . But Isabella also knew that it was likely she would marry her husband .
 In 1469 they were married in the Spanish city of Valladolid . For much of the next 10 years they fought for recognition of their right to become joint rulers of the unruly kingdom .
 Isabella and Ferdinand were winning on every front within a few years of their marriage . Isabella's husband and his wife are now the world's most famous couple .
 Isabella's strong will helped bring about fundamental changes in Spain . By 1476 they had set up the hermandad network of local Isabella networks .
 Her reign led to the permanent unification of Spain . Her decision to sponsor Christopher Columbus's journey to find a new route to Asia laid the groundwork for an era of global commerce and trade .
 Isabella's greatest achievement was the conquest of Granada . Granada was the last Moorish kingdom in Spain . Isabella was queen of Spain .
 In practice, promises of religious toleration were not kept . She and her husband are pictured accepting the submission of their new Muslim subjects .
 Isabella's younger brother Alfonso dies in 1468 . Isabella had achieved so much for ""God's cause" that she had time for other activities .
 Isabella of Castile and Ferdinand sponsor the ""enterprise of the Indies,"" of Aragon . Ferdinand sponsored the first transatlantic voyage of 1470 . Isabella and Ferdinand agreed to 1469 marriage .
 Isabella was distressed by a succession of family tragedies in her final years . Isabella's final years were troubled by the deaths of her family .
 Parliament confirms Isabella's succession as Queen of Castile . Isabella becomes Queen of Spain in 1480 . Monarchies announce intention to go to war against Granada . Granada is Granada's capital of Granada, Spain .
 Isabella is the same as the title of the Prince of Wales; the Ieee airiai a a a Ferdinand’s . They issued joint decrees ‘Catholic Monarchs’ second, Henry VIII Jews ana dissidents are rigorous perc mea and approved coins
 Ferdinand's name preceded addition to forming But Isabella's son m M MAC or taoa ovna Isabella’s on state documents, her coat the final episode in the and heir, John, died i of arms .
 Ferdinand E. the Iberian peninsula . Granada's the death in childbirth of Isabella's only one of whom conquest was widely seen as eldest daughter, Isabella .
 Isabella may have viewed Constantinople to Muslim in her arms . Then, before de d The Catholic Monarchs compensation for the loss of he was two, her grandson Michael died .
 Ferdinand's youngest the turmoil of her Ottoman Turks in 1453 unhappy Joanna /a loca daughter Catherine as a sign of . having lost her reason, all hope for the 1 1492 Fall of Granada . The last God's displeasure with future of the dynasty rested with Moorish
 It is thought that the expedition of ) minted in Seville with the images of m for order and unity led to both monarchs . Her I De ue T grandson, the future Holy Roman Isabella agree to support sense of duty .
 Spain had access to vast amounts of silver and gold in the Americas . The events contributed to a decline in the establishment of the amounts of gold and silver in the region .
 This was a court run by the Catholic Church with the aim of ensuring royal subjects Christopher Columbus . This was the first court to be set up in order to ensure Christopher Columbus was not a royal subject .
 Ferdinand's political skill was matched by his flair Coote ss( The Teo eM eae conversos (Christians of Jewish as a military commander) Ferdinand's first victims were Jews .
 1497 John marries Margaret of Austria; Joanna of Austria . He had great charm, and in his enthusiasm he marries Philip of Flanders .
 By 1492, the year of hunting, jousting, gambling, and women, he was 1498 John dies suddenly . He was the epitome of the dashing Renaissance prince .
 Isabella and Ferdinand's daughter Maria exceeded ten thousand in number in number . Queen of Portugal, dies in childbirth in childbirth .
 In 1492, after being and flexible, Ferdinand gained much territory in Italy for Spain . As a result of the Italian Wars of 1511—13.13, Granada was besieged for a year and a half . Granada surrendered .
 Columbus landed in the Caribbean on the island of San Salvador . The arrival of a small, Spanish-sponsored fleet on San Salvador was to have dramatic effects on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean .
 European explorers would be galvanized by the discovery of what eventually proved to be two whole new continents . The native populations were about to enter a period of prolonged suffering and repression .
 Christopher Columbus was born in Genoa around 1451, going to sea at an early age . Christopher Columbus went on to be the world's most famous explorer .
 By finding a direct sea route to Asia, he hoped to open the wealth of the region for European trade . He hoped to find a direct route to the region to open up the wealth .
 His fleet consisted of three-masted cargo ships, the Santa Maria, the Pinta and the Nina . His fleet included a cargo ship with 40 men and a smaller ship with 26 men . The Nina, Nina, and Santa Maria were the only ships with 24 aboard .
 The fleet dropped anchor in the Canary Islands, southwest of Spain, for repairs . On September 6 it finally resumed its journey across the Atlantic . The fleet is currently in the middle of its journey .
 Columbus thought he saw “a light to the west” on October 11, 1492 . Columbus was aboard the Santa Maria when he saw the light on the night .
 Two hours after midnight, Rodrigo de Triana, lookout on the Pinta, sighted land . Rodrigo de Trana, looker on lookout on Pintas, sighting land . Two hours later, Rodrigo De Triana saw land .
 On January 16, 1493, he set off back to Spain, convinced that he had sailed to Asia and back . He set off from Spain, believing that he'd sailed to China and back in 1493 .
 Forty years after Columbus first set foot in the Americas, the Spanish had built a vast empire in North, Central, and South America . Columbus' first voyage to the Americas was in 1492 .
 Two small bands of soldiers felled two mighty empires and initiated three centuries of Spanish rule . With remarkable ingenuity and treachery, and considerable bravery, the Spanish army felled both empires .
 On the eve of European conquest, three highly advanced civilizations occupied much of Central and South America . Three highly advanced . civilizations occupied the region .
 All 16 states were independent, and in 1480 there was a major war for regional supremacy . In 1480, there were 16 independent states in the region, all 16 were independent states .
 The lack of a single ruler made these states more difficult to conquer . It was also made difficult to find a ruler in these states .
 Aztec rule stretched from the Caribbean to the valley of Mexico . By the reign of Moctezuma II, over 10 million people were subject to the Aztec empire .
 Central to their belief system was the need to provide human sacrifices for their sun god Huitzilopochtli .
 By 1525, the empire was at its greatest extent, stretching from modern-day Ecuador in the ; north to Chile in the south . The empire was also known as the Spanish Empire of Spain .
 The empire was rich in gold and had a 12,500mile network dud; of roads . OM The empire had 12,000 miles of roads. OM The Empire was rich .
 Francisco Pizzarro was born in 1526 Americas for a variety of reasons . He was born on the island of Colombia .
 They came to claim land for their king, and saw the locals as inferiors to be subdued and exploited . The locals were the inferiors of the king, who saw them as submissive .
 The Americas gave men such as Vasco de Balboa a chance of gold and glory . They came for adventure, but the Americas gave them a chance to gold .
 First permanent mainland settlements were founded from 1510 and included Vasco de Balboa, soon to become the first European to see the Pacific, and Francisco Pizarro .
 By now, the Spanish were realizing that this new world was rich, but its wealth was not to be taken easily easily .
 In 1518 the Spanish governor of Cuba sent 11 ships under the command of Cortés to explore the coast of the Yucatán peninsula for gold . Cortés led the Spanish forces to the area .
 Using local guides and interpreters, he arrived at Tlaxacala, an independent city and enemy of the Aztec empire . He used local guides to learn more about the city and its history .
 With the Tlaxacalan army as willing allies, he approached the Aztec capital, Tenochtitlán, in November 1519 .
 Aztec emperor Moctezuma was fearful of the Spanish, aware of their military reputation and ruthlessness . The Aztec king was aware of the Spaniard's reputation .
 He placated them with gifts and housed them in a palace in his island capital . He placed them in his palace in the island capital in his country .
 Cortés launched the desperate scheme of taking Moctezuma prisoner . This simply encouraged the Aztecs who were hostile to the Spanish presence to chose another leader .
 Tenochtitlan began its descent into chaos when Cortés’s soldiers massacred a large number of young Aztec nobles taking part in a festival of feasting and dancing . Cortés's soldiers killed many of the Aztec noblemen during the massacre .
 As the city rebelled, Moctezuma proved powerless to calm the Aztecs . He was stoned by his own people and later died .
 Aztecs failed to deliver the death blow to Cortés’s bedraggled survivors . Cortés's survivors died in the battle, but Cortés was able to defeat the Aztec .
 Cortés made a second siege of Tenochtitlan in August 1521, forcing the Aztecs into a final surrender after a desperate struggle . Cortés was backed by large numbers of new soldiers attracted by rumors of huge wealth .
 The capture of Tenochtitlan by Cortés in 1521 is shown in this somewhat fanciful late 18th-century painting by an unknown Spanish artist . While Cortés set about organizing his new territory, others Inca Gold Armlets .
 The splendor of the city on its island in Lake Texcoco is clear, though not, perhaps, perhaps the brutality of the conquest . The city's splendor on the island is clear and the brutality is not apparent .
 The Incas were great stonemasons, building depots to store their harvested crops, and roadside hostels for gold . Gold jewelry in the Inca empire was a sign of wealth and power .
 Birü excited the Spanish, who sent an expedition along the Pacific coast in 1522 that found no gold but confirmed reports of a rich empire inland . The Spanish confirmed reports that Birü was rich in the region .
 Further expeditions continued to map the coast, and two were led by Francisco Pizarro, an illiterate but brave 51-year-old soldier .
 With this treasure, he returned via Panama to Spain to Spain and sought permission to mount an armed expedition . He returned to Spain via Panama via Spain to seek permission for the armed expedition.
 Reaching Tumbes, he found it ruined by a civil war between Atahuallpa and his brother Huáscar for control of the Inca empire .
 Emperor's army camped with his army outside the city . Imperial envoy arrived with gifts from the emperor . They were received by an imperial envoy .
 Pizarro lured Atahuallpa into Cajamarca, took him hostage, and was offered an enormous ransom . He lured him to Cajmarca and offered a huge ransom .
 Pizarro and his officers executed the Inca emperor in 1533 . The Inca had amassed the treasure by July 1533, and panicked at rumors of an Inca counterattack .
 The Spanish then marched on the capital, Cuzco, and seized control of the entire Inca empire . The Spanish captured the Inca Empire in 16th century .
 Both Aztec and Inca empires fell to remarkably small Spanish armies . The Inca and Aztec empires had very small armies . Spanish conquistals had a very uneven history .
 The arrival of Europeans in force on the American mainland had lasting consequences on all sides . From a strategic point of view, they had a lasting effect on the U.S.
 The last Inca stronghold fell to the Spanish in 1572, and the Inca hinterland was largely untouched until the early 1800s .
 Conquest of Aztecs and Central America was more complete, did not end with the fall of the two main empires . Conquest of the Aztec empire did not stop with the end of the empires .
 Atahuallpa came to power after a bloody civil war that broke out on the deaths of both his father, Huayna Capac, and the probable heir to the throne by 1527 . He became the first king of his country to take power in 1528 .
 Atahuallpa took charge of the imperial army in Quito while his half-brother Huáscar ruled the city of Cuzco . Atahualpa took control of the army in the imperial capital of Quito .
 The civil war that broke out between these two for the throne tore the empire apart . It was one of the most brutal battles of the past .
 By the time Atahuallpa triumphed in 1532, the Spanish had already invaded Inca territory . The Inca and Spanish empires were highly centralized states ruled by all-powerful emperors .
 Following the conquest, the Spanish exploited the religion of the Aztecs, using their desire for captured enemies to sacrifice to turn them into allies .
 Pizarro was also helped by the superb Inca road network that enabled his troops to cross otherwise inaccessible terrain . The Inca also helped the Inca to build a better road network than the roads .
 The Spanish brought with them diseases to which the Americans had no resistance . Perhaps most importantly, though, the Spanish brought disease to the United States . The Spanish disease was a disease that the Americans could not resist .
 Diseases decimated local populations as the Spanish took control of their lands . The Spanish conquistatian disease decimated the local population .
 The Maya were a greater challenge, as their states had to be conquered one by one . The Maya state was conquered by the Mayes, but the Maya had to come to terms with each other .
 New World domesticated crops included corn, tobacco, cocoa, cotton, cocoa and cotton . New World crops were controlled by farmers .
 The Old World was equally productive, but apart from cotton it shared few crop types with the Americas . Apart from cotton, the Americas had few crops of cotton . The Americas were equally productive in cotton, but the Old World had few crop varieties .
 Europe and Asia had an abundance of domesticated animals, such as horses, cattle, goats, sheep, chickens, and pigs . But in the pre-Columbian Americas the only equivalents were turkeys, guinea pigs, dogs, alpacas, and llamas .
 Americas, however, had an incredible range of wild animals, hence much meat in the diet was obtained through hunting and fishing . The LLAMAS in Peru had a huge range of animals .
 Before Columbus, the Americas had enjoyed a long period of population growth . The Americas had a long history of rapid growth .
 Nevertheless, mortality rates remained high from diseases such as tuberculosis, and waterborne parasites caused illness . Waterborne parasites also caused illness in the country .
 olumbus’s very first voyage C in 1492 introduced new species to the Americas . He brought 28 horses, three mules, and an assortment of sheep, goats, cattle, chickens, dogs, and cats . Europeans suffered similarly, but they went on to export some
 Spanish colonization in the 16th century quickly expanded stock holdings . Apart from dogs, these were all unfamiliar creatures to the indigenous Americans .
 The numbers of domesticated animals imported by Europeans grew at different rates depending on the species, and brought different social effects . Europeans imported animals from all over the world from around 600 years ago .
 Sheep, goats, pigs, and chickens bred rapidly to be useful to the colonists . They were useful as sustenance for the colonists and trade with native Americans for fruits and vegetables .
 Columbus's arrival in the Americas in 1492 began one of the greatest revolutions in global food habits ever seen . Geographically, grazing animals also spread quickly . By 1519 The Great Exchange, by 1519
 Plants and animals previously separated by some 3,000-4,000 miles of ocean would now be exchanged . Sheep flocks could be found from northern South America up to the southwestern corner of what is today the United States .
 Horse and cattle numbers grew more slowly because of the animals’ longer breeding cycles and smaller numbers of offspring . Horses and cattle are more likely to breed more slowly than cattle in the U.S.
 During the 16th century they spread through Peru and Chile and reached northward through New Spain, which covered Central America and much of southern North America . Nevertheless, during the . 16th . century, they spread throughout Peru and . Chile .
 Horses were central to the early Spanish military conquests . Many native Americans were at first terrified of horses, believing them to be divine creatures . Horses introduced effective transportation, providing the future means for a wider trade .
 The first major smallpox outbreak in the Americas occurred in 1520-24 . Epidemics returned regularly until the late 1800s .
 American Indians fueled the growth of cattle herds with a newly acquired love of beef and leather . American Indians later fueled the development of cattle .
 The “exchange’s” of animal foods between the Old and New Worlds was mainly one-sided . Europe imported its domesticated animals into the Americas .
 The European colonists attempted to grow all the traditional Old World Crops in the Americas . Sugar cane, bananas, and lemons, for example, all doing well in the tropical climate .
 Grain crops such as wheat grew better in mountainous regions and later found perfect growing conditions in the temperate plains of North America . Grain crops like wheat were later found to grow better in temperate climate conditions .
 By the end of the 16th century, sugar cane was growing in huge amounts in the Caribbean, Peru, Brazil, and Mexico, with entire forests clearing for its growth .
 Corn, beans, potatoes, potatoes and tobacco were exported to Asia and Europe . Crop exports changed the diets of much of Europe and Asia, including corn and beans .
 Potatoes introduced across Europe between 1570 and 1600 . Two centuries later they would be one of the most important crops of the Old World . Potatoes were introduced in 1570 to 1600 and were one of Europe's most important crop .
 Cacao (a base ingredient of chocolate) transformed European confectionery, while tobacco introduced a whole new pastime . Tobacco is the most popular form of tobacco in Europe .
 Wheat, an Old World crop, grows alongside potatoes in a hilly region of South America . Tomatoes became staples of Mediterranean cooking, while chili peppers introduced Potatoes and wheat .
 The first attempts to grow the plants in the American tropics largely failed . typhoid fever, scarlet fever, cholera, whooping cough, diphtheria, mumps, and malaria and yellow fever .
 The only major disease that possibly traveled the opposite direction was syphilis . Many experts dispute the origins of syphilis, although many experts dispute its origins .
 Compounding the horrors of disease were the social effects of Old World agriculture in a New World setting . Compounding disease was the social effect of the New World in the form of agriculture . Compound the horrors, disease was also the social impact of the disease .
 Local communities were displaced to make room for grazing cattle, or forced to labor on farms and plantations . Local people were displaced from their homes and forced to work on plantations .
 O stripped of vegetation MASTRE DELE � ÍRTA HEL | VEIN ARI and suffering from soil Destruction and disease . Destruction of soil and disease is causing soil destruction and disease. O stripped vegetation O stripped .
 The New World steadily transformed the had imported much ts F world’s diets, but also had dramatic human consequences . For better or worse, the New World has been transformed .
 Europeans brought diseases that devastated indigenous populations, principally smallpox, measles, bubonic plague and smallpox . Along with food, Europeans also brought diseases to indigenous populations .
 Italian cookbook from 1622 was an effort to teach Italians how to cook exotic foods arriving from the Americas . It was published in 1622 and was an attempt to teach them how to eat exotic foods such as tomatoes .
 The Great Exchange had far-reaching implications across the world, irrevocably changing the global ecosystem . After the Great Exchange, the world's economy has changed dramatically .
 Tea was first imported to the Dutch settlement of New Amsterdam in North America in 1650 . During the second half of the 17th century its popularity spread along the eastern seaboard .
 Horses had existed on these continents previously, but were hunted to extinction by 7000 ce. 2011 . Horses had previously existed in these continents, but had previously been hunted down .
 American Indian nations of the plains (stretching from the Rocky Mountains to the Mississippi River) mastered the use of the horse, it transformed their way of life .
 They were now able to travel faster and farther than ever before, and their hunting efficiency increased exponentially . They were able to hunt faster, farther, and more efficiently, than before .
 Early Silver Silver is documented as being used as far back as the 3rd millennium Bce in the Middle East . Silver was first used in the Bronze Age and Bronze Age of Bronze Age Bronze Age .
 It became the most common coinage metal in Europe from the 5th century BcE onward . It was used in coinage coins from 5th Century onwards .
 Imports from America included pearls, sugar, dyestuffs, cowhide, and cowhide . Gold and silver were most highly prized among the imports .
 At first soldiers seized or bartered objects belonging to the native Americans . Soldiers seized or traded objects from native Americans. Soldiers then bartered or traded them for goods .
 Gold was prospected by natives washing out surface gold from stream beds . When these supplies were exhausted, gold was washed out by natives .
 The Spanish New World was shaped by the discovery, exploitation, and trading of silver around the world . From the 1540s onward, Spanish silver was found in many of the world's most important cities .
 The steady stream of silver into the Empire's coffers allowed Spain to become the superpower of its day . The discovery of silver at Potosí T in April 1545 was not the first time the Spanish colonialists had encountered this precious metal .
 It was already being mined in the arid hills of New Spain and in Peruvian mountain sites previously exploited by the Incas .
 Porco is located like Potosí to the southeast of Lake Titicaca . In 1540, Spaniards began mining silver at Porco, located near the lake, in Peru .
 Five years later, the discovery of an entire mountain of silver ore changed everything . It was the biggest single concentration of this precious metal ever found . The discovery of the largest concentration of the precious metal in the history of the world's first silver ore .
 Potosí quickly sprawled into a shanty village, growing in the next century to become the largest city in the New World with a population of between 100,000 and 160,000 .
 Potosí remains the highest human habitation in the Americas . A royal mint, established there in 1585, still stands today and, at some 13,600 ft above sea level, remains a royal mint .
 Real exploitation of the Potosí mines took off around 1560 when a new and more productive method of refining silver came to use . Real exploitation took off when new and productive method came to light .
 The new process required mercury, for which the main source was the Almadén mines in Spain . It yielded more silver than traditional smelting, and made it worthwhile to extract lowergrade, less concentrated seams of ore .
 Silver mining boosted supplies of beef, leather, and tallow candles . Silver mining also boosted the demand for supplies of meat, leather and tallowing candles .
 Mules were used to carry supplies to the mines and bring back silver . Ranching and mining grew together . Mules carried supplies and brought back silver from the mines .
 The conical mountain of Cerro Potosi became the chief source of the Spanish Empire's dazzling wealth after the discovery of silver there in 1545 .
 The huge outcrop of silver ore was soon honeycombed with mine workings, as shown in this engraving from the 18th century . slaves increased—imported for mining industry, and to work as servants .
 Many native Americans were used as forced labor, but others were paid as skilled craftsmen to produce fabulous silverwork . Some of the silverwork was made of native Americans .
 From 1503 to 1660 some 16,000 tons of silver were shipped to Seville . Tripling the existing silver resources of Europe . The first transatlantic convoys of the 1500s .
 Seville was the “mistress” port, enjoying a monopoly on all these precious cargoes until 1680 . Seville is the ‘mistress of’ port of the Spanish city .
 Each flota sailed from Vera Cruz, Cartagena, and Nombre de Dios to Seville over two months .
 The accountants ensured the silver took a secure route to the ship . It was not just the sailors, but also the civil servants who ensured it was safe .
 The system was set up to replace the violent, quarrelsome, and independent-minded Conquistadors . They ran an extensive and accountable system of bureaucratic government . The Spanish conquistadors were set up in 16th century .
 An elaborate silver church censer from about 1650, suspended by chains and used for burning incense in Catholic ceremonies, shows the direct link between the prosperity of the Spanish-American society and silver production .
 The mistress port Seville was already a thriving trading port when it was given a monopoly on silver brought back by the fleets from Mexico and Peru . In 1503, the Spanish city was given the power to sell silver brought in by the Mexican and Peruvian fleets .
 Indies, established in Spain from 1522, was charged with the business of the new Imperial territories . It presented reports and policy documents to the King, and acted as the link between Spain and administrators in the Americas .
 All the major posts in the colonial administration, from the Viceroys of New Spain and Peru, from judges to senior churchmen, were either fixed-term appointments or always chosen from the Spanish elites .
 The imposition of a Spanishborn ruling class was deeply resented by the ‘Creole’ population of Spaniards born and bred in the New World . It could be slow and cumbersome, and the imposition of the Spanish born ruling class could be painful .
 The Spanish Crown achieved the aims of the Spanish Crown, preventing colonies from slipping toward independence . It maintained a high level of control over the resources of the New World, including silver production .
 The influx of Europeans had a lasting effect on the American continents . Bullion and coins passed from silver merchants to European royal mints .
 Even Elizabeth I and the merchants of England sought to ensure their share of the treasure through loans . Elizabeth I was among those who sought to secure their share in the treasure .
 The silver trail stretched east via Italy to the Eastern Mediterranean, and across Persia and India into East Asia . Silver was the one commodity in steady demand from Europe in exchange for spices, silks, and Chinese porcelain .
 These men, women, and children are lauded as the Pilgrim Fathers . They are the founders of what became the United States .
 They were not the first Europeans to settle in the country . Yet they were by no means the first European to settle there .
 Permanent French settlers arrived later— after the foundation of Québec in 1608 . The province of Quebec was founded in 1607 .
 The first Europeans to visit America were adventurers Jacques Cartier T io. T io . The first European explorers to visit the U.S. were Frenchmen .
 The Spanish concentrated on exploiting the wealthy empires of Central and South America . The Spanish were obsessed with gold and conquest .
 To the north, the French explored the rich fishing and fur-trapping regions of the St. Louis region . The region is now home to a population of about 800,000 people .
 European navigators who did visit America were more concerned with finding a route around it to Asia than exploring the continent .
 While the Spanish established bases to protect their bullion fleets, such as St. St. Louis, St. Mary's was a base to protect its bullion fleet .
 The English first attempted to colonize the eastern seaboard of the Eastern Seaboard . The French and the French traded in Canada to the north .
 Sir Walter Raleigh established a settlement on Roanoke Island in 1584, but lacked the resources to sustain it . The English adventurer set up a settlement there in the early 1580s .
 The settlement is believed to have been destroyed by the local Croatoan Indians in 1590 . It is believed the settlement was destroyed by Croatoans .
 Defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588 gave the English incentive to attempt to intervene in the relatively undefended and undercolonized continent of North America . By then the English were trying to intervene .
 In 1607 the Virginia Company of London set up a colony in Jamestown, Virginia . The colony was set up by the London-based company .
 The Pilgrims came to Jamestown to acquire land and hopefully wealth . The men and women who settled the town came to acquire lands and wealth . They were the first settlers to settle Jamstown .
 Those that landed at New Plymouth in 1620 came to escape religious persecution in Europe . They came to New Plymouth to escape persecution of religious persecution .
 Puritans were religious dissenters who had left England for the Netherlands in 1608 . They decided to build their own society in a new land in the Netherlands .
 Armed with a Virginia Company land grant, they set sail in the Mayflower . The Mayflower is the oldest surviving surviving members of the English-speaking colony .
 Catholics in Maryland in 1634, freethinkers in Rhode Island in 1636, and Quakers in Pennsylvania in 1682 . After a two-month voyage, they arrived in the New a M FATHERS 1630 .
 Other colonies, notably the Carolinas, were given by the English king to supportive noblemen .
 The Dutch West India Company established Fort Orange (presentday Albany) on the Hudson River in 1623 . Fort Orange was established on the river on the New York River .
 It then purchased Manhattan from the native Canarsees for 40 guilders in 1626 . Manhattan was purchased by the company in 1624 .
 The Swedish West Indian Company set up New Sweden on the Delaware in 1638 . Farther south, the Swedish West Indies Company established New Sweden in New Sweden .
 The Dutch ended Swedish rule in 1655, but were then conquered by the British in 1664 . Swedish rule was ended by the Dutch in 1666, but was then taken over by British rule .
 English colonists preferred to create closed, self-sufficient communities . The English colonists wanted to create self-sustainable communities .
 When their efforts failed, as they often did, they often tried to defeat, destroy, or drive them away . The settlers tried to conciliate the natives, but instead tried instead to defeat or destroy them .
 To the English, the native American was an obstacle to be overcome, not a valuable resource to be exploited . The native American American was not an important resource for the English to exploit .
 Painting shows the 12-year-old Mayflower in Delft grew in strength . This proved a problem as the colonies grew stronger . The Mayflower proved to be a problem for the colonies .
 Spain ruled what is now Florida, while France controlled much of Canada . Spain ruled much of Florida, and France controlled Canada .
 The blue area in the north of Canada had both French and British settlements . The area was also known as the French-British area .
 Colonists traded blades, often imported from Sheffield, England, with American Indian nations in return for furs from animals trapped and killed by the Indians .
 By 1750 most of the 13 colonies celebrated their first successful harvest growing of tobacco and other export colonies were governed with a dinner . The event still celebrated crops led to the development of large colonies .
 The settlers, who called themselves first by white indentured servants from steel assembly, called themselves "Saints" or "Strangers" The settlers met in the Meeting House in Newport (above their religious beliefs)
 Each colony made its own laws and help initially from two American in Jamestown in 1619 with porcupine quillwork . Each colony was internally self-governing .
 They were relatively independent, with political and social institutions that differed markedly from those of Britain . They were therefore relatively independent and with different political institutions .
 Indians, Samoset and Tisquantum, who spoke English as well as their native language, Algonquin . Indians . They spoke English and their native languages .
 Squanto had been taken to England in 1605 by an English seafarer and stayed for nine years . Squanto stayed in England for nine more years .
 Pilgrims were not the first Europeans to settle in the area, as the seaboard was well known to English fishermen from the early 1500s . Many of them wintered on its sheltered coast and gathered stocks of food for the journey home .
 Colonies were subject to the British parliament and government, which regulated their trade and currency to prevent them from competing with British industries . Colonies had to be regulated by the British government to prevent competition .
 In 1765 the British government began to levy direct taxes on the colonies to pay for its recent colonial wars . The colonists objected to paying without proper representation in the British Parliament .
 Spain's trade LL ' Ü V9"" was a notorious pirate, operating along population and natural resources, buta bureaucracy ensured that the monarch ae tune the coast of Virginia, the Carolinas, and wealth of nautical .
 He seized tolls from ships with the backing of the governor of North Carolina, until a British force was dispatched at the request of cotton planters . The tolls were taken from ships in North Carolina .
 He was attacked and decapitated in November 1718 . His navigational c.C. and precious metals expertise .
 By forging Let It be known mined in the New an empire, it could World, in exchange tap into the lucrative that if YOU dre for protective convoys .
 Portugal helped colonial ambitions under Louis XIV safeguard a position in Europe . Ormuz, and Goa in : while Portugal helped . Louis XIV . helped . protect a position . in France .
 France's empire wasa countries, the interests of merchants established by M East Asian trade, state creation, and state creation came a poor second . France's Empire wasa .
 Portuguese navy IS yours."" carrying gold and enthusiasm among the French l general Afonso silver to China and merchant classes. carrying gold .
 Traders and adventurers were at the PORTUGUESE VICEROY OF INDIA, 1507 . They ensured control of via the Pacific and France , along the trading forefront of England and Holland’s the Persian Gulf and Atlantic . network around the Great Lakes .
 Belts of small seashells, called wampums, were made by stretching to Africa, Asia, and the Americas . Belts were made from small seashomes, which can be found in the Americas and Africa .
 Imperial growth tended to follow one of two patterns: Iroquois natives along the New England coast . Imperial growth tend to follow a pattern similar to that of the Native Americans .
 Dutch centralized, bureaucratic, and monarchical, or mercantile and occasionally chaotic . Dutch centralized and monarchial, or monarchical .
 In 1405-33, seven major Chinese naval expeditions explored and traded across the oceans as far west as Africa . Seven major Chinese expeditions explore and trade across the world .
 Mariner's Mirrour was the first book to show standardized symbols for buoys, channels, safe anchorages, and submerged rocks . The book was published in 1926 . It was first published by the Mariner’s Mariner .
 Where conflicts arose, the great empires were ruthless apis — -— in Japan . The great empires are ruthless and ruthless in Japan, says historian .
 The Dutch trade in commodities became more complex, by the Dutch . Merchants used it to check on the Spanish convoys, but it was used in the Netherlands .
 The 1715 Treaty of Utrecht gave England a monopoly on supplying slaves to the Spanish American empire . New Navigation Acts set out a framework for colonial trade and monopolies .
 Batavia was seized by Jan Pieterzoon Coen in May 1619 . It became the trading hub of the Dutch East Indies trading hub .
 While the last few emperors of the Ming dynasty were distracted by internal rebellion, a new power was gathering in the north . The last few Ming emperors were distracted from internal rebellion .
 The Jurchen people were descended from the founders of the Jin dynasty . Jurchen were descendents of the founder of the Jurchen dynasty .
 By the 16th century the Jurchen were living near Jilin in modern-day northeast China, where they hunted, farmed, and traded extensively with the Chinese . The Jurchen lived in modern China, hunting, farming and farming .
 Jurchen leader Nurhaci founded the Later Jin dynasty in 1616 . He began to organize his people, as well as the Mongols and Chinese who had submitted to Jurchen rule .
 50 2 5 niru, or 7,500 families, were organized under one banner . The entire population were enrolled into four military units called banners, each being identified by the color of their standards .
 Nurhaci's successor, Huang Taiji, introduced Chinese-style institutions among the Jurchen . The Jurchen were originally from the Chinese .
 The banner system was expanded by the conquests of Huang Taiji to include eight Manchu, eight Mongol, and eight Chinese banners by 1644 . The banners were expanded to include Manchu and eight Mongol banners .
 In the early 17th century, the E Ming dynasty was beset by internal popular rebellions and the threat of a Manchu invasion . Xinjiang 0 2000 km 0 2000 miles .
 In April 1644, the rebel leader Li Zicheng took Beijing, and the Ming emperor committed suicide . The Ming Emperor committed suicide in 1644 . The rebel leader took Beijing .
 Li tried to persuade Wu Sangui, the most powerful commander on the frontier, to join him . Li tried unsuccessfully to persuade him to join forces with him .
 Wu negotiated with the Manchus, allowing them to pass freely through the Great Wall . Instead of negotiating with the Chinese, he negotiated with them instead .
 The reigns of the Three Emperors, Kangxi , Yongzheng , and Qianlong are known collectively as the “Prosperous Age” A period when the Chinese empire expanded to its greatest extent and its population doubled . Imperial Poetry is the work of Imperial Po
 Emperor Kangxi was an accomplished poet as well as a sponsor of the arts . Outer Mongolia uangzhou peal’
 The Manchus continued their advance south, crushing any resistance from Ming loyalists . The Chinese continued to advance south .
 All male Chinese to show that they submitted to Qing rule by shaving foreheads and adopting the queue, a long braided ponytail . The queue, which was compulsory in China throughout the Qing period, was also ordered .
 Qing instituted a bureaucracy that relied on features retained from the Ming administration, which of government examinations . Having gained control over China, the Qing instituted the bureaucracy .
 In 1757 a Zunghar rebellion was mercilessly crushed, and their territory was incorporated into the empire . In 1756, a revolt against the Zuns was crushed, with the death toll at 1,000 .
 Manchu and a Chinese official helped ease resentment felt by the Chinese at being ruled by alien invaders . Manchu policy helped somewhat in easing resentment .
 Shunzhi showed great promise as a ruler, but died of smallpox at an early age . The Prosperous Age was the most prosperous era of China .
 It was his three successors who were responsible for consolidating Qing power in China .
 Shunzhi’s son, the Kangxi emperor, was the longest-reigning emperor in Chinese history . Kangxi was the most successful emperor in China's history .
 He read and commented on more than 50 memorials every day, and traveled extensively . He also traveled extensively and read memorials around the world .
 During his reign he crushed a major internal rebellion and led successful campaigns against the Zunghar people of Mongolia . He also crushed an internal rebellion against his people .
 Yongzheng insisted on the use of the Manchu language at court and raised the salaries of officials to discourage corruption . He also insisted on using the language of Manchu at court .
 The Sacred Edict exhorted subjects to revere the emperor was read out twice a month at Confucian temples . To ensure ideological conformity, the emperor ordered that the edict be read out at temples .
 The addition of territory led to an expansion of the economy, as well as a significant population increase . It led to a significant economic expansion and population growth .
 The first Christian Jesuit mission in Beijing had been established in 1598 . Missionaries had been sent to China in 1698 .
 The sails of a junk could be moved inward, allowing it to sail into the wind much like today's windsurfers and catamarans . When the Manchus came to power, they continued the Ming practice of moving the sails inward .
 Bamboo battens stiffened the sail and made tt easier to roll up in high winds . Bamboo sail sail is made from bamboo .
 The stern were used for centuries before their adoption by the West employing Jesuits for various official tasks . They also prevented the sail from tearing too easily .
 Kangxi gave Father Adam Schall responsibility for preparing the imperial calendar . Father Schall was responsible for preparing imperial calendar, for example .
 When a mistake was detected, Schall was accused of treason and narrowly escaped death . Schall narrowly escaped being executed after a mistake in his actions .
 Other Jesuit priests engaged as diplomats, architects, artists, and mathematicians . Jesuit priests were engaged as diplomat, architects and mathematician .
 Kangxi issued an “edict of toleration” in 1692, after Jesuit missionaries had cured the emperor of malaria . Kangxi allowed the teaching of Christianity in China .
 The tea trade links by land with Central Asia and Rudders affixed to the nks . Introduced in the Han dynasty, these ocean-going vessels were in use throughout Chinese history .
 Qing dynasty trading junks carried a variety of Christians from performing the rites of ancestor worship . The preaching of Christianity in China was forbidden .
 The rowboat was hung from the very high poop deck at the stern of Chinese junks, rather than from the sides of the ship . China had long-standing commercial GREEN TEA GINGER ROOT commercial success .
 Britain had become China’s major Western trading partner . Model of a traditional Chinese junk products, from tea and spices to silk and jade, is tea .
 Tea quickly became China’s leading export . Interest in ceramics and silk was still strong, but tea quickly became the leading export.
 Under the Qing, foreign trade was regulated closely and from 1760 it was confined by to the city of Guangzhou . From 1760, trade was restricted to Guangzhou, Guangzhou.
 From the late Ming period, China also had dealings with the European powers . China also has dealings with European powers from the Ming period .
 Qianlong projected an image of himself as a model Chinese ruler, attending to affairs of state in the morning and painting and writing poems in the afternoon . Qianlong was a model ruler of China .
 More than 40,000 poems have been ascribed to him . Though not particularly gifted, he was a prolific poet .
 The last few decades of Qianlong's rule saw the ""Prosperous Age"" come to an end . Qianlong ruled China for decades until the end of his rule .
 In 1775, the imperial bodyguard Heshen became a favorite of Qianlong . Heshen began to build a network of corrupt patronage .
 Qianlong gave him control of the imperial revenues, and allowed him to appoint his henchmen to senior official posts . Qianlong was given control of imperial revenues and was allowed to appoint henmen to top posts .
 Heshen is considered to have begun a trend of corruption that continued through the 19th century, gradually undermining the status of the Qing dynasty . Heshen began a trend that continued to undermine the Qing Dynasty .
 Opium, grown in India, was smuggled into China by British firms . Opium was smuggled across the border from India to China .
 By 1830, the trade had soared to 18,956 chests . Then the price was lowered, and by 1830 the trade was booming . The price of the chests was lowered .
 Opium smuggling surged again to more than 40,000 chests a year in 1834, costing 34 million silver dollars and causing a significant drain on imperial revenues . The smuggling of opium was a major drain of imperial revenues and a major source of revenue .
 For of sakoku, or national seclusion, magine a 17th-century city of towering stone walls, long wooden parapets, huge gatehouses, and massive moats, all sprawling from the largest castle in the world .
 Edo was twice the size of the largest cities in Europe at the time, such as London and Paris . Edo is a bustling town-port with artisans, traders, and laborers .
 Before the Edo period, Japan was a politically divided and unstable country . Its busy thoroughfares were filled with people from different classes, all of whom were beneficiaries of a new period .
 The battle of Sekigahara was the last great field battle between two Japanese armies . The battle was fought in the final battle between the two sides of the war .
 The shogun, while exercising control from Edo, had to work with local magnates in order to maintain power in distant provinces that were difficult to reach . He worked with them to maintain control in the distant provinces .
 The samurai were allowed to demand physical labor and duties from local villagers, including taxes and rent . The Edo period was known as the ‘Great Peace’ or Edo Period .
 The emperor and his court were consigned to ceremonial stature at Kyoto, which was Japan’s capital at that time . The emperor's court, though revered, was consigned in ceremonial stature .
 The Imperial court, powerless but prestigious, conferred the title shogun and Ieyasu manipulated this “support” to his advantage . Ieyas manipulated this "support" to gain power over his enemies .
 Print by Ando Hiroshige reveals an 18th-century view of Edo, Japan . Edo was one of the largest cities in the world throughout the 18th century . The city was the world's largest city, with Edo being one of its largest .
 The population was labeled as to whether they were samurai, farmers, craftsmen, or merchants . The population of the population in Japan was labeled depending on the type of people .
 At the apex of the system were the warrior class, the samurai, who were the only individuals allowed to carry weapons . At the end of the 16th century, samurai were only individuals permitted to carry a weapon .
 As a class, samurai were controlled by the military leaders and worked as government officials, guards, policemen, or for local authorities, serving either shogun or one of the local daimyo .
 The great change in Japanese society was the elevation of farmers to the second rank of society . Farmers made up 80 percent of the population, and their labor was critical to the economy . Farmers were given the status of second rank in society .
 Peasant farmers enjoyed a high degree of village autonomy . Although at the mercy of the daimyo and samurai, the peasants were at the least of their own .
 Locals elected leaders and formed collective assemblies that decided on local issues . They elected leaders, held collective assemblies and decided on issues of their own .
 Villagers paid taxes as a village unit and were granted individual rights to cultivate the land registered to them . They paid taxes and were given individual rights in order to cultivate land .
 In Construction of a Noh mask Noh masks must be light, as they must be worn throughout an entire performance . In construction of the mask, the mask is light .
 Traditionally, each mask is carved out of a single piece of cypress wood . Each mask is made of one piece of wood .
 Below farmers in terms of rights and restrictions were the artisans and craftsmen . Merchants and shopkeepers were considered the lowest rank in this strict class structure .
 Commerce developed in the expanding urban centers of Edo, Osaka, and Kyoto . The merchant class made money trading and brokering, coming to enjoy a certain amount of financial power .
 The Edo Period produced much of what we recognize today as traditional Japanese culture . Edo period was one of the most influential periods of Japan's history . Japan was ruled by Japan's rulers during the Edo era .
 Haiku, the 17-syllable poem still in use today, was born . Zen gardens, flower arranging, and the tea ceremony all came into their own . Noh theater was transformed .
 Noh plays deal with a universal truth, displayed on stage in a kind of visual metaphor . "Noh plays are a visual metaphor," says Noh playwright .
 Pictured to the right are a 14th-century warrior mask and two Edo-period masks . The masks were created in the 14th century and 16th century .
 Noh theater's restraint and elegance appealed to upper-class Japanese society . Kabuki theater, which was garish and bawdy, was embraced by the merchant class . The merchant class embraced Kabuki Theater .
 Cha-no-yu, as it is called, was considered a traditional art in Japan provinces .
 It originally consisted of acrobatic and juggling displays, but the addition of operatic dance and recital transformed it into a highly stylized and symbolic drama .
 Noh theater was strictly governed in Japan during the Edo period . Lower classes were forbidden to learn the techniques of the art form . The lower classes were also forbidden from learning the techniques .
 Kabuki, ukiyo-e, porcelain, and lacquerware all developed and thrived during this period . Kabuki and lacqueware all thrived in this era .
 Ukiyo-e, or ""pictures of the floating world,"" was an art form that proved highly popular for its depictions of sensual courtesans, erotic prostitutes, and flashy kabuki actors .
 The genre later proved influential to Western artists such as Vincent van Gogh, Claude Monet, Edgar Degas, and Gustav Klimt . The genre also proved influential in the Western world .
 The 18th and early 19th century in Japan was marked by severe famines, increasing social tensions, and repeated but unsuccessful attempts to political reform .
 A long, slow decline ended with the as undisputed ruler of northern India . The Rajput confederacy of Rajput kings at Kanua. empire's dissolution in 1857 . empire's demise was the result of a long slow decline .
 Mughal treasury. from Fatehpur Sikri to Lahore. ad atl 1648 . Shah Jahan takes up residence in his new capital, Delhi .
 Akbar accedes to the throne Mughal Empire and rule over India by the British crown . with Bairam Khan as regent . Akbar accedes to the throne and rule .
 Babur defeated the Afghan Sultan of Delhi, Ibrahim Lodi, at Panipat in 1526 and his success over a confederacy of Rajput kings at Kanua the following year . The splendor and sophistication of Babur's court was world-famous .
 Babur, founder of the Mughal Empire Babur captured sheep from the Hazara tribe . Using firearms and an experienced and efficient cavalry, he had consolidated his rule over the rich cities . Babur is shown here capturing sheep from Hazara tribes .
 Babur is remembered as much for his literary prowess as for his military achievements . Babur was one of the world's most famous men . He is also known for his achievements in Afghanistan and Afghanistan .
 By 1540, he had lost his father's kingdom to the Afghan ruler, Sher Shah Sur . He had been forced into exile at the Safavid court in Persia .
 In mid-1555, with Persian support, he restored Mughal rule by defeating Sher Shah’s weaker descendants . In 1555, he defeated Sher Shah's weaker descendants, thus duplicating his father's conquests . With Persian support he was able to successfully conquer Sher
 He died seven months later, leaving the empire to his 12-year-old son, Akbar, with —— an influential noble, Bairam Khan, as his regent . However, he died just seven months after his death .
 Mughal control extended over northern India in the region bounded by the Indus and Ganges rivers . The region was framed by palace fortresses at Agra, Allahabad, Ajmer, and Lahore .
 The center consisted mainly of Muslim o T P, Q »ig t OMasulipatam sultanates, while Hindu Rajputs and Lodi 25 o Afghans quarreled over the north . The center was mainly Muslim .
 To consolidate his position, Akbar established a centralized system of government . O CEA Structure and tolerance .
 This was administered by warrior-aristocrats of various ranks . They could be appointed to bureaucratic or military positions . They were accompanied by their own households or troops .
 They had the right to collect taxes from this land, but could not own, govern, or occupy it . They were not allowed to own or occupy the land .
 Akbar had a policy of religious tolerance, which was evident in his own marriages to women of different faiths . He did not force to convert to Islam, which he did .
 Hindu Rajputs were allowed to negotiate entry into his nobility if they offered their daughters in marriage . He also allowed the Hindu Rajasputi's Hindu Rajaputi Rajaspiri's daughters to be married to him . The Rajputi was allowed entry into the nobility
 He relied more on Rajputs and Persians than on his own Central Asian nobles . Eventually, he relied on more than his own central Asian nobles to support him .
 Akbar reduced the influence of Muslim scholars . He abolished taxes on Hindu pilgrims and non-Muslim residents . Akbar also introduced the Bengali calendar, a solar calendar to replace the Muslim lunar cycle .
 At his new palace at Fatehpur Sikri near Agra, he held among garden tombs streams are thought to represent the four rivers in the Islamic depiction of paradise religious debates .
 He induced the famed singer and musician, Tansen, to join his court, and began patronizing what became known as north Indian classical music . He induced Tansen to join him .
 At Fatehpur Sikri, he established a school of Mughal painting, combining Persian with Persian . The tomb is placed at one end, not at the center .
 The Taj Mahal at Agra is the ultimate example of a Mughal garden tomb . This is unique geometric bricklined flowerbeds the white marble interior "" of the dome is decorated a with a sun motif t23 .
 Shah Jahan's palace was built in 1632-54 under the patronage of his beloved wife, Mumtaz Mahal . It was built after she died giving birth to their fifteenth child in 1631 . The palace is the most famous mosque in the world .
 Jahangir’s son, Shah Jahan, contributed more artistic treasures, such as the Taj Mahal at Agra and a majestic new capital at Delhi .
 These huge projects were also symbols of Mughal wealth, dependent on flourishing agriculture and trade .
 Aurangzeb oversaw the expansion of the empire to its largest extent . From his accession in 1658, the last ‘great’ Mughal was the last "great” emperor . He ruled from 1658 until his death in 1683 .
 The Great Mughals' reign also included the Red Fort at Delhi . Yet his reign also also included a series of other great works .
 From 1648 it functioned as his imperial palace and the Mughal administrative center . The palace is located in Delhi, India, from 1648 .
 In the 18th century, Mughal sovereignty became limited to Delhi and its hinterland . In the early years of 18th Century, Delhi was ruled by the Delhi Sultanate .
 A final attempt to restore Mughal rule was connected to the Indian Mutiny of 1857 . The final attempt was made in 1857 to try to restore the Indian empire . The attempt was connected with the Indian mutiny of the same year .
 The last Mughal emperor, Bahadur Shah Il, died in exile in Burma in 1862 . He was the last emperor to die in exile .
 Mughal formal gardens, charbaghs, were based on those of the Persians . Persians saw great significance in the number four .
 The plan of the Taj Mahal garden shows the use of units of four signified the beginning of the end of the era .
 He depleted the treasury trying to defeat the Marathas in the south who were trying to establish their own empire . He was often away from his capital on military campaigns .
 Some scholars believe his strict interpretation of Islam offended his Rajput collaborators and Hindu subjects . Some scholars also believe he may have offended Rajputs and his collaborators .
 The empire was further weakened by a rapid succession of rulers following Aurangzeb's death in 1707 . The empire continued to be weakened further by a series of rulers' rapid succession .
 In 1739, Nadir Shah, the Safavids' successor, sacked Delhi and seized the Mughal treasury . In 1740, the Delhi treasury was seized by Nadir, who was killed in 1739 . The treasury was looted by the Safvids and the M
 18th-century miniature by Fazil Enderuni shows concubines bathing in the harem of the Topkapi Palace . The harem was created by the Ottoman Empire .
 All concubines were non-Muslim captives taken in war or bought from slavers . The concubine were taken from war captives or bought by slavers in the region .
 The Ottoman Empire was forged in a bloody furnace of continual intrigue and conflict . Before the Ottoman Empire, the Ottomans were in the midst of constant conflict .
 Orhan and his son Murad I seized most of the Balkans, and achieved the Ottoman goal of conquering Anatolia . With this formidable army, Orhan's forces seized the Balkans .
 The Sipahis were mounted warriors in the army recruited from land-owning Turks . They were called the Sipahs by the Turks, who were part of the land-owned Turks .
 T he emergence of the T Ottomans as a world power began with the rule of Mehmed II in 1451 . T he emerged as the world's most powerful power in the early 1400s .
 With 160,000 men against the defenders’ 7,000, he swiftly crushed all resistance . Using the world's largest cannon to pound the allegedly ‘impregnable’ walls, he used the world’s largest cannon . Using more than 160,00 men against
 Mehmed pushed on into Europe, seizing territory, until his failure to take Belgrade in 1456 brought the conquest to a halt . The Ottoman Empire’s border with Western Europe was left static for the next 60 years .
 The Ottoman eastern borders were threatened by the rise of the Persian Safavids . Meanwhile, the Ottoman east borders were also threatened .
 It was not until the Battle of Chaldiran in 1514 that Selim I humbled the rival dynasty . The battle took place at the end of 1514 .
 Selim led his troops east and south, taking Jerusalem’s holy sites and conquering Cairo in 1517 . Selim also led his forces to take Cairo and took Jerusalem in 1516 .
 Selim’s son, Suleyman, was known as ‘The Magnificent’ in Europe for his wealth and power . He proved no less a conqueror than his father, known as the Magnificent .
 Suleyman’s two favorite sons, Mustafa and Bayazid, were accused of conspiring against him . Mustafa was accused of conspiring against him in the 1980s . The two sons are now in the prime prime minister's second family .
 Suleyman the Magnificent ruled the Ottoman Empire . He was known as Kanuni, "the Lawgiver" in the Islamic world and in the Western world . He never ruled the empire .
 Suleyman believed himself to be the spiritual heir to both Alexander and Caesar . Claimed title to all the lands they had ruled over and claimed title to them .
 Within a year of his accession, his armies had taken Belgrade . By the time of his death the Ottomans controlled large parts of southeast Europe, the North African coast, and the Middle East .
 His support of the arts and the rule of law that he implemented remain his legacy . His support for the arts remains his legacy, he says .
 Ottoman weaponry was renowned for its beauty and functionality . Dagger and scabbard Ottoman weaponry is renowned for beauty and function .
 This dagger and scabbard was probably the possession of an Ottoman noble . It was probably recovered from this loss and became a Palace, leaving his Grand the empire .
 Selim had no political or military training, Selim's formative experiences were food, drink, and women . Selim was born in Istanbul, Turkey .
 On his accession Selim handed over control of the empire to his vizier . Selim was the first ruler of the Ottoman Empire .
 This set the pattern for the next century of Ottoman rule, with catastrophic results . The pattern was set for the future, with disastrous results .
 Without a strong ruler, corruption flourished, government corruption flourished . The indifference of the bureaucracy to predatory local officials eroded public support for the regime, says CNN .
 Monemvasia. rzurumdS ONakhichevan "" 5 A ; “Rhodes b AT Dabiq Lo 5 DLP Cyprus.” 5 A; “rhodes’s” is the name of a Cypri
 The Ottoman Empire was a considerable force in world politics from the 14th century until the early 20th century . Aden of pace Socotra was a major factor in the Ottoman Empire's power .
 Map shows the borders of the Ottoman Empire at the height of its power . The Diwan, grand vizier, and janissaries (elite army units) vied for power .
 The Sublime Porte presented a united face to its enemies, but a century of nepotism and greed slowly ate it from within . The Sublimity Porte was once the most powerful and most powerful in the world .
 Mehmet Kopprulu, grand vizier to Mehmet IV, began a systematic effort to root out corruption in 1650s . Mehmet's first attempt was to stem the tide of misgovernment in 1660s .
 He planned a resumption of Ottoman conquest, but died before his plans came to fruition . He also planned to return to the Ottoman Empire .
 Mehmet’s brother-in-law, Kara Mustafa, marched on Vienna, the capital of the mighty Habsburg Empire, in 1683 . Mehmet marched into Vienna, Austria, and took control of the city . Mustafa was the son of Mehmet and
 A combination of innovative cavalry tactics and superior artillery resulted in Mustafa’s defeat . Mustafa was defeated by the Ottoman Empire .
 With this defeat a steady European encroachment on Ottoman lands began, and for most of the 18th century they were at war with one or more European powers . The Ottomans were defeated in the Battle of the Crimean Peninsula .
 Mahmud I brought respite to the weary empire, capturing Belgrade, and holding it under the Treaty of Belgrade of 1739 . Mahmud captured Belgrade in 1739 and held it under a treaty of peace .
 Given ongoing corruption within government, further losses seemed inevitable . But given the ongoing corruption in government, more losses were inevitable . More losses are expected .
 Sultan Ahmed mosque in Istanbul is lined with more than 20,000 handmade ceramic tiles . The Blue Mosque was built between 1609-16 by master architect Sedefhar Mehmet Aga .
 Initially tugras were used only on official documents such as fermans . Later they began to appear as a symbol of sovereignty on stamps, coins, and flags .
 After 1750, the Ottoman Empire's story was one of slow, continuous decline . The Ottoman Empire has been in decline since 1750 . The Empire is one of the world's most populous countries .
 In the early 18005, reforms were introduced to stabilize the Ottoman Empire, but its slow dismemberment continued . Reforms were introduced but the Empire continued to lose ground .
 Bosnia-Herzogovina rebelled in 1875, and in another war with Russia in 1877-78, the Empire ceded Romania, Serbia, and Montenegro . The Empire was defeated by the Ottoman Empire in the war of 1877 and 1878 .
 Two more Balkan Wars saw the empire lose most of its remaining European territory . The empire was defeated in both of its two more wars in the early years of the empire .
 The aim of the Europeans was to save the island of Cyprus from the westward advance of the Ottomans, who already occupied most of Hungary and threatened Vienna, Austria .
 In 1453 they conquered the empire's capital Constantinople . In the next few years they took over most of its lands, from Serbia and Bosnia in the west to Anatolia in the east .
 By the early 16th century they were expanding again, destroying the power of Hungary at the Battle of Mohacs in 1526, and laying siege to Vienna in 1529 . They had to pull back from the city when they ran out of supplies and winter came .
 The Habsburg rulers of the Holy Roman Empire were concerned they would be attacked again . The Catholic Church also felt threatened by the Muslim Ottomans .
 Venice, Genoa, Spain and the Papacy formed an alliance, called the Holy League, to defend the Mediterranean against the Ottomans . The Holy League was formed to protect the Mediterranean from the Ottoman invasion .
 Both fleets were made up mainly of galleys, large warships powered by oarsmen . Both fleets are made up of large warships, mainly made of oarsman .
 Don John also had six galleasses, powerful hybrid vessels with sails as well as oars, and with heavy cannons mounted along their flanks . Don John's ship was one of the most powerful vessels in the world .
 The Turks preferred to fight by ramming their enemy's ships, but Don John deployed the formidable firepower he carried . Don John used his formidable firepower to defeat the Turks .
 The Ottoman commander, Ali Pasha, was killed, as were thousands of his men . Thousands of men were killed, including thousands of men .
 The Holy League destroyed the Turkish navy, but they did not destroy the Turks . The Turkish navy was destroyed by the Holy League, but the Turks did not .
 They did not expand farther westward, as they might have done if they had won . But they didn't expand further westward . The U.S. declined to expand westward.
 16th-century Italian artist Andrea Micheli depicts the Battle of Lepanto, which was the last battle fought by galleys . Don John of Austria went to war with Austria in 16th century .
 During the 15th and 16th centuries, art and learning flourished in cities and at royal courts in many parts of Europe, but especially in Italy . The Renaissance flourished in Italy, especially in France .
 Renaissance was part of an ongoing process that changed the shape of European culture over many centuries . The works of the exceptional individuals who made this “renaissance” are among the marvels of the world .
 The writings of Dante, Petrarch and Boccaccio in the 14th century are among many works that prefigured the Renaissance . The paintings of artists such as Giotto, and the writings of Petrarch, are among those pre-figured .
 In medieval times, some artists and thinkers were already breaking with tradition . The period of the Renaissance is, however, early book BEFORE .
 Historians have identified an early ""renaissance"" in 12th century Europe . Historians identify an early Renaissance in the 12th Century Europe .
 Florentine artist Giotto di Bondone initiated a revolution in European painting a century before the Renaissance proper . Giotto was the first Italian painter to be influenced by the Renaissance .
 Economic prosperity was the basis for the Renaissance . Wealth and culture was the foundation for the renaissance . Wealth was the source of Renaissance .
 Art and learning were luxuries that could be afforded through the increasing wealth of a social elite . Art was a luxury luxury for the social elite, with art and learning luxuries becoming luxuries .
 Grown S rich on the proceeds of banking, trade, and manufacture, cities spent freely on cultural luxuries out of civic pride or to enhance the prestige of local rulers such as the Medici family .
 Wealthy kings such as Matthias Corvinus in Hungary and Francis I in France patronized artists and intellectuals as a way of advertising their own power and status . Wealthy monarchs also patronized art and intellectuals to advertise their status .
 Renaissance popes such as Alexander VI and Julius II lavished money raised from their Christian flock on extravagant artistic and architectural projects such as St. St. Peter the Apostle and St. Paul the Apostle .
 Dante standing before Florence Domenico di Michelino painted this image of the poet Dante alongside his native city, Florence .
 Detail from fresco in the church of Santa Maria Novella in Florence shows a group of humanist scholars including Marsilio Ficino, head of the Platonic Academy .
 Michelangelo's David was made by Michelangelo for the city of Florence in 1504 . The massive marble statue is made by the famous Italian artist .
 Renaissance scholars placed humankind, rather than God, at the center of their world-view . The loose international network of scholars who spearheaded the Renaissance are known as "humanists"
 Scholars studied ancient texts more critically than had been done before . Reading in Greek as well as Latin, which had long been the THE RENAISSANCE language of the educated in Europe .
 Humanists strove to establish an accurate text for the Bible . Erasmus regarded his Greek version of the New Testament as his major achievement . They also strove for an accurate Bible .
 Humanists were often employed as tutors for the children of the rich and powerful . They devised influential systems of education, focusing on subjects such as Latin, history, grammar and rhetoric .
 Architecture was an area in which the emulation of antiquity was most fruitful . Feats in architecture were among the most successful attempts to emulate ancient architecture .
 Filippo Brunelleschi's dome was one of the first great achievements of the Renaissance . The dome was built for the cathedral in Florence by Brunellesschi in the Renaissance era .
 Brunelleschi had studied the ancient ruins in Rome, including the domed Pantheon, before embarking on the work . He had also studied the dome of the Pantheon in Rome's ancient ruins .
 Completed in 1436, it was the largest dome ever built, a nearly miraculous feat of engineering as well as an aesthetic masterpiece . The dome was completed in the 1436 .
 Domes were established as a crowning feature of the most ambitious Renaissance buildings, including St. Louis Cathedral and St. Charles Cathedral . Domes are established as crowning features of some of the largest Renaissance buildings .
 Sandro Botticelli’s famous painting is unusual in having an overtly pagan theme drawn from classical mythology . The Birth of Venus was painted around 1483 in the Sistine Chapel of St. Peter's Basilica .
 This was produced for Lorenzo de Medici's private villa, not for public display . This was possible because it was produced in the villa's private home, not public display.
 Commissioned by Pope Julius Il in 1508, the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican is one of the masterworks of Florentine genius Michelangelo Buonarroti . The ceiling was commissioned by the Pope in 1515 .
 Palazzo consists of a pentagon around a circular colonnaded courtyard the piano nobile (main living area) contains 12 state rooms decorated with frescoes illustrating the exploits of Hercules, Alexander the Great and Hercules . The Farnese family fortresslike main entrance base reached 2A
 In painting and sculpture, the influence of ancient Greece and Rome was evident, for example, in the interest in an ideal version of the naked human body . Michelangelo Buonarroti's paintings and sculptures were seen especially in the art of Michelangelo .
 Artists also added classical pagan mythology to their subject matter . Artists often used pagan mythology for the private enjoyment of wealthy people .
 As well as a desire to match the art of antiquity, there was a novel drive to represent the visual world with illusionistic precision .
 Flemish artists such as Jan van Eyck led the way with oil paintings that represented human features and the surfaces of objects with astounding accuracy of detail . The paintings were created in the 17th century in Belgium .
 Villa Farnese in Caprarola is considered a masterpiece of late Renaissance architecture . Commissioned by the wealthy Farnese family, it is considered one of the world's most beautiful buildings .
 Architect Giacomo Barozzi de Vignola worked on the building from 1559-73 . Architect worked on building from 1659 to 73 . The building is located in central Italy .
 Gerhard Gerhards, known as Erasmus, was ordained as a priest but lived as an independent scholar . He was known as a humanist and lived as a pen-name for the Dutch scholar .
 In works such as /n Praise of Folly, he criticized the corruption of the Church . He advocated a life governed by firm moral and religious principles .
 Painting was part of the mainstream of intellectual development in the Renaissance . Associated with geometry and optics, painting was associated with geometry, optics .
 The striving for an exact depiction of the world in art was related to a wider trend toward the close observation of nature, rather than reliance on received wisdom, the author says .
 This produced clear advances on the knowledge inherited from the ancients, says the author . This produced advances on knowledge from the ancient world, he says .
 The geographical notions of the ancient Greek Ptolemy were corrected thanks to the efforts of European explorers and mapmakers . European explorers were able to correct the errors of the Ptolemans .
 Renaissance was a culture of practical ingenuity and skilled craftsmanship . Craftsmanship underpinned the achievements of the celebrated geniuses of the Renaissance .
 Fine craft objects, such as the elaborate suits of armor made by the metalworkers of Nuremberg and Augsburg, were collected as avidly as any painting or sculpture . Fine art was collected as well as any paintings or sculptures, including those of the Venetian or Florent
 The first clocks marked with minutes appeared in the 1570s . But truly accurate timekeeping was not possible until pendulum clocks were introduced in the 17th century .
 Mechanical clocks were first started to appear in the towers of Italian cities in the 14th century . Mechanical clocks became more widespread in the 15th century, with clocks dating back to 14th .
 Navigational instruments such as magnetic compasses were essential tools of expanding seaborne trade . Magnetic compasses are now an essential tool of navigation in the world .
 By far the most influential product of European enterprise was the printing press . The printing press is the most important product of the European revolution .
 Jean de Dinteville is depicted with his friend Georges de Selve . The French envoy is shown with a friend, French envoy, in the painting .
 In the foreground is a distorted representation of a skull, an obvious symbol of mortality . The image was taken in the foreground of an image of the skull, a symbol of death .
 Skull appears correctly if viewed from a precise low point to the side of the painting . New printed books could be produced and distributed .
 English, Italian, and French, rather than scholarly Latin, received an enormous boost . Literature in the vernacular—everyday languages such as English and Italian, was given a boost by the book .
 Humanist scholars were able to circulate accurate, standardized versions of major texts . They circulated accurate versions of some of the world's oldest texts .
 The celestial globe, showing the constellations, was the latest model, made by German astronomer Johannes Schóner .
 The scientific instruments are devices for navigation and time measurement . They include navigation instruments for navigation, time measurement and navigation .
 They are resting on a valuable Turkish rug, imported from the Ottoman Empire . The rug is a valuable piece of art that has been used in the past .
 Cultural developments of the Renaissance took place within a context of acute political and religious conflicts . The cultural developments took place during the Renaissance period of 16th century .
 Italian city-states that were such dynamos of creativity were also the site of vicious power struggles . City-states were the sites of vicious political power struggles in Italy .
 In Florence the dominant Medici family was twice driven into exile by popular uprisings, in 1494 and 1527, and twice restored to power . In Florence they were twice driven out of power by popular revolts, and were restored into power .
 France and Habsburg emperors fought one another in Italy in a series of wars from the 1490s to the 1550s . Civil conflicts were complicated by the intervention of the armies of the kings of France and the emperors, who fought in Italy from 1490 to 15
 Niccolo Machiavelli wrote his cynical political handbook The Prince in 1513 (published in 1532) The Prince advised rulers to use any methods, however immoral, to stay in power .
 Whether or not this was good advice, it certainly described the normal practice of Renaissance political leaders .
 Machiavelli’s model for The Prince was the ruthless Cesare Borgia, the illegitimate son of Pope Alexander VI . Cesare was suspected of many murders, including that of his elder brother .
 Niccolo Machiavelli based his pragmatic political philosophy upon his experiences as a diplomat in the service of Florence . Author of The Prince based his political philosophy on his experiences .
 The first effective printing press for printing books using movable metal type and oil-based ink emerged in 15th century Europe .
 Gutenberg's invention is attributed to Johannes Gutenberg, a German artisan and entrepreneur . Gutenberg is credited with inventing the invention of the printing machine .
 The Bible that he published in 1455 was the first book printed in this way . The Bible was printed in the way of printing .
 Press presses established in Paris in 1470 and London in 1476 . The new technique spread across Europe .
 The most prestigious early printer, Aldus Manutius, set up the Aldine Press in Venice in 1494 . The most important early printer set up his own press in the city of Venice .
 Printed books revolutionized the diffusion of knowledge . Print books were cheaper than hand-written works . Printed books were used to disseminate knowledge .
 Renaissance humanism was an attack on the ignorance and corruption of the clergy, including successive popes, and calls for a return to a purer form of faith . Much of the thrust of Erasmus, especially in the works, was to attack the clergy and call for a pure
 Renaissance artists, as purveyors of luxury goods sometimes with pagan connotations, found their works under attack from religious reformers . On the other hand, Renaissance artists found their artworks under attack .
 Between 1494 and 1498, a radical monk, Girolamo Savonarola, led an orgy of book-burning and destruction of works of art in his campaign against wealth and corruption .
 One of the main provocations for the Reformation that challenged papal authority from 1517 was outrage at the money being spent on commissioning men such as Raphael and Michelangelo .
 The Counter-Reformation was broadly hostile to the spirit of free inquiry and invention that animated the Renaissance . The atmosphere heavy platen or printing plate was the atmosphere of the Reformation .
 Protestants and Catholics cracked down on the ""free-thinking"" that undermined their religious orthodoxies . In the second half of the 16th century, both Catholics and Protestants cracked down .
 There was to be no turning back from the development of scientific and philosophical inquiry, the author says . But in the longer term, there was to turn back from scientific inquiry, he says .
 The introduction of spring-powered timepieces at the start of the 16th century allowed smaller portable clocks such as this to be made for domestic use . The Mercator map was created by Gerardus Mercator in 1587 .
 Mercator's projection, his famous method for representing the globe on a flat surface, was still in widespread use four centuries later . Mercator’s projection was still used four centuries after the discovery of the globe .
 Renaissance thinkers came in conflict with the Church, but their achievements lived on . Renaissance thinkers were at the center of conflict between the Church .
 In 1542 the Catholic Church established the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith in Rome as a body to suppress ideas contrary to the Church's teaching . The Congregation was established in 1542 . The Catholic Church was founded by the Pope in 1541 .
 Giordano Bruno was a wide-ranging thinker in the Renaissance tradition . Bruno was burned at the stake in Rome after the Congregation found him guilty of heresy in 1600 . Bruno's writings include works from the Renaissance, Renaissance and Renaissance .
 Through the 16th century, European painting, sculpture, and architecture developed in a less naturalistic direction . European art valuing expression above harmony and proportion .
 This more artificial style has been labeled ""Mannerism"" by art historians . Art historians have labeled this style of art art "mannerism"
 Mannerism evolved into the exuberant Baroque style dominant in the 17th century . The style evolved into a modern art form .
 In some countries the Renaissance Is generally agreed to have flowered at a later date . The Renaissance is said to have flowed into existence in some countries .
 In both England and Spain, the height of the Renaissance did not occur until the second half of the 16th century and early 17th century . Writers, musicians and artists such as William Shakespeare, El Greco, Miguel Cervantes, Edmund Spenser and William Shakespeare all flourished .
 Leonardo da Vinci is one of the great geniuses of the good use of opportunities for profit and 0 Italian Renaissance (see advancement)
 At about age the countryside outside Florence, he 14, he was apprenticed to Andrea del received little formal education, Verrocchio, a leading sculptor and only learned Latin . He branched out into painting in adulthood, in adulthood .
 Leonardo’s outstanding studied the animals and landscapes talent, especially in the around him . Leonardo was an outstanding artist who studied animals, landscapes and landscapes . Leonardo is known for his work on the works of art and science .
 Leonardo painted in his mid-20s he was able to set . up a studio of his own . the human and . natural world .
 Leonardo was a poor boy making century, even with his own studio, an artist was only a craftsman touting for commissions . Leonardo’s paintings are now his most famous career .
 The next step up was to be taken on by a prince as a member of his household . The prince's household was then taken on as a household member by the prince .
 Document from Cesare Borgia, lord of the Romagna, dates to 1502, commissioned ‘architect and engineer” Leonardo to survey palaces and fortresses . Leonardo proposed his services to Ludovico Sforza, the ruler of the Ducal Ducal .
 Leonardo drew this haunting self-portrait when he was in his mid-60s, three or four years before his death . Leonardo drew the portrait in the mid-70s and mid-80s .
 The long hair and beard give him the air of Florence Cathedral a traditional sage or seer . The long beard and long hair are reminiscent of a traditional seer in Florence Cathedral .
 Leonardo helped place the orb and cross on top of the cathedral dome in Florence . During his apprenticeship in Florence, Leonardo helped put the orb on the dome . Leonardo helped build the cathedral's famous cathedral dome .
 Leonardo's flying machines were simply flights of imagination . None of Leonardo's planes were practical; they were just flights of imaginations .
 Leonardo listed at length the ""infinite W variety of machines for attack and Y | defense"" that he could create, including armored cars, portable bridges, and cannons, before skills at painting .
 Leonardo's all-around skills, including his ingenuity at P designing machines, were exactly what Renaissance NW princes were looking for, and | he rarely lacked employment Hk i YA for the rest of his life . Leonardo was a man of talent, and his all-round skills were
 Leonardo’s boundless imagination and experimentation led to many failures and disappointments, he says . Leonardo's boundless creativity led to a series of disappointments and failures, he adds .
 Ludovico Sforza designed one of the largest equestrian statues ever conceived . But it is unlikely that it could have been cast and only a clay model was built . Only one clay model of the statue was built and it was never cast .
 His Last Supper is considered one of the ultimate masterpieces of Western art . It was painted using an innovative technique that meant it started decaying almost as soon as it was finished .
 Leonardo painted The Last Supper in the refectory of the church of Saint Maria delle Grazie in Milan, using a mix of tempera and oll, rather than a traditional fresco technique . In the service of the ruler of Florence from 1503, he produced
 This model is a full-size realization of his design for an ornithopter . Ornithopter is a machine powered by flapping artificial wings .
 Leonardo's sketch of a cross section of a human skull showed impressive anatomical details, which are due to the autopsies he preformed . He also undertook to paint the Anghiari fresco for the Palazzo Vecchio, which was never completed .
 The machines he dreamed of were ingenious and forward-thinking but mostly impractical . The machines were ingenious but impractical, he says .
 Leonardo’s most remarkable work consisted of writings and sketches in his private notebooks . Material remained unpublished until long after his death . Much of Leonardo's work was found in his notebooks .
 Leonardo’s fertile, inquiring, adventurous mind and eye found full expression in notebooks . Leonardo's notebooks were in these notebooks that he used to be a genius .
 The pages are packed with an astonishing number of ideas, observations, projects, and experiments . The pages of this book include many of the world's most interesting ideas .
 They include studies of the movement of water and speculations on the nature of the cosmos, as well as reflections on fossils and on the principles of flight .
 They include the systematic exploration of human anatomy . They also include the record of one of his greatest achievements .
 Leonardo obtained about 30 corpses for dissection, from which he produced the most refined, accurate, and annotated sketches . Leonardo obtained the most detailed sketches of his sketches .
 Leonardo’s idiosyncratic personality and free-ranging mind could easily have brought him into conflict with the authorities . Leonardo was a modern thinker and a free thinker . He was a member of the Leonardo family and friends .
 His homosexuality was both a sin and a crime in the society he inhabited, even if it was not generally disapproved of in sophisticated circles . Homosexuality is both a crime and a sin in society, even though it is not generally a sin .
 Dissecting corpses was of dubious legality and almost got him in trouble in Rome in about 1515 . Dissected corpses were illegal in Rome, but he almost got into trouble in 1515.
 He seems to have had no fixed religious beliefs and certainly did not allow Christian doctrine to set limits to his thinking .
 He found a sympathetic patron in the French King Francis I, who appreciated the prestige of having such a renowned figure in his employ . Unable to undertake major works, he was unable to work major works .
 It is reported that Francis said he could never believe there was another man born in this world who knew as much as Leonardo . It was reported that he said he never believed there was a man born who knew more .
 Few of Leonardo’s paintings have survived, but their scarcity has enhanced his legendary status . Leonardo's paintings are rarer, but his reputation has since been enhanced .
 Leonardo da Vinci was born near Vinci, a small town outside Florence . He was the illegitimate son of a peasant woman and a local lawyer . Leonardo was born in 1452 .
 April 1476 Accused of homosexual activity, offense that could carry the death penalty . 1476 accused of homosexuality .
 Commissioned to paint an altarpiece for the church of San Francesco in Milan, now known as the Virgin of the Rocks . April 25, 1483 .
 Works on a failed project for a canal to give Florence direct access to the sea . The project was meant to give the city a direct route to the ocean .
 1504 starts work on a fresco, the Battle of Anghiari, for the Council Hall in the Palazzo Vecchio, Florence . 1504 .
 Lollards and Hussites proposed reforms of the Catholic Church to end corruption and purify church doctrine . Lollards from England in the 14th century and the Hussites from Bohemia in the early 15th century both proposed reforms . The Hussites and Lollards proposed reforms to purify
 Pope Clement V moved the papacy to Avignon in France in 1309 to avoid internal feuding in Rome . The papacy was moved to France in 129 . It was the first papal move since the Great Schism .
 An attempt to return the papacy to Rome in 1579 led to the election of two rival popes, causing a schism . Attempt to return Rome to Rome led to an attempt to end a papacy schism in Italy .
 A Church meeting in Germany in 1417 elected a third pope to replace the two rivals . A third pope was elected after a meeting of two rivals in Germany .
 The building of a vast new basilica in Rome was funded by indulgences, or pardons for sins, in the 15th century . The building was funded in part by indulges and pardons . The extravagance typified the extravagance of the Catholic Church .
 Pope Leo X financed construction partly through the sale of indulgences and used the leading artists of the Renaissance to design and decorate it . A simple but effective protest against corruption in the Catholic Church in 1517 soon turned into a major force for religious change .
 Luther's challenge against the Catholic Church in Wittenberg, Saxony, came after the arrival of Johann Tetzel, who was selling indulgences to raise money for Pope Leo X . Indulgences had long been criticized by Catholic theologians but their financial success ensured the practice
 Luther’s response, on October 23, 1517, was to post a document bearing 95 theses on the door of the town church . Luther posted the document on the church door in 1517 . Luther's response to the document was to put it on the top of the
 Luther’s theses were not radical, but they attracted a wide audience, and due to recent advances in printing methods they were widely distributed and read . Luther's theses attracted a wider audience, but due to modern printing methods, they could be read widely .
 Luther’s initial criticism of the church focused on the sale of indulgences . Luther went on to attack the core Catholic teachings of transubstantiation and clerical celibacy .
 He called for reform of religious orders such as monasteries and a return to the simplicity of the earlier church . He also called for a reform of the reform of monasties .
 Luther’s challenge to the established church won him many followers, but he initially wished only to reform the existing church rather than set up an entirely new system . Luther's challenge won many followers but he was initially only interested in reforming the existing system .
 His disagreements with the Catholic Church hierarchy over its conduct led to a revolt against the institution in 1517 that soon spread across Europe . His disagreements led to the revolt that spread across the continent .
 Luther was a reluctant revolutionary, preferring at first to reform the Church from within . Luther was excluded from the Church in 1521 . He made good use of the new printing technology to distribute pamphlets .
 His belief in order, and his conservative political views, put him at odds with many who wished to develop more radical religious doctrines . His beliefs in order and political views were at odds .
 The world's first printed Bible was produced, in Latin, by the German printer Johannes Gutenberg in 1455 . The Gutenberg Bible was printed in Latin and printed in the Bible's first edition .
 Bibles in the vernacular, or common language, first appeared during the Reformation . Bibles first appeared in the common language during the 16th century .
 Luther refused to retract his views and, having already been excommunicated (expelled from the church) by the pope, was now outlawed by the emperor . Luther was now banned from the Catholic Church in Germany .
 Luther's edition would allow people to read the Bible in their native language for the first time . Luther also set to work translating the Bible into German; previous editions of the Bible had been translated in Latin .
 Germany at this point was made up of many independent states nominally controlled by Emperor Charles V . German princes wanted to exert their power against the dominance of Charles V of the church . Luther’s teachings were a way of breaking both imperial and church control .
 In 1524 the Peasants’ War broke out in southwest Germany as a result of economic hardship in the region . The war was the result of an economic crisis in the area .
 A league of German princes, supported by Luther, crushed the revolt in 1526 with great loss of life . The revolt took place in 1523, but Luther's supporters were able to defeat it .
 Luther's revolt horrified Luther as much as it did the secular leaders it was aimed at . Luther was a Protestant leader in the early 15th century . Luther's death of Luther was the result of the revolt against the Catholic Church .
 Protestant Reformation began in Germany in 1517 and had a profound and disruptive effect across Europe well into the next century . One by one, the north German states of Saxony, Hesse, Saxony and Hesse became Protestant states of Germany . The Reformation was the work of
 Pope Leo X became a cardinal while still a child . The Renaissance papacy was one of the most successful periods of the papacy .
 Luther protested against this practice at St. Peter's Basilica in 1517 . Luther's protest against the practice prompted Luther to write a book .
 Each state took control of the church, strengthening the hold of the ruler over his people . The church was taken over by the Roman Catholic Church in Rome .
 The appeal of Lutheranism was not restricted to Germany . It was a worldwide appeal for the church .
 Gustavus Vasa seized church lands in 1527 to provide funds for his new state of Sweden . Sweden had only gained independence from Denmark-Norway in 1523 . The lands were seized to provide money for the new state .
 Lutheranism was adopted in Denmark-Norway in 1536 . A similar process saw the adoption of Lutheranism in Denmark and Norway .
 In England, a break with the church in Rome came about after the pope refused Henry VIII a divorce from his wife, Catherine of Aragon . Henry VIII's break with Rome came after he was refused a divorce by the pope .
 The political response to the Lutheran reformation was led by Emperor Charles V . However, his vast territorial domains in Europe brought him in conflict with France . Charles V's vast territories brought him into conflict with the French .
 War between Charles and the growing might of the Muslim Ottoman empire in the Mediterranean and Balkans meant he could not devote all of his resources to crushing the Lutherans in Germany .
 Charles defeated the Lutherans in battle at Mühlberg in 1547, but he could not crush them politically . Charles defeated them in battle but could not defeat them politically. He died in 1549 .
 A religious and political compromise was reached by the Peace of Augsburg in 1555 . Each prince within the empire was allowed to choose between Catholicism and Lutheranism and impose that belief .
 He disagreed with Luther about the nature of the Eucharist (the bread and wine received during communion) and began to lead the Swiss Church in a more radical, anti-hierarchical direction . However, he disagreed about Luther's views .
 His death in 1531 slowed the momentum of the reformation in Switzerland . He died while defending Zurich against the Catholic cantons of Switzerland .
 Calvin was starting to create a new religious center in the city of Geneva . Calvin emerged as the key figure associated with protestant reform in Switzerland . Calvin became a key figure in the Swiss protestant movement .
 Calvin converted to the new reformed faith in 1533 and settled in Geneva in 1556 . Calvin had converted to a reformed faith and settled there in Geneva .
 There he developed a more austere form of Protestantism, based on his own reading of scriptures and his rigorous academic training, stressing predestination .
 Calvin did not develop any practical theory of resistance to “ungodly authority” such as the Catholic Church or rulers . Many of his successors were prepared to justify violent resistance through his teachings .
 Like Luther, John Calvin stressed an individual’s direct relationship with God without a papal or priestly intermediary . Calvin stressed the primacy of the Bible, now widely distributed in modern languages . Calvin was born in France, but experienced a “sudden conversion’ to
 He rejected papal authority in favor of justification by faith alone . He wrote the Institutes of the Christian Religion .
 He settled in Geneva in 1536, where he sought to create a society in which the demands of 'godly behavior' were strictly enforced by a combination of . church and civil . authorities .
 The Church Council met in 1545-47, 1551-52, and finally in 1562-63, to reform the doctrines and practices of the church to meet the threat posed by the Protestant Reformation . Here, in the cathedral, the Church Council meets to discuss the threat
 It strengthened the spiritual institution of the papacy, reformed old and formed new religious orders, most notably the Jesuits, who set up schools and missions to preach Catholic virtues .
 The Baroque style is best personified by the glorious new churches in Austria and Italy . The spectacular {8 ceiling of St. Louis Cathedral is one of the most striking examples of the Gothic style .
 The St. Ignatius Church in Rome dates back to around 1707 . It is the first time the Jesuits have been seen in Rome since the 16th century .
 Catholic cardinals and bishops and leading Catholic theologians attended the council; no Protestants attended . teaching. teaching .
 Calvin preached that church and state should act together to create a ‘godly society’ in which religious beliefs and strict codes of conduct should shape every aspect of daily life . Unlike Luther, however, who believed in the political subordination of the church to the state, Calvin preached
 Calvinism took hold in Scotland, the Netherlands, and in large parts of France, where followers were known as Huguenots . Followers of Calvinism also spread across the German states, Bohemia, and Transylvania .
 Calvinism also inspired the Puritan movement in England and, later, North America, whose members wished to purify the Anglican church of its remaining Catholic elements .
 The initial Catholic response to the Reformation was to excommunicate (exclude from the sacraments of the church) Those who rebelled against it were excommunicated . The Catholic response was excommunicating (excluding) those who were rebelled .
 As it became clear that it could not crush the Reformation, the Catholic St. Louis Cathedral became a state of the Catholic Church .
 The French wars of religion reached a bloody climax on St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre . The massacre took place in the French town of St. Bartolomew in 1877 .
 The French Church began to reform itself in 1572, drawing on a groundswell of internal calls for church reform . The reform predated the emergence of Luther, but it predated Luther .
 The Catholic Counter-Reformation succeeded in its aims, strengthening Catholicism both theologically and politically . A more authoritarian orthodoxy was instituted, although a more authoritarian version was instituted .
 The strong Calvinist presence in France prompted a lengthy religious war that was only ended in the Edict of Nantes in 1598 . The war was ended only with the granting of religious toleration in the edict of 1598 in France .
 By the end of the century, perhaps 40 percent of Europe’s population followed one or other of the reformed beliefs .
 Catholic mobs then went on a rampage, killing thousands more Huguenots . Catholic mobs killed thousands of Huguensots .
 In Germany and Scandinavia it became a political struggle for and Calvinist churches in 2 pacz Troyes . France and the equally Switzerland, the Netherlands, Spain and Austria were Catholic nations .
 Her birth was a disappointment to her father, Henry VIII, who was desperate for a male heir . She was born in 15th century . Henry VIII was desperate to find a son to succeed him in the throne .
 He declared himself head of the English Church so he could divorce and marry again, in an effort to produce a son with his new wife . He had declared himself English head of English Church to divorce and marriage again .
 Elizabeth was two-and-a-half when her mother, Henry's second wife Anne Boleyn, was executed on his orders, accused of adultery . She was two and a half when she was killed by her mother .
 Declared illegitimate, Elizabeth was relegated to court life, finding safety in discretion . Elizabeth was forced to live in a stateless state of secrecy .
 Mary's accession to Maesbrorne in-1553 placed Elizabeth in a perilous situation . Mary's accession to Maes brorne placed her in a difficult situation .
 The Catholic Mary The Tudor Rose Henry VIII was a true Renaissance man . Elizabeth l's father was a real Renaissance man. He was also a great writer and artist .
 He was highly educated, fluent in several languages, and adept at sports such as tennis . He was also a fluent speaker of several languages .
 Henry VIII established the Church of England in 16th century . Henry founded the Church in 17th Century . Henry VIII was the first monarch to establish the church .
 Elizabeth had every reason to distrust a sister who could be put forward as a Protestant candidate for the throne . The decisive defeat of the armada was Elizabeth's finest hour .
 Elizabeth survived by steering clear of plots against Mary and maintaining a facade of loyalty . Elizabeth avoided plots against her family and maintained a facade .
 The worst she suffered was a brief imprisonment in the Tower of London, in 1554 . She was imprisoned for a time in the 15th century, but escaped .
 The early deaths of her siblings brought Elizabeth to the throne at the age of 25 . The Golden Age was the early years of Elizabeth's reign as Queen .
 From the start of her reign, she chose her advisers well, especially her chief secretary of state, William Cecil . William Cecil was William Cecil, the Queen's chief secretary .
 The goal she set them was the survival of her person and her state . The goal dictating caution, suspicion, and ruthlessness when required, she said .
 Elizabeth refused to endorse Protestant extremism . She insisted on royal control over the Church but avoided complex issues of doctrine .
 Her cousin, Mary Queen of Scots, was executed as a dangerous Catholic claimant to the throne . Plots and rebellions by English and Irish Catholics plagued her reign, and she had her cousin imprisoned and executed .
 Elizabeth tried to avoid involvement in religious wars racking Europe . She was reluctantly drawn into backing the Protestant Dutch against Catholic Spain . Elizabeth was forced to back the Dutch against Spain .
 The Virgin Queen Elizabeth’s role in the cultural flowering that occurred in England during her reign is hard to assess . Her role in England's cultural flowering in her reign and the feats of English mariners is hard-to assess .
 Her taste in theater was more for clowning than for refined wit . She supported the arts financially, although her taste was more of humor .
 Adventurers such as Sir Francis Drake enjoyed her fitful support, backed when their schemes served her purposes . Her schemes included the schemes of Drake and Drake .
 For the last two decades of her reign, England was at war with Drake . Elizabeth knighted Drake knighted Elizabeth | knighted Francis Drake on board his ship .
 The knighthood was a calculated political gesture, effectively giving royal backing to his plunder of the lands of the Spanish empire . It was the first time the Spanish king was knighted .
 He excelled at both comedy and tragedy, and his works explored the universal human experience . His works included works of tragedy and comedy .
 Twelfth Night was written specifically to be performed at court for Elizabeth I Spain . The play was intended to be played at court at the time of Elizabeth II .
 Elizabeth's advisers tried to seek national security through an advantageous marriage between the queen and a foreign prince . The queen and the prince were married to a prince from a prince in the Middle Ages .
 Unmarried she ruled; once married, she inevitably would have had to cede part or all of her power to her consort, as were the conventions of the day . Unmarried, she ruled . Once married she would have ceded part of or all her power .
 In Elizabeth’s later years, the deaths of favorites and counselors left her an isolated figure . Elizabeth was a close friend of the late author .
 May 19, 1536 Anne Boleyn is executed; Elizabeth is declared illegitimate and loses her right of succession to the throne . Elizabeth was declared illegitimate by Elizabeth's father . Anne was executed in 1536; Elizabeth lost her right to throne .
 Act of 1543 restores Elizabeth to line of succession after her brother Edward VI and sister Mary . Act of parliament restores her to the throne . Act also restores Elizabeth's sister Mary to the royal succession .
 January 28, 1547 Henry VIII dies; Elizabeth becomes a ward of his widow, Catherine Parr . Elizabeth becomes Elizabeth's first child to be born in England . Elizabeth was born in 1547 .
 Catherine Parr's fourth husband, Thomas Seymour, is executed for treason . Thomas Seymour is executed on March 20, 1549 . Elizabeth is Elizabeth's fourth wife and Elizabeth's sister .
 Elizabeth is imprisoned in the Tower of London for alleged complicity in a rebellion against Mary led by Sir Thomas Wyatt . Elizabeth is released on May 19, 1554 .
 July 25, 1554 Mary marries Philip Il of Spain in Winchester Cathedral . Roman Catholicism restored as the primary religion in England .
 Elizabeth accedes to the throne on the death of Mary on November 17, 1558 . She was crowned in Westminster Abbey on January 15, 1559 .
 Act of Supremacy asserts the Queen as head of the Church of England . Act of 1559 restores the Anglican Church in place of Mary's Catholicism . Act also asserts Queen's right to be head of England, restoring Anglican church .
 The Catholic Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland lead the ë Northern Rebellion against Elizabeth Elizabeth . The Earls led the Northern Rebellion .
 April 4, 1581 Elizabeth knights Francis Drake after he completes a voyage around the world . Elizabeth knights Drake after completing his voyage . Francis Drake completed his voyage in 1581 .
 The Spanish Armada, an attempt by Philip Il of Spain to invade England, fails in 1588 . The Armada was a failed invasion of England by Philip II of Spain .
 William Cecil (later known as Baron Burghley) died August 4, 1598 . Cecil was Elizabeth's chief adviser since the start of her reign . Cecil died at the age of 60 .
 30 Years War became a battle for European supremacy in Germany . Initially a civil war between rival religious factions in Germany, it became a war for Europe supremacy .
 By the end of the 16th century the empire included much of Germany, part of the Netherlands, Bohemia, and many states in Italy . The empire included many states including much of Italy, Germany and Bohemia .
 Many German states adopted Protestantism, causing tension within the Holy Roman Empire . Protestantism caused tension in Germany during the reign of the Roman Empire.
 The 30 Years War was a series of conflicts spurred by religious bigotry and imperial paranoia that divided Europe from 1618-48 . The 30 years War was the first European conflict since the fall of the Thirty Years .
 For the people living in central Europe, this period was one of continuous warring . The people of central Europe were living in constant warring periods .
 Martin Luther, John Calvin and the Reformation challenged the authority of the pope . The words of Martin Luther and John Calvin challenged the previously unquestioned authority of Pope Francis .
 The Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V, along with the Imperial Diet headed by the empire's great princes, agreed that each ruler in the empire should be able to choose between Catholicism or Lutheranism for their realm's religion .
 In 1607 a riot between the two sides broke out in the south German city of Donauworth . The two sides fought in 1607 .
 The emperor authorized Catholic Duke of Bavaria, Maximilian I, to restore order . The emperor was authorized to order the action .
 Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus was killed at the battle of Lützen, Saxony, in 1632 . The duke imposed a rigorous Catholic settlement when the king was killed .
 Battle of White Mountain, 1620, was the first major military encounter of the 30 Years War . This was first major battle of the war's first major encounter in 1620 .
 The Catholic League and imperial forces had a numerical advantage over the Protestant troops, routing them in just two hours . The Protestant troops were defeated by the Catholic League, imperial forces .
 Protestants assembled in Prague’s Hradschin Castle, where they threw two Catholic regents out of a window in protest for violating guarantees of religious freedom . Protestants gathered in 1641 to throw the two regents from a window .
 German protestants formed a defensive Protestant Union led by Calvinist Frederick V, ruler of the Rhineland Palatinate . Frederick V led the Calvinist Calvinist .
 The Imperial Diet tried to resolve the ill will, but the more radical Protestants walked out and the Diet did not meet again until 1640 . This was swiftly followed by the formation of the Catholic League led by Maximilian I .
 Ferdinand of Styria named Crown Prince and Emperor Matthias's successor as King of Bohemia . A Habsburg duke, he was a devoutly Catholic . He was the son of the Habsburger duke and the Crown Prince .
 Regents representing Ferdinand used their muskets as clubs when too close to fire, relying on pikemen to defend them . Regents from Ferdinand and Ferdinand used musket as clubs as clubs .
 Later, the plug bayonet, fitted into the gun's muzzle, was a better close-quarters weapon . It was fitted in the muzzle of the gun and was fitted with a bayonet attached to the muzzle .
 Ferdinand Il. general Torstensson ravages Cologne, France, and Habsburg lands in Austria . Swedish signed by Bavaria, Ferdinand Il.-Ilfius . general . general Torrensson . Ferdinand Ilfius Torrssson .
 Matthias’s death in 1619, of Ferdinand as King of Bohemia and Holy Roman Emperor, became an imperial one . The Habsburg's religious issues became a religious issue after Matthias died .
 The Bohemian rebels appointed Calvinist Frederick V as king of Bohemia . Frederick V took the throne and called for support from the Protestant Union in his revolt .
 Spain lent Ferdinand financial aid, as well as troops to crush the German Protestant rebellion . The Catholic League army led by Count Tilly marched into Bohemia in order to defeat the German Protestants .
 After the battle of White Mountain on November 8, 1620, Bohemia lost its independence, and Protestantism in the region was exterminated .
 Cardinal Richelieu of Catholic France supported the rights of the German princes against the Catholic Habsburgs . Catholic France was led by state politics and trading interests rather than any shared cause .
 Self-interest of the sovereign state was also behind the intervention of the Dutch Republic and Sweden in the war, rather than any anti-Catholic solidarity with the German protestants . Self-interested of the . sovereign state . was also . behind the . intervention .
 The Dutch had trading rights to protect across Europe and the rest of the world . The Dutch were able to protect their trading rights across Europe .
 Sweden was a small country of peasant farmers and a preeminent gun foundries industry . Sweden was the country of peasants and had a large gun industry .
 Gustavus Adolphus II (see 272) became a power on the Baltic coast of Sweden in the early 1900s . Gustavus Gustavus was one of the most successful monarchs in Scandinavia . Sweden became a major power in the Baltic Sea .
 The Estates army formed two echelons of footsoldiers, about 5,000 cavalry, and reserves . It was formed after crushing Count Tilly at the Battle of Breitenfeld in 1631 .
 The right wing flanked an arboretum, the left backed against a hillock . The left wing backed against the left back was backed up against the right side of a hill .
 Any accurate artillery shell or side-on cavalry charge on such a formation spelled disaster, as the target was larger . However, any accurate artillery shells or a cavalry charge would spell disaster for the enemy .
 After the end of the 30 Years War, there had been a shift in power among the states involved . The framework for a modern Europe of sovereign states was established .
 The Peace of Westphalia paved the way for the concept of the sovereign state . The sovereign state was the first state to become independent .
 Fixed geographical boundaries for the many countries involved were established and states of the Holy Roman Empire were granted full sovereignty . Fixed geographical borders for many countries were established .
 It was recognized that citizens were bound to the laws of their own government rather than those of neighboring powers, whether religious or secular . Citizens were also bound to their own laws, not those of others .
 The end of the war left Germany decentralized and divided into many territories . The rise of France was a major factor in the rise of the French revolution .
 A politically weakened Spain recognized the Dutch Republic —and later Portugal —as independent . The Dutch Republic and later Portugal were later recognized as independent .
 France continued to war with Spain until 1659, when it emerged as the dominant Western power . France and Spain fought for centuries until the end of the war .
 Calvinism, Lutheranism, and Catholicism were all recognized as legitimate faiths . Calvinism and Lutheranism were all considered legitimate faiths.
 There were no further great religious wars in mainland Europe . While religious conflicts still occurred, there was no further religious wars .
 The hiring of mercenaries had been commonplace in realms that lacked standing armies . Hired mercenaries had become commonplace in those areas .
 The size of the armies had grown massively, making them very costly to maintain . However, the size of these armies has grown massively . It is now very difficult to maintain, making it difficult to keep .
 The soldiers attempted to live off the land, often taking from civilians . They also caused great destruction as the soldiers tried to live from the land .
 The limitations gave rise to the idea of the national ‘professional’ army . The army is now a national force of sorts, with a wide range of capabilities .
 It was the most costly war in terms of human life to be fought on European soil until the two world wars of the 20th century . It was also the most expensive war in the history of European warfare .
 Peace of Prague was forged in 1635 between the Holy Roman Empire and most Protestant states . The desire for peace, and resentment against marauding armies looting their land was overwhelming in Germany .
 Richelieu entered into the war against the Habsburgs that year, with Swedish support . Reconciliation between Catholics and Protestants in Germany was imminent . The war was fought in 1883 .
 The theater of war now spread to most of Europe, with fighting between the Dutch Republic and France against Spain . France and the Netherlands are fighting in the Netherlands .
 The conflict between monarchy and Parliament had its origins in Charles l's belief in the Divine Right of Kings . The conflict began in 1654, when Oliver Cromwell addressed the Army Council .
 By the time it was over, around 10 percent of Britain’s population was dead . By the end of the war, 10 per cent of the population had been killed .
 This war was not just the product of a quarrel between Parliament and the king . It was the result of a dispute between the king and Parliament . This war is not just a quarrel, it was a war of war with Parliament and king .
 For many Parliamentarians, Catholicism and tyranny were inseparable . Religion also played a key role, as for many .
 Instead of granting him cash, they countered with their own catalog of recriminations, fueled by 11 years of grievances . Instead of cash, instead of giving him money, they offered him an apology .
 The reign of Charles was characterized by religious conflict . He was forced to dismantle the institutions of absolute rule . Charles' reign was dominated by religious conflicts .
 Prime Minister's charm and stubborn tendencies put him on collision course with Parliament . Combining charm with stubbornness, his absolutist tendencies, put him in collision course .
 Since the 13th century, the English monarch had needed Parliament's approval to raise taxes . Its increasing interference infuriated the Stuart kings .
 When the pope refused Henry VIII a divorce from his first wife, Henry rejected the pope's authority . Henry declared himself head of the Church of England in 1534 . Henry VIII declared himself king of England after his divorce from first wife .
 Since she was childless, she was succeeded in 1603 by her Stuart cousin, James VI of Scotland . James VI lost his right to dissolve Parliament and lost the right to do so .
 Rumors of his complicity in the Irish rebellion against Protestant English rule increased the tension . Rumor of his involvement in the rebellion increased the tensions .
 When news reached Charles that Parliament intended to impeach (charge with improper conduct) his Catholic queen, Henrietta Maria, he took drastic action . Charles took action after news of the impeachment reached him that he was being investigated .
 In January 1642, he entered the House of Commons with an armed force, intending to arrest five leading radical MPs for high treason . He entered the Commons with armed force to arrest them for treason .
 Charles’s actions were considered an outrage by the City of London, which considered it an outrage . Forewarned, they took refuge in the city of London .
 Fearing for his safety, Charles went north to raise an army, while his queen went abroad to raise funds to pay for it . Charles went to raise the army, raising funds for it, fearing for his own safety .
 While the king commanded the loyalty of Wales, the west, and the north, Parliament controlled London, the east, and south . The years of conflict were the years of the conflict .
 The initial battles were inconclusive . They were followed by victories for the royalists, Cavaliers, at Landsdown and Adwalton Moor in 1643 .
 Numerical supremacy and Scottish involvement led to Roundhead victories at Marston Moor in 1644, # and at Naseby and Langport in 1645 .
 James's belief in the Divine Right of Kings (that the king was god's representative on Earth with unlimited authority) antagonized Parliament . James believed in the belief that the king had unlimited authority with unlimited power .
 He enforced royal authority through the Courts instead of the Courts . He raised money by selling titles to raise money for the poor .
 The conspirators meet and Lady d'Aubigny shows them Charles's Commission of Array (a royal commission summoning his officers to war) to be proclaimed once Charles sends word of his advance . Charles's commission of Array is shown to the conspirators . The plotters meet and
 The Guildhall is the planned storehouse for the conspirators' magazine . niei. magazine . It is planned for the Guildhall .
 With suspicions aroused, the Commons orders the detention of the King’s emissary Alexander Hampden .
 On May 31, they order the arrest of the suspected conspirators on the evidence of a spy . The suspects are believed to have been involved in the plot .
 The New Model Army was England's first uniform item i at Nerak marked POE professional army . Parliamentarian uniform red coat was N after the fall of Oxford in 1646 .
 The foot regiments, officially n E l . l | the first civil war comprised of pikemen and musketeers, issued to the l were provided with the distinctive red New Model | Lis roe S supporters now .
 Army split into those who wanted to share power with the king, and a more radical group, supported soldiers were by the army generals, that wanted a Foiled royalist plot dax republic .
 It is a graphic account of the various parties, finally making a deal many signatures, including that of Oliver Cromwell . with the Scots to adopt Presbyterianism “Malignants’ plot"" against Parliament woolen that was unearthed on May 31, 1643 .
 The royalists rose again in July 1648 of a Scottish army loyal to Charles I's son . The Scots invaded England in 1648 and Charles I was defeated .
 Ww easily suppressed these uprisings before In 1653, Cromwell dismissed the Rump crushing the Scots at Preston . The at Worcester in 1651 New Model Army finally brought end to civil war .
 Unhappy at its failure to pass any reforms, they marched on Parliament and passed any reforms . They then marched on parliament and passed the necessary legislation .
 The appointed Lord Protector for 58 who remained, known as the life . role that effectively colored bow, i which was used Rump Parliament, were ordered made him a military . Ordered to set up a High Court to try the dictator .
 Charles I was found guilty and beheaded on January 30, 1649 . The plan is to 1649. Charles I will be found guilty of treason .
 Leading monarchs had been deposed or parliamentarians, killed before, but never legally legally England and Wales into 10 districts ruled by army generals . This was truly revolutionary; arrest the leading monarchs and parliamentarians had been killed before .
 The conspirators are Before the civil war, helpless against the a SUD hanged at the Tyburn . Oliver Cromwell was army generals and 4 / gallows . With no P ae The Lord Protector power base, he was m m m The conspirator are
 ZW. i issues a proclamation i URS aa es) — ES making all who support Parliament . ZWI. i issued a proclamation . i . URS. es: Proclamation . i issued to all who supported Parliament .
 ETERNE AN ETEN S iir SPRL par oir Barmy. reopened, and public festivals, such as Christmas, such . Christmas, Christmas, Charles Il in 1685, alienated his subjects by placing . His subjects were restored .
 Nell Gwyn, a former orange-seller turned actress, became one of the king's most popular mistresses . She was one of his most famous mistresses during his reign in England .
 In response to John Pym's report on the royal plot, the Commons accepts P y P Lena / to take over the throne in 1688 . The imposition of a vow of support for Parliament known as ""the Covenant" was sent around the country as a test of loyalty .
 Taboos surrounding the desecration of corpses prevented physicians of the 2nd-14th centuries from studying human anatomy .
 Practitioners used methods we would recognize today in pursuit of a mythical ""philosopher's stone" The stone is attributed with a variety of powers, such as the ability to give everlasting life or to make gold .
 16th and 17th centuries saw a metamorphosis in European thinking about the natural world . Scientific Revolution was the beginning of the scientific revolution .
 The Renaissance had transformed art, and the Reformation loosened the ties of religious dogma . The Reformation was the first major religious reform in the history of American art .
 As their works began to filter back into European libraries, they helped to inspire a growing recognition that not everything the Greeks said was accurate .
 During the 18th century, failings were exposed in a number of areas . A new method of philosophy, in which observation and experiment took precedence over authority, began to establish itself .
 The scientific revolution could not have taken place without the printing press . The rapid spread of information that printed books brought with them .
 Ideas could be transmitted rapidly across the entire European continent . Suddenly, ideas could be easily transmitted accurately and rapidly across Europe .
 The idea that the universe orbited Earth is an ancient one . Collectors, such as the Dane Ole Worm, created “cabinets of curiosities” —early Ring measures ascension, the equivalent of longitude on the celestial sphere .
 Mercury and Venus never strayed far from the Sun, and Mars occasionally reversed its motion . However, there were problems—Mercury and Venus rarely strayed from each other .
 Nicolaus Copernicus published the first widely read proposal for a new system with the Sun at its center in 1543 . The Earth is the third of six planets orbiting around it .
 It is a skeletal representation of the ""celestial sphere"" used for measuring astronomical coordinates . It is used to measure astronomical coordinations . The sphere is used in astronomical calculations .
 From the early 17th century onward, the Sun was placed at the center of the sphere, as shown here . The Sun was first placed in the sphere of the globe in the 17th Century .
 Ring measures declination, the equivalent of latitude Plane Plane of the solar system equivalent of today's natural history museums . Ring measures Declination Plane of Earth's solar system . Plane of solar system equivalents of museums such as Natural History museums .
 Exotic plant species brought back from around the world were cultivated in botanical gardens . Collection of new specimens became an increasingly important part of exploratory and trading missions overseas .
 The growing interest in novelty undermined the reliance on the ancients, as it became clear that they had not, after all, known everything .
 The classical geographers had nothing to say about the new lands now being discovered, and since the authorities were also silent about the many new species of plant and animal, the scholars of the time had no choice but to investigate for themselves, and draw their own conclusions .
 Improved technology was also undermining other long-held theories . Improved technology is also undermining long held theories of evolution .
 The most celebrated casualty of the revolution was the ancient, Barth-centered model of the universe . Barth's model was a model for the universe that was based on an ancient model .
 Galileo Galilei is often credited with discovering that Earth and the other planets orbit the Sun, using one of the first telescopes . Italian physicist and astronomer Galilei discovered that Earth orbits the Sun using a telescope .
 Galileo’s discovery in 1610 of the four moons orbiting Jupiter showed that Earth was not the center of all motion in the universe . His observation of the Moon-like phases of Venus showed that it must be orbiting the Sun . Galileo's discovery of the moon-like phase of
 Improvements in time measurement aided both astronomy and navigation . The most persuasive evidence for this theory came from the observations of Danish Timekeepers . Timekeeping helped navigation and astronomy .
 The weightdriven brass lantern clock was one step forward, although this Japanese version from the mid-T7th | century still does not have a minute hand .
 The pendulum clock invented by Christiaan Huygens in 1656 marked a further advance in precision . Tycho Brahe was the astronomer of the 16th century .
 However, these observations alone could not have created a new theory, they merely disproved the old one . However, they could not be created new theory .
 The crucial leap was made by Brahe's one-time student, Johannes Kepler . Kepler was Kepler's student at the time . Kepler became the first German astronomer to discover the planet's first solar system .
 Brahe's measurements allowed him to develop a set of laws that showed how the planets follow elliptical, rather than circular, orbits around the Sun .
 Medicine and anatomy were also in a period of rapid change . Astronomy and physics were undergoing their revolution . Advances in biology were also undergoing rapid changes in the past .
 The first book of microscope observations was Robert Hooke's Micrographia of 1664, which described and illustrated his observations of insects, plants, and living cells . The discovery of a lost text by Galen in the early Life through a lens .
 This illustration of an ant shows more detailed anatomy than was previously possible . The ant's anatomy is more detailed than ever imagined .
 Kepler's laws explained how planets and other celestial objects followed their orbits, but could not explain why . Kepler could not have predicted how planets would follow their orbits . The discovery of Kepler's Kepler laws led to a revolution in the science .
 Isaac Newton realized that force of gravity found on Earth might extend out into space, and be generated by other objects of sufficient mass . Isaac Newton came from Newton's theory of gravity .
 Newton was a brilliant but tempestuous individual, fascinated by mathematics, astronomy, optics, and alchemy . Newton was fascinated with mathematics, | astronomy, . optics, . astronomy, and . alchemy, he said .
 During the last two ų decades of his life, he was the most revered ″natural philosopher” in Europe . He was known for his work as a "natural philosopher"
 The universal laws of motion and gravitation, and the model of the behavior NEWTON’S TELESCOPE of light that he discovered, remained the 16th century intrigued the Flemish anatomist Andreas Vesalius, who discovered that Galen had clearly never
 Vesalius’ great atlas of anatomy, De Humani Corporis Fabrica, inspired a new generation to continue the study of anatomy without undue deference to authorities from the past . Vesalii’s atlas inspired new generation of anatomyists to continue study without
 One great battleground between traditionalism and the new approach was the nature of the circulatory system . The new approach to the body's role was the creation of a new model of medicine .
 Imbalances in the humors supposedly caused a variety of ailments . Much of medieval medicine focused on how best to regulate them . The humors were thought to be responsible for many ailments .
 Only when Galen’s description of the heart was proved wrong did physicians begin to question this theory . Galen's description of heart proved wrong, physicians began to question it .
 In 1603, Italian anatomist Hieronymus Fabricius discovered valves within certain blood vessels . It was not until 1628 that William Harvey, personal physician to Charles I of England, announced that the valves only worked one direction .
 Blood vessels must form two distinct groups:arteries taking blood away from the heart, and veins carrying blood back toward it . The blood vessels must therefore form two separate groups: the heart and veins .
 Harvey’s discovery met with fierce resistance, not only because it undermined Galen, but also because, with no visible connection between Mountains on the Moon and spots on the Sun, it relied on tiny “capillaries” too small to be seen, to complete the
 By stating the evidence rather than attacking rival ideas, Harvey formed a template for later scientific publications . Harvey's work was published in the early 1900s .
 In 1661, improvements to the recently invented microscope finally allowed direct observation of the capillaries . Harvey vindicated Harvey and confirmed the supremacy of the new method of observation, experiment, and deduction .
 After the scientific revolution, science became established as the best method to explain and predict natural phenomena . Science was established as a best way to predict and explain natural phenomena after the revolution .
 The 17th century saw the foundation of many scientific societies across Europe . The first scientific society was founded in 17th Century .
 Establishment of true scientific method inspired thinkers in many other fields, giving rise to economic, social, and political sciences among others . Establishment of scientific method gave rise to social, political, and economic sciences among other fields .
 The growing supremacy of Western technology ensured longevity of the nascent European empires . Western technology was key to longevity of European empires.
 Up to 100,000 people perished in the earthquake itself and in the tsunami and fire that followed . Up to a million people were killed in the quake and tsunami that killed thousands .
 The physical shockwaves were felt around the world; but the event also caused people to question established beliefs . The event was a shock to the world, but also to the religious community .
 In the 18th century, Lisbon was a grand, affluent city that formed the hub of a vast global empire . Lisbon is situated on the southwest coast of Portugal, at the mouth of the Tagus River .
 An estimated 9 on the Richter scale (the highest number on the scale being 10) on November 1, 1755, was an earthquake measuring an estimated 9 . Lisbon was devastated by the earthquake . The earthquake measured a magnitude of 9 .
 Cracks as wide as 16 ft appeared in the ground, swallowing buildings and people . Cracks were seen as large as 16 feet wide, swallowing people and buildings .
 Many inhabitants had fled toward the port at the mouth of the river, clambering aboard the ships moored there in the belief that they would be in a safer place . In panic, many inhabitants had clambered onto the ships in the hope of a safe place .
 The earthquake was followed by a massive tsunami, a huge wall of water some 20 ft high, that crashed into the city and roared up the river, causing further death and destruction . But the earthquake was not followed by the tsunami .
 All along the coast of Portugal, towns were inundated by catastrophic floods . Floods devastated areas of the country's coast .
 Agadir in North Africa was flooded, leaving thousands dead, and the wave traveled as far as northern Europe and across the Atlantic . The wave also traveled across Barbados, Barbados and northern Europe .
 Once the ground had stopped shaking and the waters had receded, the third disaster, fire, struck Lisbon . The Portuguese capital was hit by a series of natural disasters in the past week .
 Three catastrophes destroyed threequarters of Lisbon's buildings, including the city's vast royal library . The library held priceless works of art and historical records detailing Portuguese expeditions to Southeast Asia .
 The earthquake struck on All Saints’ Day, one of the holiest days in the Christian calendar . The earthquake had struck on the holiest day of the year in Christian faith .
 The earthquake caused others to question the existence of a higher being . The earthquake was the first earthquake to strike in the world's history .
 The event became a key topic of discussion for thinkers of the Enlightenment . The Enlightenment began to look for the causes of natural disasters in the natural world .
 The French writer and philosopher Voltaire used the earthquake to attack blind faith in God . Immanuel Kant argued that the causes of the disaster should be examined scientifically, and that humanity should prepare itself .
 Lisbon's buildings rocked backward and forward as the earthquake struck . Lisbon was hit by the earthquake in the early hours of Tuesday morning .
 The Encyclopéédie paid particular attention to everyday professions, eager to preserve artisan skills and techniques for posterity .
 Immanuel Kant described the Enlightenment as man's release from his "self-inflicted immaturity" meaning that people should use their reason without taking direction . The Enlightenment was defined as the release of man's self-injury .
 17 volumes of or ""Reasoned Dictionary beyond during the 18th century thanks that allowed anyone to be locked up ED PAR cM e E E El AD an 72,000 articles and over 2,500 plates . The 17 volumes or ""reasoned Dictionary Beyond" contain over 72,
 Arts and Trades. to an explosion in printing and the without evidence; and the Church (for encouraging 5 ims superstition and Phe Swiss thinker ENCYCLOPEDIE, widespread use of the French language. Arts and . Trades .
 From 1750, Jeanne Poisson was installed in beliefs by arguing Mis en & publié par M DI DE RO T, de l'Académie Royale des Sciences & des Belles .
 Lettres de Prule; &, quanta la Pantie Maruémarigque, par M D'ALEMBERT, emerged in Paris, an avid patron of artistic and intellectual projects . had helped to corrupt de l'Académie Royale des Sciences de
 The roots of the as Voltaire were Voltaire's Voltaire . Che; . Saine Jacques, d la Plume d'or, F .
 He promoted the English legal system, Enlightenment lay in religious toleration, and its constitutional monarchy the Renaissance and as alternatives to French absolutism . It was immediately banned .
 Humanists such as Michel de Montaigne wrote | on direct experience; and d'Alembert. Humanists . such as the empiricism of the empiricism .
 Isaac Newton and disseminate all existing knowledge customs through the eyes of Persian d D RA | for his unifying scientific in clear, accessible prose and to educate visitors .
 Banned twice for perfected it in Candide , an and replaced by William Ill. Ill. Banned again for its use in the novel .
 A more effective way of spreading hypocrisies of the institutions and similar ideas was through satire . Subsequent to its anti-Catholic tone, its survival relied account of a naive young man's political reforms .
 They argued that for states to be progressive, politics and religion should be kept apart . They argued for states that want to keep religion and politics separate .
 Many believed that religion was necessary for upholding the social order, creating an insoluble conflict . Yet many also believed that religious beliefs were necessary to uphold the order . The conflict was created by both sides of the debate .
 Anticlerical sentiments, spread by satirical prints and novels, were fueled by anger at the Church's corruption and abuse of power .
 Freemasons lodges sprang up across Europe as secular spaces for disciples of the “Cult of Reason"" to gather and exchange ideas . Freemasons were founded in 18th Century Freemasons in France and Italy .
 The tools of the trade of a pastry cook are shown here, including bowls of varying sizes, a baking tray, a mortar and pestle, and a rolling pin . The French king and his ministers were often in dispute with the parlements—French law courts dominated by the aristocracy .
 Montesquieu proposed a limited monarchy based on a three-way division of powers between the executive, legislature and judiciary . The French monarchist revolutionized the political debate in his book Spirit of the Laws . He proposed a constitution based on the division of power between the legislature and the
 This was a time when thinkers believed that a rational, scientific approach could be applied to almost any subject . This was the time of a rational approach to almost every subject .
 Adam Smith's analysis of capitalism, in his book Wealth of Nations, invented the new science of economics . Kant's Critique of Pure Reason presented a more scientific approach to philosophy .
 A fully inflated cornemuse shows the positioning of the mouthpiece, fingering tubes, and venting tubes .
 A soufflet was a type of bellows to which a sound-producing object such as a chanter could be attached . The soufflets were used to make a sound sound sound sounds .
 The four-reed drone fitted onto the musette de cour shown above it is a type of bellows-blown bagpipe .
 With three keys and seven finger-holes, it gave a range of one octave . annotation relates each finger-hole to its note . It gave three keys, seven fingers and seven fingers, with three octaves .
 Other mouthpieces for the bagpipes are illustrated . The editors intended the engravings to be as comprehensive as possible .
 The Enlightenment provoked both radical change and growing criticism of its ideas . After The Enlightenment, the Enlightenment was the focus of the Enlightenment .
 Increasing demands for political representation helped pave the way for the U.S. and French revolutions . The American revolution was inspired by the French revolution .
 In practice, the self-interest of modern nation states often comes first . Self-interest comes first in practice, in practice of modern nations .
 Enlightenment ideas on the state, attacking outdated traditions, filtered down to some of Europe's rulers, including Empress Maria Theresa of Austria, Catherine II “the Great" of Russia, and Frederick II ""the Great"" of Prussia, who briefly employed Voltaire as his advisor .
 Frederick tried to govern his subjects as the ""first servant of the state” His ""revolution from above"" created an enlightened welfare state with a modern bureaucracy and law system . His ""Revolution from above" created a modern welfare state .
 Prince Karl Frederick of Baden abolished serfdom by abolishing it outright . The Badenese monarch abolished it outright in 1883 .
 Innovative tactics were employed by field commanders, and training manuals, maps, and field glasses began to be more widely used . Training manuals and maps were used more widely .
 The idea of a permanent or ""standing"" professional army as a fixed piece of machinery of state was still in its infancy . But the idea of permanent or standing" professional army was still still in their infancy .
 The copper and bronze weaponry made to fire it was slow in development and far from uniform in design or ammunition . It was slow to develop and was not uniform in the design or ammo .
 English fleet of 56 ships under the Duke of Albemarle and a larger Dutch fleet commanded by Michiel De Ruyter . Battle was fought at close quarters between an English and a Dutch fleet .
 Gustavus ADOLPHUS was the Swedish king of Sweden . He ensured his men were regularly paid .
 His military innovations in troop formations and combinations led to a permanent increase in the size of European armies . His innovations led to the creation of the largest armies in Europe .
 Gustavus Adolphus II came to the throne of Sweden in 1611 and is considered the father of modern military tactics . He is considered one of the most influential military leaders in the world .
 He promoted a more standardized and much lighter artillery, more compact supply trains, offensive tactics, and provisioning troops by negotiation, not looting . He also promoted a quick offensive campaign gave the enemy little time to prepare .
 Europe D became an almost permanent theater of war, witnessing more battles than any other place or time . As military tactics became more sophisticated, full-on cavalry charges and standardized artillery became integral to more sustained and offensive tactics than pike-style warfare .
 If there was a dispute to settle, then war was the way to do it . Diplomacy came when treaties were made, and treaties came when they were made .
 From the late 17th century, trade was the dominant cause of conflict between Europeans . Trade, not religion or dynasty, became the dominant source of conflict .
 The nascent nation-states were increasingly concerned about their freedoms to trade, and thereby to profit and to protect monopolies both on the high seas and in overseas possessions .
 Quarrels about trade around the world are now a concern of European states-in-the-making . European states in the making are concerned about trade in the world .
 By the 18th century, Europe had emerged from a series of violent wars fought over religion . For example, from 1652 to 1674, two former Masters of War .
 Three Anglo-Dutch Wars centered around trade, colonial possessions, and shipping rights . Such conflicts were quickly replaced with battles over republican allies .
 The initial cause was an act passed by the English parliament that forbade any foreign ship to carry, and therefore trade, English goods . The first cause was a ban on foreign ships carrying English goods, which led to the death of many .
 The Dutch carried massive quantities of English goods in their ships, which made them huge profits . The Dutch were prepared to fight to protect their profits from the English .
 Treaty of Breda was the first multinational peace settlement . It concerned as much about Europe’s overseas interests as its European boundaries . Treaty ended the second Anglo-Dutch War .
 Peace of Westphalia ended the 30 Years War trade rights in Europe and in the ever-increasing number of European colonies abroad . Significantly, the wide-ranging peace of westphalia that had ended the war ended trade rights both in Europe .
 Only 19 years earlier the treaty contained almost nothing about non-European matters in its collection of treaties, which demonstrates how rapidly Europe’s overseas possessions had grown in importance .
 Large and properly equipped armies and navies had to be maintained, and this required centralized and bureaucratic states to run them . One effect of frequent wars was that large and well equipped armies needed to be kept in place .
 Countries now developed national armed forces as they became an integral element of nation-building . Armed forces are now an integral part of the country's development .
 The Dutch were a typical example of how a government’s administration and finances were now geared to mobilize for war and buttress the state . The Dutch government's administration was now geared toward mobilizing for war, the historian says .
 FREDERICK II of PRUSSIA did not “stand down” every winter slowly became the norm . He says he is proud of his work in the field .
 The days of the mercenary captains raising private armies for a fee were numbered . The days were numbered for mercenary captains who raised private armies .
 By the 1690s, France, fighting a European coalition, could mobilize upward of 340,000 troops . France was able to mobilize upwards of 300,000 French troops .
 Even at peace the French standing army numbered 150,000 troops, compared bronze siege mortar F2 — with 55,000 in 1660s .
 Prussian mobilization in the 18th century could raise an army of 185,000 from a population of only five million . Prussian mobilisation in the 1800s raised an army from just five million people . The Prussian army was able to mobilize 185,500 people in the Prussian
 Warfare came of age with key developments in the study of strategy, siege tactics, topography, and ballistics . Warfare came to prominence in the development of siege tactics .
 Weapons and ammunition were also refined, and logistics became more of a science . Soldiers were now part of the state’s permanent expenses . Weapons and ammo were also refine, and .
 Early mortar gun by a Dutch military engineer, the Coehorn siege mortar gun was a cannon used to fire Shells at right angles . The emphasis switched to defense from aggression .
 Developed in the 17th century Europe's military power grew in sophistication and scope, soon to be ""exported"" to the rest of the world . Europe's growing military power became more sophisticated and more sophisticated .
 Napoleon Bonaparte introduced the method of deploying massed artillery at a specific point in a battle, thereby giving him sensational victories . During the Napoleonic Wars he introduced the technique to give him sensational wins . Napoleon's method was used in the Battle of the French Revolution .
 Russia had the first European army in which all the men wore uniforms . Private soldiers were decorated for bravery . Russia's first professional army was almost unknown in the rest of Europe .
 Troops were directly recruited and financed by the state . Peasant conscripts served for life until 1793 . Troops recruited and funded by state .
 It is considered to be the first truly global conflict in history . It was fought in the Middle Ages .
 VAAN d Lg c m uam ume RR 22 LES cülsss GAUNTLET Com ""– GreaVE AND GREAVE AND SABATON — a Pe um zr z e e RR AMA SABaton CUIRASS
 Lighter, more flexible armor was used and the use of guns increased . Despite their violent purpose, many weapons were exquisitely decorated .
 French sword, dating from poe helmet, dating to c 1570 and elaborately decorated, is made from silver with elaborate gold decoration . French sword dating from 1570 is made of silver and gold .
 Italian equestrian armor, designed to protect the head JH $ b British matchlock gun, dating from the 17th century . and neck of a horse in battle .
 Dutch Closed helmet with pivoting visor from an Italian eit. flintlock pistol, 1700, made by the Flemish gunmaker suit of armor, dating to the mid-16th century .
 Scottish pistol, 1750, constructed constructed constructed from metal plates, was actually made from iron by Thomas Cadell of Doune . The suit was made of metal plates and iron .
 Gauntlets constructed from Sh a Ne 6 gaps in the steel blade were designed to trap the sword of an small, flexible plates protected the hands and wrists . i"" Ae opponent, and wrench it from his grip or shatter the blade . i."" Ae opponent .
 Greaves protected the lower legs and sabatons covered Barbed arrowheads dating from 1500, and probably the feet of the feet . The lower legs were protected by Greaves .
 The cuirass protected the torso and comprised HUNTING used for hunting rather than warfare . It was used to protect the torso rather than protect the body .
 Steel mace with breast and back plates, which were attached to each SWORD seven flanges, was attached to . Each weapon in the 16th other with leather straps, and typical of this type of weapon in .
 The establishment of overseas empires, and the creation of trading centers to finance them, spurred this new wave of global commerce . Discovery of the Americas and the development of ocean-going ships capable of sailing vast distances kick-started the modern era of capitalism .
 The enterprise of investing money to make money now had a global reach with potentially massive profits, simply because of the scarcity of the precious commodities . Investing money now has global reach, with potentially huge profits .
 The value of goods from the East was so huge in Europe that it paid for the costs of such voyages many times over . Europe paid for many of the cost of the trips to the East .
 Ships often succumbed to storms, reefs, and pirates, with the result that all of the goods accrued over many months would be lost in an instant . Ships often succumb to storms and reefs .
 In medieval period, attitude of the Catholic Church to usury prevented capitalism from developing . Investment in ships, rigging, guns, and crew, as well as refurbishing and filling the ships with new goods, was crucial .
 Papal ban on levying interest was not repealed until the 15th century . The papal ban was first repealed by the Pope in 15th Century .
 undertakings tied up large sums of money for long periods, sometimes years, before any profit could be realized . Underwater undertakings have to wait for years to realize profits .
 So a large number of speculators needed to be persuaded to share the risk . So many of the speculators were convinced to share risk with the public .
 The need to secure the required investment saw the creation of joint stock companies . Joint stock companies were created in order to secure investment .
 Investors bought into the companies even if they had no personal links to its trading activities . Investors bought stocks in them on the open market .
 Ship owners meet at Lloyd's coffeehouse to discuss future voyages with underwriters . Underwriters are men who insure things against loss for a premium . The coffee shop is a favorite of the day .
 Dutch trader's manual from the 1500s with pictures of coins was used to conduct business .
 Richard Gresham supplied tapestries for Henry VIII's Hampton Court . He visited Antwerp's trading center . The tapestry was made for the Henry VIII court .
 He recognized its vital trade link, and urged the establishment of a similar center in London . The center is based in London and is located in central London .
 In 1565 his son Thomas established the Royal Exchange of London, but could not withdraw their capital . The Exchange was established in 1565, but the capital was not withdrawn .
 An investor's share in the company's stock could also be sold at whatever price the buyer and seller agreed on . An investor could also sell his own share at the same price as an investor .
 Muscovy Company was the first joint-stock enterprise established in England in 1555 . Dutch East India Company was one of the most famous companies in the world .
 It was chartered by the States General in 1602 and consisted of six provincial chambers each with its own capital and share distribution of total profits . It consisted of a grouping of six provinces with their own capital .
 The Heeren XVII became the central management of the Dutch government . They appointed 17 general directors, the Heeren XVIII, who became the main management . The XVII also appointed 17 . general directors .
 The Heeren XVII controlled the administration of factories and territory in the East Indies . It also controlled the marketing of imported goods to Amsterdam, and how ships were to be freighted .
 Even the Bank of England, when it was founded by royal charter in 1694, was organized on joint-stock lines to raise money for what were effectively trade-based wars against France .
 Other company enterprises included the United Company of Merchants of England, the Royal African Company, the Dutch West India Company, and the Hudson’s Bay Company .
 Joint-stock company enjoyed a much more long-term and independent existence than other companies . It built up capital and a buoyant market for its shares over time .
 A large range of financial services offered by banks were provided by legal clerks, merchants, and goldsmiths in the 18th century to protect their coastal factories and trade .
 Specialist traders now arrange deals between buyers and sellers of stocks and shares in an enterprise or commodity with which they had no direct connection . In return for a cut on each transaction, they arrange deals with buyers, sellers and shares .
 In London the brokers gathered at first in coffeehouses, and a system of stockbroking — pg ""tI D e" - became established .
 At Edward Lloyd's coffeehouse, merchants, brokers, ship owners, and sea captains met to discuss investment and insurance for new voyages . The meeting was held at Edward Lloyd’s coffeehouse .
 Brokers negotiated with investors to buy and sell shares in jointstock companies and trading ventures . Jonathan's coffeehouse in Change Alley is located in the heart of Change Alley . Brokers negotiate with investors in the coffeehouse .
 In 1698, stock dealers were expelled from the Royal Exchange for rowdiness . They began their dealings in the streets and coffeehouses nearby in Jonathan's Coffeehouse .
 Brokers came up with idea of producing lists of share prices and shipping departure data . Brokers also came up to the idea of publishing lists of shares prices and departure data in coffeehouses .
 In the same year, John Castaing began publishing a twice-weekly newsletter of share and commodity prices . The Course of the Exchange was published by Jonathan's .
 From the early 16th century in Antwerp, merchants had a base within which to trade—a Bourse . A ""bourse"" is born from the early . 16th . century .
 It was custom-built and regulated as a market for the sale and purchase of trading companies' shares and stocks . The market was custom built and regulated to allow trading companies to sell and buy shares .
 The Bourse, the continental term for a stock exchange, was the symbol of capitalism and an expanding economy . Ships were chartered, cargo insured, and stocks and shares bought and sold .
 As with marine insurance, double-entry bookkeeping and other business techniques, bank was copied from Italian models .
 Adam Smith's /nquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations supported the massive growth in the banking industry . Adam Smith’s . The banking industry has since been transformed into a multi-billion dollar industry .
 The Lutine Bell is located in the atrium of the Lloyd's of London building . Lloyd's is one of the world's largest insurance companies . The Bell is the largest in the world and is the oldest in London .
 HMS Lutine, which sank in 1799 with its crew and cargo of gold and bullion, was rescued from HMS . The ship's crew were rescued from the wreck of the ship, which sunk with its cargo and cargo . It was rescued by the crew of the HMS L
 It was traditionally rung once for the loss or delay of a ship and twice for its safe arrival . Now mainly reserved for ceremonial purposes, it is rung twice for safe arrival and once for loss .
 During the campaigns, Louis XIV relied on his "" regency of his mother, Anne of Austria, director of finances, Jean-Baptiste . The effective ruler of France was her Colbert, her Colbert .
 When Mazarin died in 1661, the 23-year-old King Louis XIV was expected to appoint a chief minister .
 Louis was constantly waging war for the first 20 years of his personal reign . Louis spent much of his reign as a king of France .
 He began with an attack on the Spanish Netherlands in 1667 to gain land . But his territorial ambitions there were thwarted by an alliance between Holland, England, and Sweden .
 In 1672, he invaded Holland, but under William of Orange the Dutch managed to stand firm against him . He had detached England from that alliance, and invaded Holland in 1672 .
 Louis did make some territorial gains along France’s frontiers . Although this campaign led to the formation of another European alliance against France, Louis made some territorial gain .
 By all accounts, Louis was attractive, with a strong nose, piercing eyes, and a healthy complexion . Louis was also a good eatery, according to reports .
 Louis XIV was a member of one of the most powerful and widely distributed royal dynasties lasted until 1697 . The War Royal family tree of the Grand Alliance Louis XIV .
 He was also in charge of the royal household’s finances, a responsibility that included the cost of Versailles . He was responsible for many of the costs of the French Revolution, including the cost .
 The court of the Sun King Versailles began as a modest hunting lodge near Paris . The young Louis A XIV entertained his intimate friends at the hunting lodge . Louis XIV's court was a hunting lodge where he entertained intimate friends .
 In the late 1660s Louis started to devote more attention to the project of reconstructing and extending the old hunting lodge into a royal palace .
 There was method behind Louis’ extravagant plan to build a great royal palace . Louis wanted to build an extravagant palace in the style of Louis XVI .
 Versailles was the permanent base of the royal court and the seat of government from 1682 . Louis created a hugely attractive nexus of power and influence, which the nobility found irresistible .
 Versailles Court was a center of conspicuous consumption and magnificence . The Court was intended to glorify the ‘Sun King,” as Louis was Sun King .
 From the moment of his coronation Louis XIV demonstrated his belief that he had a “divine right" to rule France as an absolute monarch . Without consulting parliaments, ministers, or senior nobles, he ruled without consulting . Louis XIV believed he had God-given duty to
 He was an extraordinarily capable ruler . Blessed with stamina, confidence, and a passion for order, he was an extraordinary ruler .
 He insisted on daily progress reports about the construction of Versailles . Even when he was at war, he insisted on the construction reports . Even during the war he insisted that he would not be at war .
 Madeleine Béjart was the leading lady of the F theatrical company managed by Molière, the genius of French comedy whose plays entertained Louis and his court . She was a leading lady in the F.F theatrical company .
 The Palace of Versailles is a monument to French cultural and political prestige . Louis’ court become a magnet for all the talent in France, and a monument . styled by artists paid to glorify him .
 Louis wished to appear a great patron of the arts, provided that the artists obeyed the various controls imposed by the royal academies . And, like the sun god Apollo, Louis wished for the arts to appear to be a patron .
 At its height was the size of a small town containing upwards of 10,000 people . At the heart of the royal palace were the apartments of Louis, his Spanish Queen, Marie Thérèse, and the royal mistress .
 It was usual for the current royal mistress to enjoy court honors . The children resulting from the relationships were acknowledged by the king .
 The Sun King died at the age of 77, in the 56th year of his personal rule .
 His final years were clouded by bereavement, military defeat, and a catastrophic country-wide collapse in the French economy . French President Francois Hollande's final years clouded with bereavement and military defeat .
 The sudden deaths of his son, the dauphin , his grandson, and his elder great-grandson, all within a matter of months, meant that his kingdom passed to his five-year-old great grandson, Louis XV. miti .
 The 1668 Treaty of Aix-La-Chapelle marks France's successful annexation of part of the Spanish Netherlands . The treaty was signed by Louis XIV in 1668 .
 Louis XIV bequeaths the throne in the first instance to Louis XIV's grandson, the Duc d'Anjou, who becomes Philip V of Spain . His bequeathments the Spanish throne in first instance . Louis XIV was born in France in 17th century .
 The war ends in 1713 at the Treaty of Utrecht, with Philip V left on the Spanish throne, but the Spanish Empire partitioned . The Spanish Empire was partitioned into a Spanish Republic .
 The first sugar plantation was established by the Portuguese in Madeira, an island off the northwest coast of Africa, in 1452 .
 At first Africans were kidnapped and forced into slavery to work on plantations . In 1458 a deal was brokered with African rulers to purchase slaves . The deal was made in 1458 .
 The global triangular trading system had profit on every leg . The triangular trade had profit every leg of the global triangular trade .
 Slave ships left European ports for West Africa laden with Iron, wine, guns, and textiles . Slave ships loaded with guns, iron, wine and textile . Slave ship left Europe ports for the African continent .
 These were exchanged for slaves, who were transported across the Atlantic to sell to plantation owners . The slaves were transported to the Atlantic and sold to plantations owners .
 The ships returned to European ports with a cargo of sugar, coffee, and tobacco . The ships then returned to Europe with sugar and coffee .
 Around 10 million Africans were captured, shackled, and shipped to the Americas to work on sugar, cotton, and tobacco plantations . All together, around 10 million African slaves were captured and shackled .
 Europe’s craving for sugar brought European traders to Africa to buy and barter slaves . African slave labor A was used in the production of other commodities, such as minerals, coffee, cocoa, indigo, cotton, and tobacco .
 The Swedes, Danes, French, British, Dutch, and Portuguese established over 30 slave forts along the West African “Gold Coast” The ports for exporting slaves stretched over 2,000 miles from the Senegal River south to Angola in Senegambia, Dahome
 Slavery was already part of Africa’s tribal economy and society before the arrival of the European traders . Slaves in Africa was part of the African tribal economy before the European trade .
 Women and children whose menfolk had been killed in battle were usually enslaved, becoming part of a tribal ruler’s extended family . For example, women and children who had died in battle became slaves .
 The East Africa slave trade was also wellestablished, with captured slaves transported north across the Saharan desert and east into Arabia, the Middle East, and India . Arab and Ottoman slave traders traded captured slaves in the region .
 African chiefs were complicit in providing the European seafarers with slaves . The slave trade was a form of slavery in the form of slaves .
 African chiefs leased out land along the coast so the Europeans could establish trading forts . Europeans were able to establish forts in the area .
 African slaves captured in raids or after battle were transported to the forts by their African captors, then sold to the European traders . African slaves were transported by their captors and sold to Europeans .
 For Instruments of torture Slaves were seen as chattel, or goods, not as human beings, demonstrated by the assortment of heavy tron Shackles that they had to endure . Slaves had to be chained to heavy chains and tortured with heavy chains .
 Male slaves were chained up in gruesome ankle and neck chains . In 1726 the King of Dahomey suggested that the Europeans should establish plantations .
 Europeans were unable to monopolize the slave trade . Europeans had only a toehold on the African coast, but were able to control the trade . The slave trade was largely based in Africa .
 Slaves collected directly from leased forts in exchange for goods, such as guns or alcohol, or ships plied the Gold Coast hoping to pick up a cargo of slaves from private dealers .
 By the 1780s the plantations of the French colony Saint-Domingue accounted for 60 percent of France’s overseas wealth, supplying . Slaves were shackled in rows between the hold and the deck, lying on their back or sides .
 All male slaves were forcibly branded with a hot iron as proof of ownership . 40 per cent of all the sugar and 60 percent of all coffee consumed in Europe consumed .
 Slaves from African coastal forts packed on ships bound for N a journey called the “middle passage’s” The journey was called the "middle passage" Slaves were packed into ships bound to the African coast .
 Men were chained together at the front of the boat; women were held in a separate area . Men and women were chained separately at the back of the ship .
 Both food and water were rationed so there was enough to last the voyage . Food and water was rationed out of the ship .
 This peaked in the 1780s at 78,000 slaves a year, with half of them carried on British ships . Half of the slaves were carried by British ships, and half were carried on their ships .
 Men were chained together in a suffocatingly small space between the deck and the hold . Men chained together was chained together . The men were chained to a small space in the small space .
 Women were usually left unchained and allowed on deck to help with the cooking . Women were often left on deck unchained to help cook .
 The European crew risked constant sexual harassment and rape by the European crew . However, they risked constant harassment and raped by the crew .
 Few ships were equipped to deal with bodily functions and, as they were shackled together, it was particularly hard for the men to avoid catching dysentery and smallpox . The two biggest onboard killers onboard were smallpox and dysentry .
 After a month at sea, a slave ship stank of sweat, urine, feces, and vomit . The slave ship was filled with sweat and urine and feces . It was the first slave ship to be sent to Africa .
 It was said that a slave ship could be smelled two days before it actually arrived in a port . A slave ship was said to have arrived at a port in 17th century .
 Each morning, the slaves were dragged up onto deck and their shackles were inspected . The slaves were then dragged onto the ship's deck and shackled into place .
 Any slave who had died during the night was unchained and thrown overboard . The slave who died in the night could be found to be unchained .
 Rations included boiled mash of horse beans and yams, biscuits, rice, plantain, and occasionally meat . Rations include boiled mash, biscuits and plantain .
 One food bucket was usually shared among many, resulting in quarrels— and infection . One bucket is usually shared by many, leading to quarrels and infections .
 Accounting for those dying in transit to forts and on slave ships, the figure is probably closer to 12 million . The figure is likely to be closer to that of 12 million people .
 The slave trade was abolished in England in 1807 after years of campaigning by antislavery groups .
 Thomas Clarkson gathered evidence such as shackles and oral accounts of former slave captains to publicize the horrors of the trade .
 The Abolition of the Slave Trade Act was passed in England in 1807 . The Emancipation Act of 1833 made owning slaves illegal in England .
 A string of legislation followed, with slavery abolished in the United States in 1865, Cuba in 1886, Brazil Captains and crew z | m in 1888, ending with Sierra Leone in succumbed to disease and m sg s rq.27 and the Gold Coast in 1928 .
 Slave-ship crews embarked from Liverpool in England in 1787 . Less than half returned alive .
 The slaves were sold at auction, then delivered to their new owners . They arrived in Brazil or the Caribbean islands .
 This was often followed by a period of "seasoning" in which the slave either succumbed to disease or survived to live a life of human bondage and misery . The slave was either either a slave or a slave who survived, or died of disease .
 Modern-day human rights campaigners point out that the fight against slavery is far from over . Guianas Brazil is one of the world's oldest slave states .
 It is estimated that there are over 27 million slaves in the world today, including people in forced labor, women and girls trafficked for work in the sex industry, and children kidnapped and forced to fight .
 The problem of determining longitude on an endless horizon was one of the greatest challenges for sailors in the 18th century . Harrison eventually won the prize in horizon .
 The Aborigines best of which could keep time at sea to within about ere ee who landed there 40,000 years earlier . But arid Australia clock-making but built five marine timekeepers, the remained uninviting except to the Aborigine .
 To Europeans, Terra Australis Incognita (Unknown his first prototype, called H1. H1) clock was to be called the H1 clock .
 Greenwich after a aj AE M Y-the3middle-of-tre-pstri landmass combined, and a voyage to the other side of the world p /, y P B century, Europeans had winds also narrowed the sea routes required an extremely accurate clock .
 Earlier Polynesian voyagers— The ability to determine longitude was fy 4 and South America, Asia, and Africa, the Maori who had sailed to New. Zealand, was vital . It would allow sailors to chart Y fy | and vast empires were well underway .
 E to colonize the islands of the Pacific sun and the stars, and patterns in the and reported in 1568 but were not i Ocean until the late 18th century . ocean's currents and waves were not known until the end of the century .
 Accurate chronometers were invaluable as they allowed sailors to measure exact longitude ror the first time . They were invaluable to sailors in the early days of navigation .
 Other obstacles to colonization included malaria, malaria, the poor quality of land for farming, and tropical storms .
 They used the Pacific primarily to ship South American silver to the Philippines to trade with China and the East Indies . The Pacific was primarily used primarily for the shipment of silver from South America .
 Spain’s greatest rival, the Dutch East India Company, concentrated on its possessions in the Indonesian archipelago, discouraging its captains from long, fruitless and costly ocean voyages in the region .
 Breakthrough voyages such as Luis Vaez de Torres’ 1606 sailing between New Guinea and Australia that proved the former to be an island received no publicity .
 Captain James Cook set out for Tahiti on the Endeavour in 1768 . His orders were to observe the transit of Venus, a rare astronomical event when the planet passes across the disk of the Sun .
 The British also wanted to forestall any French ambitions of gaining land in the area . But the British also sought to prevent any French land gains .
 Cook's voyage was to survey the vast Pacific Ocean to see if Tahiti was the possible gateway to the landmass of — a southern continent, Australia . As European settlers arrived, some under duress, the region began to develop whaling and agricultural industries .
 Whaling was a lure in the Pacific for Europeans and Americans from 1789 onwards . It was a big lure for European and American whaling ships .
 They impacted on the islands"" native communities as well stimulating further maritime expansion . The islands are now home to a range of native communities . They are now the world's largest islands .
 British settlers in Australia and New Zealand introduced sheep to temperate regions of continent .
 From the middle of the 18th century, the world experienced radical change . 1750-1914 was the beginning of the industrial revolution in the world .
 Political revolutions challenged established governments, aiming to throw off the shackles of oppression and privilege . Political revolutions challenge established governments to throw free of oppression .
 New methods of mechanization and transportation resulted in an age of industry and manufacturing that gave birth to new cities and consolidated empires . New ways of transportation and mechanization led to an era of industrialism .
 Victory at Battle of Plassey secures Bengal for the British East India Company . Prussia defeats Austria at the Battle of Leuthen; gives them control of Silesia . Victory at the battle secures Battleship for the British East India Company
 James Cook begins his first Pacific voyage . A Bridgewater canal 1760 Boer settlement of South African interior . James Cook was born in Cape Town, South Africa .
 1776 United States Declaration of Independence; British abandon Boston . Captain Cook's <q chronometer 1776 U.S. Declaration of 18th Independence .
 Spanish possession of Uruguay and Portuguese possession of Amazon basin confirmed . Portugal's possession of Uruguayan territory confirmed . Spain's control of the Amazon basin is confirmed .
 1781 Battle of Yorktown: George Washington and French allies defeat British; Articles of Confederation ratified . Article of Confederation was ratified in 1781 . Article was ratified by the American Revolutionary War .
 British take direct control of Indian territories . French Revolution begins after Treaty of Paris ends . Treaty ends with the Tennis Court Oath .
 George Washington elected first president of the United States (to 1782) Britain sues for peace with American rebels in 1782 . George Washington was the first American president to be elected to the presidency .
 The American and French revolutions transformed Western political expectations . The revolution in France and the U.S. transformed Western expectations .
 The U.S. emerged as a fully functioning democracy, France destabilized for almost a century . The United States emerged in the 19th century as a result of political liberation .
 Louis XVI overthrown; French republic declared; France declares war on Austria, Prussia, and Piedmont . These demands were against a background of Western domination, ee ap .
 Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette executed; beginning of ‘Terror’ led by Maximilien Robespierre . 1793 Louis XVI . and Marie . Antinoisette executed .
 Napoleon Bonaparte invades Egypt; French fleet destroyed by British at Battle of the Nile . Maximilien < Robespierre : 1798 Napoleon invades Egyptian; British destroy French fleet in Nile .
 Lewis and | Clark explore territories of Louisiana Purchase | and reach the Pacific . Lewis and Clark explored the Louisiana Purchase .
 Battle of Trafalgar d 1804 Napoleon assumes title of Emperor of France . Napoleon assumed the throne of France in March 1804 .
 Napoleonic Code introduced . 9 allies defeat France; | British cross into 1 France . Napoleson Code introduced. 9 allies defeated France; . French defeat Britain; .
 Congress of . Vienna to set out Abolition of . slavery future of Europe in Britain p | | Moscow, but forced to . retreat . Congress of | Vienna to . set out . future of European slavery future in Britain in Britain .
 Egypt reclaims Battle of the Nations, reclaims battle of the nations . Egypt supported by rapid industrialization, expanding trade, and population growth .
 It was an era of unprecedented European global supremacy and imperial expansion on every continent . It was a period of unprecedented global supremacy, imperial expansion .
 Russia acquires Armenia, declares war on Ottomans, takes Varna, Bulgaria . Yet by 1914, these apparently impregnable powers were poised to tear themselves apart in the world’s 1828 Russia .
 Agricultural innovation, such as Morton seed iÑ. drill, continues . Agricultural innovation continues .
 Peru becomes independent from Spain, aided by Simón Qd ] Bolivar . The Russo-Persian War was fought in 1826-28 . The war was the first of its kind .
 1818 Chilean independence from Spain confirmed by victory in Battle of Maipu . Chilean independence was confirmed in 1818 by victory against Spain .
 M Morton seed drill 1750-1914 PY Liberty Leading the People, Eugene Delacroix . 1830 Revolution in Paris topples Charles X; Louis-Philippe crowned | king of France .
 The Communist ES Manifesto is published by The Communist Party of India . The Manifesto was published in the 1920s and 1930s .
 Second Italian War of Independence; Giuseppe Garibaldi serves as major general . V indian Mutiny Second Italian war of Independence . Second Italian Wars of Independence was first Italian war .
 “A people destined to achieve great things for the 9 gitare of humanity must one day or other be con ynstituted d nation.” “Ynstitution’s nation” is a nation that must be conjoined by a nation.
 Madagascar becomes a French protectorate, Tanganyika a German protectorate . Madagascar is a French protectorate and a German protorate of Tanganyikia .
 Young Turk Revolution v Reformist ""Young Turks"" oust Ottoman sultan, Abdul Hamid Il. Il. Young Turks . Reformist "Young Turks" oust sultan . Reformists ousted sultan; Young Turks fought for independence from Ottoman Empire . Young Turks overthrown sultan Abdul
 Food production in pre-18th-century food production was inefficient and reliant on manual labor . Mexican Revolution begins. Mexican Revolution began .
 The enclosure system was first developed in England in the 12th century . It saw the division of large, commonlyowned fields into small, privately-owned plots .
 Laborers forced from the fields by land owners thanks to a series of Enclosure Acts . Laborers were forced to leave fields by landowners thanks to the Enclosure Act .
 By the mid-17th century many farmers began to treat farming as a science . By the 17th century, farming was considered a science by many farmers .
 They adopted new winter feeding methods, which made fresh meat available year-round . The animals were able to eat fresh meat every year in the winter .
 Improved seeds in Holland and later in England yielded new varieties of fruit and vegetables . Numerous new horse-drawn threshers, cultivators, grain, and grass cutters were used in the early 1800s .
 The population had ceased to grow because agriculture could not feed the extra people . Each time this had happened before, each time the population had stopped growing because of the lack of food supply .
 By 1750 the onset of agricultural technology allowed this population growth to be sustained . The mid-18th century witnessed T a dramatic increase in world population .
 Thomas Malthus believed that this rise would eventually be halted by a shortage of food . Thomas believed that the rise in food prices would be halved by food shortages . Thomas thought that the rate of food prices was due to rise in the future .
 He had not accounted, however, for vast improvements in agricultural practice, he said .
 In 1701, Jethro Tull had developed the horse-drawn seed-drill, a machine for efficiently planting seeds . A four-year system of crop rotation dispensed with the need to replenish fields by leaving them unfarmed for a season .
 The Agricultural Revolution that began in the mid-18th century saw a massive increase in food production . Enclosure Acts allowed landowners to evict peasants from the land, and experiment with new farming techniques without the consent of peasants .
 The dramatic increase in efficiency fed a rising population, allowing it to expand further . The rise in efficiency allowed it to feed a growing population .
 It could do the work of three men, and was soon exported around the world . It could be used to do the same as three men .
 Rural scene like this one in Norfolk, England, had remained relatively unchanged for centuries . Rural scene remained relatively untouched for centuries, but changing practices changed dramatically .
 Eventually, with the introduction of steam power, horse-drawn plows became obsolete . Eventually, horse drawn plows were obsolete .
 Thomas Malthus was born into a wealthy family and enrolled at Jesus College, Cambridge, in 1784 . He was the son of a wealthy aristocratic aristocrat .
 In 1798 he published his Essay on Population, arguing that the growth in population was far outstripping that of food production . He also argued that food production was far more needed to feed the population .
 Although derided by many, he was the first to write about the economic situation of the lower classes . He was also the first person to write on the subject of the economic crisis .
 Malthus believed that if left unchecked, population would always exceed the level of food available . He believed that population could always exceed food available in the world . The population was left unchecked by population growth .
 He saw starvation and disease as ""positive checks" on population growth . He saw voluntary abstinence as a form of birth control as “preventative checks’ of other farmers.’
 In the US, the mechanical reaper, invented by Cyrus Hall McCormick in 1831, further reduced the need for farm labor . In the U.S. it was used to harvest crops and vegetables for the first time .
 Steam power invaded the countryside with the introduction of the Fowler steam plow in the 1850s . The Fowler plow was introduced in the 18th century .
 Selective breeding introduced by British agriculturalists Robert Bakewell and Thomas Coke in the 18th century .
 British scientists Joseph Gilbert and John Lawes demonstrated that plants required nitrogen and other nutrients in the mid-19th century . They improved techniques for farming crops .
 Morton seed drill of 1828 shows how seeds were passed from a hopper by grooved rollers . The Morton drill was used in the early 1800s and early 1900s in Europe .
 This gave more precise coverage of seed than spreading by hand, ensuring that more seeds fell on fertile soil . This gave the seed seed seed more coverage than spreading .
 In 1788, the first European settlers arrived in Australia, and influenced early practices in wool production . The first wool production in Australia was established in 1788 .
 A lack of wooden fences meant farmers could not keep cattle off their crops . But lack of a wooden fence meant farmers were unable to keep cattle from crops . The farmers were forced to use wooden fences to protect crops .
 The invention of barbed wire (made commercially successful by Joseph Glidden in 1874) solved this problem and transformed farming in the Midwest in the process . In 1874, Glidden invented the invention of the wire .
 Prairie grassland was hard to cultivate, but the development of farm machinery changed this situation . John Deere's sodbuster plow helped change this situation in the prairie grassland .
 As food production increased, workers moved away from agriculture, into industry . Food production increased as workers moved into agriculture .
 These crops from the Americas triggered an agricultural revolution in Africa . They triggered a revolution in the continent's agricultural revolution .
 Corn and sweet potatoes reached the western shores of Africa with slave traders, who introduced them into that continent to provide food for their human cargoes . They were introduced to Africa by slave traders .
 Equally important to this improvement was that crops could be preserved and distributed efficiently and . safely .
 New preservation techniques were invented during the 18th and 19th centuries . Although drying and salting had been used for millennia, new preservation techniques had been invented in the past .
 Nicolas Appert developed a process for preserving food in airtight bottles after sterilization . The French chef developed the process in 1795 . Appert invented the process to preserve food in bottles .
 The rights to this were bought by engineers Donkin, Hall & Gamble, who set up the world’s first canning factory in 1813 in London .
 Modern refrigeration began in the 1850s when French inventor Ferdinand Carré pioneered the vapor compression system . He pioneered the system using vapor compression systems .
 This enabled agriculture to pursue price and profit globally, rather than focus on a small, local economy . It also enabled farmers to import specialty seeds, foods, and livestock that suited their terrain. This also enabled agriculture .
 High productivity and low food prices meant people did not spend all their money on food . A period of high productivity means people spent less on food than they did in the 1970s .
 Amid this wealth, the Irish potato famine ravaged the Irish population . The potato famine struck Ireland in the 1920s and 1930s .
 The involvement of technology in food production continues in the 21st century, though not without controversy . Food production continues to be an integral part of the food industry .
 Clarence Birdseye developed advanced techniques for freezing food in the 1920s . He developed the techniques in the early 1900s . The technique was developed in the 1930s .
 The popularity of frozen food increased during World War II as it used less packaging than canning .
 As more people moved to cities, food had to be transported and stay fresh for longer . Food was transported and stayed fresh for a longer time in order to stay fresh .
 This was made possible by the introduction of additives to prevent food decay . This is made possible because additives to stop food from going to waste have been introduced .
 Since James Watson and Francis Crick broke the genetic code in 1953, the engineering of genes has been possible . Since then it has been impossible to genetically engineer food .
 In 1846, blight—a fungus that damages plants—ruined the potato crop in Europe, leading to starvation for many people in Ireland . Potato blight was a major problem for many in Ireland, where potatoes were a staple food . The potato crop was the first potato crop to be
 There was another blight in 1847, accompanied by an outbreak of typhoid . Another blight was the outbreak of a typhoid epidemic in 1846 .
 Ireland's population was decimated in this, the last peacetime famine in Western Europe . All attempts to deal with the problem failed and the famine decimated Ireland .
 By 1851, the population of Ireland had fallen from 8. million to 6. million . Ireland's population of 8.6 million was reduced to 6 million in 1851 .
 Access to cheap imports, such as cotton, silk, and wool, from its colonies gave Britain an advantage in being able to industrialize faster than the rest of Europe .
 Two key innovations made by British ironworks owners contributed to industrialization . Ironworks owners made key innovations in the early 1900s .
 Abraham Darby's use of coke (processed coal that burns at much higher temperatures) instead of charcoal reduced the cost of ironmaking, due to coke's relative abundance . First, in 1709, Darby used coke in ironmaking to reduce the cost .
 Transportation was another vital element during industrialization . Transportation was also a vital element in industrialization.
 Raw materials had to be moved to the point of manufacture, and finished goods went to cities and ports for distribution .
 Britain had a network of navigable rivers, which it enhanced by building canals . Britain added canals to its network of canals in order to increase the number of rivers .
 Bridgewater Canal, Manchester, cut in 1761, was followed by other canals that ERIDGEWATER were connected to CANAL major rivers . The Bridgewater Canal was first to be connected to the River Thames in 1763 .
 Industrialization began in Britain in the 18th century and spread across Europe and North America in the 19th century . Industrialization was first developed in the late 1800s, and spread to North America and Europe in the early 1900s .
 The steam engine powered the internal frontiers and trade barriers gave innovations, social developments, for its manufactured goods, with an revolution . An empire unhindered by continental Europe's event, rather a series of technological . Britain had an unusually large market .
 E slavery was abolished in 1807, trade with the to be the industrial pioneer . Trade with the was the first to be an industrial pioneer.
 Steam powered trains were both the product and driving force of the Industrial Revolution . Steam powered Trains, like this British one from 1908, were the product of the revolution .
 They were enabled by the growth of coal mining, and transported raw materials and goods at high speed . The coal-mining industry is now the world's largest and fastest transport network .
 In 1712 Thomas Newcomen built an ""atmospheric engine"" in which a vacuum produced by condensing steam caused atmospheric pressure to pull down a beam . The engine was created by a steam-powered steam engine in 1712 .
 Sixty years later James Watt improved its efficiency, and added modifications for driving machinery . James Watt added modifications to the vehicle to improve efficiency .
 Child labor was cheap, and in demand, as small hands could reach into machines . The revolution in the industrial revolution was the birth of the Industrial Revolution .
 Children spinning cotton in South Carolina, in 1905, have bare feet because nails on their shoes might produce a spark, causing a fire . James Watt's steam engines have remained an essential element of steam engines since .
 Watt went into business with Matthew Boulton, an entrepreneur and factory owner, in the 1770s . They manufactured steam engines to Watt's patented design . Watt's invention of the steam engines was patented in 1770 .
 These went on to power all stages of industrial production, including the mines, factories and mills . They were used to power the steamships and trains .
 The huge demand for steam resulted in both the mining of coal and its distribution via canals, and later, railroads, dramatically cut its cost . Improvements in both mining and distribution of coal dramatically cut the cost of steam .
 The use of refined coal to smelt iron further fueled industrialization by enabling engineers to build better tools and machines . Refined coal was used in the early 1900s for smelting iron and smelling iron .
 Iron was also used as a building material for bridges, ships, and railroads . Iron was used in many of the world's most famous buildings .
 There were 6,214 miles of train tracks around Britain . By 1850, about 2 million tons of iron had been used for railroad tracks . There were about 6,000 miles of tracks in Britain .
 The speed and efficiency of the railroads made the growth of the great manufacturing cities possible . By the 1840s, it had cut the cost of moving goods by up to 50 percent . The cost of shipping goods was cut by 50 percent by railroads .
 Greenwich Mean Time replaced local time across Britain . Railroad timetables were changed to standard timekeeping, with the standardized use of the new timekeeping .
 Free enterprise capitalism works on the basis that all of industry (property, business, factories, and transport) should be privately owned . Products of industry should be sold in a free market, through a system of supply and demand . With the harnessing of steam power, factories and mills no
 For this to happen, industry has to be unrestricted by government control, subsidies, or tariffs . For this, industry must be unrestricted, government control or trade restrictions .
 Growing populations in the 18th and 19th centuries provided a larger market for new products . Steady growth in wages increased buying power, helping to satisfy the laws of supply and demand .
 Textile production rapidly mechanized; by 1835 there were more than 120,000 power looms in textile mills . Textiles were mechanized by the end of the 1800s, with more than 100,000 looms in mills .
 Industrial Revolution was synonymous with appalling living and working conditions . The Industrial Revolution undoubtedly improved productivity and drove technological and economic progress . But it also became synonymous for appalling living conditions .
 An organization devoted to protecting the interests of its members, who are drawn from a specific profession or trade . Men, women, and children flocked to the cities, but with so many seeking . employment, the value of their labor was reduced .
 Opposition to industrialization came from skilled workers who had been made obsolete by mechanization .
 France’s first railroad opened as early as 1832, but subsequent development was hindered by political and financial problems . France's first railroads opened in 1832 .
 Gustave Eiffel's tower, made from 18,058 separate pieces of iron, was a sign of France's industrialization . The tower was finished in 1889 and is now located in Paris .
 American colonies had shipbuilding and iron-production industries . Some German states began to industrialize their metalworking .
 The first Continental nation to industrialize was Belgium, from 1820 onward . Belgium was the first to begin industrializing in 1820 onwards .
 By the turn of the century, both Germany and the United States had overtaken Britain’s industrial output . German industrialization accelerated after unification in 1871 .
 European industrialization was made possible not just by technology, but also by the availability of a workforce recently freed from serfdom . Industrialization in Japan, Austrian part of Habsburg Empire and, to a lesser degree, Spain and Hungary .
 Massive acceleration in industrialization, particularly in Germany and the US, which began to challenge Britain's supremacy . Germany and US began challenging Britain's dominance .
 Coal output increased almost sixfold in 50 years, from 11 million tons in 1800 to 65 million tons . Coal fueled the industrial revolution, and in Britain output increased sixfold . In 1800 to 1854, output of coal increased from 11 tons to 65 tons .
 National and international transport networks were vital to the continued momentum of the Industrial Revolution . A Trade and transportation network was vital to economic growth in Britain .
 London's Albert Dock was opened in 1880 as the second of the Royal Group of Docks . The dock was opened as a result of a decision to allow people tied for life to work on their land .
 In the US, immigrants moving to North America from Europe brought new skills and labor . In the U.S. from Europe, immigrants moved to the United States from Europe .
 In addition to transporting raw materials and finished products, they also affected the economies of industrializing nations . The transport of raw materials, finished products has affected the economy .
 Railroads have transformed the economy in recent decades . Railroads are now a major source of growth in the U.S. and Europe . They are now an important part of the economy .
 The progression from sail to steamships had an impact on global trade . Similarly, the progression from sailing to sailing had a similar impact .
 Foodstuffs and raw materials could be bought from the cheapest supplier, and the market for finished products increased . Food was bought from cheapest supplier .
 Improved communications enabled businesses to respond relatively quickly to changes in the marketplace . The invention of the telegraph and telephone helped businesses to adapt quickly .
 They were able to establish links with the farthest parts of the world which, thanks to the developments of the Industrial Revolution, had become intimately linked with their own . They were also able to . establish links . with the . farthest part of the . world .
 Steel-making was one of the key characteristics of the second phase of the Industrial Revolution . Steel--making is a key part of the industrial revolution .
 Henry Bessemer filed a patent for a means of producing mild steel by blasting cold air into molten iron in a “Bessemer Converter"" This reduced the amount of carbon in the iron, making a stronger, more versatile product used for railroad lines, shipbuilding, and
 After the first phase of the industrial revolution in Britain and the second in Belgium, Germany, and the US, economic growth was slowed by a worldwide depression . The third wave of industrial revolution was the third phase of a global depression .
 Recovery was triggered by a third wave of industrialization from the 1890s onward in countries including Russia, Sweden, France, Italy, Italy and Japan . Recovery is triggered by the third wave in industrialization .
 Third wave saw application of industrial processes to chemical and electrical engineering, car manufacture, and increasingly, armaments . First wave had centered on textiles and iron production, and the second on heavy engineering and steel .
 Bessemer invented his steel-making process after the French complained that a new artillery shell he had invented for use in the Crimean War was too powerful for their castiron cannons . He invented the process after French complained their new artillery shells were too powerful .
 The advent of steel sparked an arms race that changed the face of warfare forever . The introduction of mass-produced guns, heavy artillery, and tanks were introduced in the 1930s .
 German dominance in industrial production and weaponry toward the end of the 19th century led its neighbors to accelerate industrialization . Germany's increasingly nervous neighbors accelerated industrialization in response .
 Russia, France, and Italy all invested in arms manufacturing . Russia improved its railroad network specifically for transporting troops to defend its borders .
 Tensions over colonial was sandwiched between Prussia the number of deaths, and the size powers, although they did not consistently . Tensions continued between Britain and Austria .
 Fighting broke out of the cell turned the incident known fight on the same sides. and France . Austria plotted to almost immediately. as the Black Hole of Calcutta imio regain the province of Silesia.
 The Aix-la-Chapelle peace treaty of 1748 confirmed both Maria Theresa and her husband on their respective thrones . It left Austria weakened against the growing power of Frederick Il's Prussia, which had snatched Silesia from Austria .
 The treaty formally brought peace to Europe, it also left many issues dangerously unresolved . The treaty was signed in 1903, when it was signed by the League of Nations .
 The First Global War was the first global conflict in seven years . The major nations of Europe waged war not just on the European continent, but also on colonial possessions overseas in the Americas and Asia .
 The Seven Years War was the first approximation to a world war, and gave birth to a new, truly global empire . It was the beginning of a new global empire, with the British Empire .
 Prussia's annexing of Silesia saw it emerge as a significant figure on the European stage . It led to diplomatic overtures from Britain and France, leading to diplomatic relations .
 Alongside the war in Europe, Britain and France continued their colonial rivalry overseas .
 Britain captured Louisbourg on Cape Breton Island in Canada from the French in 1745, only to lose Madras in India to France the next year .
 The Treaty of Aix-laChapelle returned both gains to their original owners, but the conflict remained intense . The treaty was signed by Napoleon III in 1883 .
 He believed in absolute power, but generally used it for the good of his subjects . He established religious toleration, abolishing torture as an instrument of state power, and freeing slaves .
 Prussia was a ruthless figure on the European stage and a brilliant military commander . He raised Prussia to the first rank of European powers .
 Russians at Zorndorf, Prussia, in August 1758 . AUSTRIAN EMPRESS MARIA THERESA, SPEAKING of FREDERICK II, in 1757 .
 In India, British general Robert Clive defeated the Nawab of Bengal at Plassey in June 1757 . The British navy routed the French off the Indian coast in 1758—59 .
 Wolfe turned the tide for the British, capturing Louisbourg in 1758, and defeating Montcalm in Quebec in 1759 . Wolfe captured the capital of French North America in Quebec, Quebec . Wolfe's victory in Quebec was the turning point of the American Revolution .
 In Europe, an Anglo-German army defeated the French in Hanover, while the French navy was crushed off the coast of Brittany . In France, the French army was defeated by the Germans and the French Navy was crushed .
 The seizure of French Montreal in 1760, and Pondicherry, in India, in 1761 effectively marked the end of the war . Despite the entry of Spain on the French side, the war was not over until 1761 . Spain entered into the French-French war in 17
 With the succession in 1762 of the pro-Prussian Peter M in Russia, all nations were ready for peace . Russia's pro-Russian Peter M was the son of a pro-German prince .
 The 1763 Treaty of Paris saw Britain take French North America, and all French lands east of the Mississippi . Britain also took every French fort in India, and parts of the Caribbean .
 Spain gave Florida to Britain, but received French lands west of the Mississippi in return . Spain gave the land to Britain in return for its return of land .
 With the French excluded from North America and India, Britain now controlled a massive colonial and trading empire . With the loss of India and North America, Britain controlled a colonial empire .
 Frederick Il of Prussia followed up his decisive defeats of the French and Austrians in 1757 with an equally impressive victory over the Russians at Zorndorf in western Poland on August 25, 1758 . Frederick's victory was a repeat of the success of the Battle of Zor
 The end of French power in India left Britain without a rival in its conquest of the entire subcontinent . The birth of the British Raj was the end of the French rule in India .
 Squashed between Prussia, Austria, and Russia, Poland was divided by the three powers after 1772 . Poland was ruled by Russia, Prussia and Austria .
 In 1795, it was absorbed piecemeal by Russia, Prussia, and Austria, and did not reappear until 1918 . It was absorbed by Russia and Prussia and disappeared in 1918 .
 Britain was ceded French territory in North America during the Anglo-French wars but the cost was high . The British felt the colonials had failed to pay their share in the war .
 Until the 18th century, British North America was subject to English law . British North American law was based on British law .
 Settlers thought the new laws passed after 1763 to raise money BOSTON TEA PARTY for the British extremely irksome . Settlers believed the laws passed in 1763 were passed because they wanted to help raise money .
 In 1773 a group of Bostonians disguised as American Indians threw a cargo of highly taxed EIC tea into Boston Harbor . The tea was smuggled into the harbor .
 Intended to restore order, instead they united the colonies in further protest . Intended . Instead they united . Instead of restoring order, the colonies united .
 Fiery leaders began to emerge in response to the actions of the British government . They cried out that the government's actions were illegal and stirred the colonists to take further action . The colonists began taking action against the government .
 General Thomas Gage, commander of British forces in North America, dispatched troops to seize an arms cache in Concord, a town just outside Boston . The arms cache was seized on April 19, 1775 .
 When the British made it back to Boston, they were besieged by militias, and had to wait there for reinforcements . The British were forced to wait for reinforcements in Boston .
 On June 15, 1775, George Washington became commander of the new Continental army . George Washington took command of the Continental Army in 1775 .
 He immediately began turning the militias into a more professional fighting force, he says . The militias are now a professional force .
 News of the revolts had spread, and the colonists’ cause was rapidly gaining momentum . However, news of the revolt had spread and the revolt was quickly spreading .
 The Declaration of Independence was signed by the U.S. colonies on July 4, 1776 . It was the first act of independence from Britain .
 The Articles of Confederation Adopted by Congress in 1777, this was the first governing document, or constitution, of the United States . It was ratified by all thirteen states in 1781 . The declaration stated that “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness were the
 Until the end of the 18th century, Europe and its colonies were dominated by monarchies . The American Declaration of Independence was published in 1776 . The Declaration was published by the U.S. House of Representatives in New York .
 The American Declaration of Independence undermined the old order and proclaimed a new republic in which people would be free to govern themselves . Gage decided to capture hill positions that overlooked Boston .
 The signing of the Declaration of Independence was a momentous event, and made a peaceful settlement with the British much less likely . It made a peace settlement with Britain less likely.
 Washington had won important battles in what is now New Jersey in 1776 . Jefferson was the third president of the United States .
 Jefferson was chosen as the principal drafter of the Declaration of Independence at the age of 33 . Jefferson was an intellectually outstanding figure of the period . He was chosen by the president of the nation to write the Declaration .
 He served as governor of Virginia during the American Revolution . He was the first United States secretary of state . He became the first president of the United States .
 On March 2, 1776, with a force of over 17,000 men and a buildup of artillery stocks, the Americans began bombarding the blockaded British troops in Boston .
 It was a major turning point—the Americans were no longer fighting alone . The U.S. no longer fought alone, it was a turning point .
 Lord Cornwallis was forced to surrender at Yorktown, Virginia, after an 18-day siege . He surrendered after 18 days of siege .
 Painting by John Trumbull depicts committee of five who drafted the Declaration of Independence, presenting it to Congress on July 4, 1776 . The British prime minister at the time, Lord North, broke down and sobbed when he heard the news .
 Loyalists were allowed to remain, but about 2 percent opted to emigrate to Canada and the Caribbean . About 2 percent of Loyalists emigrated to Canada or the Caribbean after the British withdrew .
 The British government gave the Americans their independence in return for a trade agreement that would benefit both sides . The deal was part of a trade deal between Britain and the United States .
 Treaty of Paris, signed in 1783, gave the Americans western border on the Mississippi . It gave them control of the Old North West, an area extending from the Ohio and Mississippi rivers to the Great Lakes .
 Conflicts over the issue of slavery threatened to divide the nation . The new republic had great political hopes, which they set out in the 1781 Articles of Confederation, and the Constitution of June 21, 1788 .
 Hand-sewn flag has 13 stars and 13 stripes, to commemorate the 13 original colonies that rebelled against the British . George Washington was elected as the first president in 1789, giving the federal a, A Stars and Stripes .
 Congress was to consist of two chambers, the Senate and the House of Representatives . The Senate was to be made up of two senators and two houses . The House was to have two chambers and two chambers .
 The Supreme Court was set up to interpret laws and safeguard the Constitution . The Constitution stated that all men were born equal, and had an equal voice in government . In addition, the Supreme Court had a role in interpreting laws .
 French territories were incorporated into the United States, but the growing northsouth divide eventually led to civil war . American independence was declared in 1777 .
 The new nation quickly expanded to the south and west . The nation expanded further to the west .
 Ohio became a state in 1803, Indiana in 1816, Illinois in 1818, and Alabama in 1819 . The state of Alabama was created in 1820 .
 Fought under the motto ""free trade and sailor's rights,"" the War of 1812 against Britain was a result of British maritime policies during the Anglo-French wars . American sallors were seized and forced into the British navy .
 President James Madison saw the war as a way to strengthen republicanism . James Madison believed it could secure possession of Canada as a bargaining chip against Great Britain .
 Three attempts were made to invade Canada, all of them ended in failure . Three attempts to invade the country were unsuccessful .
 The war was the first step in establishing the U.S. as a serious, and permanent, presence in international politics . It was also the start of establishing the United States as a permanent, and serious, presence .
 For years, slaves were used on southern plantations, but in the north slave labor was forbidden . In the north, slave labor is forbidden in the south .
 The war ended in 1865 with victory for the Union, but it led to economic disruption . The war in 1865 led to an economic downturn .
 Abraham Lincoln was assassinated in the month the war ended . Slavery was abolished, but Abraham Lincoln died in the same month as the war .
 The storming of the Bastille prison on July 14, 1789 symbolized the collapse of royal power in the face of widespread popular dissent . Many different factors caused this revolution, but the one event that symbolized it symbolized its collapse was the storming .
 The Bastille was built between 1370 and 1383 as part of the walled defenses of Paris . It first became a prison for high-ranking state prisoners during the early 17th century .
 It was used as an arsenal, storing large quantities of gunpowder and arms . It also served as a store for gunpowder, arms and ammunition .
 In 1789 the prison was defended by 18 cannons and 12 smaller artillery pieces manned by a regular garrison of 82 invalides . The prison was reinforced by 32 grenadiers from a Swiss mercenary regiment summoned to Paris by the king .
 Rumors spread through Paris that troops were marching on the city to crush dissent against the king . On July 14, rumors spread that troops would be marching on Paris to stop dissent against king .
 At around 10:30m. the first of two delegations met the governor of the Bastille, Bernard-René de Launay, asking him to distribute its weapons to the crowd . The Bastille is the capital of France .
 By 1:30m., the crowd had lost patience, and surged into the undefended outer courtyard . By 1.30m, the crowd was losing patience and surging into the outer courtyard, police say .
 At around 3m., a detachment of 62 mutinous Gardes Françaises arrived at the prison armed with two cannons . The cannons were placed in front of the gates leading to the inner courtyard .
 As fighting intensified, de Launay threatened to blow up the fortress . But the soldiers within the garrison surrendered, forcing him to open the gates . The fortress was destroyed by the French troops .
 The governor was led away to the Hôtel de Ville, the town hall, where he was stabbed to death, along with at least two defenders . He was stabbed in the head and head of the town's defense .
 One defender and 98 attackers died in the actual fighting, with another 73 attackers wounded . Another 73 attackers were wounded in the fighting .
 The news of the fall of the Bastille spread quickly across France, prompting uprisings in many cities . The fall of France's Bastille was the first to fall in France .
 In reality, the prison was an almost empty symbol of royal tyranny . It held a mere seven prisoners . But the storming did signify that power had now passed from those who discussed political change to those who took direct action .
 One of the first victims of the storming of the Bastille was its governor, Bernard-René de Launay, who was killed by soldiers .
 His head was stuck on a spike and paraded through the streets of Paris . He was paraded around the world parading his head on the streets .
 A century of foreign wars had left the country with huge debts and threatened bankruptcy . The country's debts had left it with huge debt and threatened bankruptcies .
 Its effect was to put financial reform at the top of the political agenda . It was the first time financial reform was put on the political front foot of the agenda .
 Nearly 40 percent of land was owned by the nobles and clergy who made up less than 3 percent of the population and were exempt from taxes . The tax burden on the bourgeoisie and peasantry was placed on the peasants and peasants .
 Bad harvests almost doubled the price of bread, worsening social tensions . Food shortages have almost doubled bread prices in recent years . The world's worst food prices have been in the past decade .
 The majority third estate insisted on greater voting rights, and when these were refused, broke away to form the National Assembly . They invited sympathetic nobles and clergy to join them, inviting sympathetic nobles to join .
 Louis XVT's dismissal of Jacques Necker, the popular finance minister, on July 11, provoked agitation in Paris for arms amid rumors of a royal clampdown .
 Several days of rioting ended with the capture of the Bastille prison symbolizing an important blow against the oppressive forces of the ancien régime, while placing Paris and mob violence at the center of events .
 The revolt spread to the countryside, where wild rumors resulted in the ‘Great Fear,’ in which peasants attacked their landlords, burning their chateaux . The revolt started in France, and the revolt spread across the countryside .
 On October 5, Parisian women, frustrated by bread shortages and the king's indecision, marched to Versailles to force his move to Paris . The king could be more closely monitored in Paris, where he could be monitored .
 Between 1789-9], the National Assembly passed a series of reforms that further undermined the ancien régime . The reforms were passed between 1789 and 1789, when the French Revolution was overthrown .
 These included publishing the ""Declaration of the Rights of Man,"" reforming the army, dividing France into 83 départements, selling off the Church's land, and forcing clergy to take a civic oath to the state .
 This last measure split the Church, alienating the conservative peasantry and sowing the seeds of future counterrevolution . The Church split the Catholic Church and the peasantry, splitting the Catholic Party .
 A new constitution showed the National Assembly's distrust of the masses by dividing the population into active and passive citizens . The constitution showed a new constitution was designed to show the people's distrust .
 This period also saw the growth of political clubs, such as the Cordeliers and Jacobins, that tried to exert pressure on the Assembly . This period was also the period of the French Revolution .
 The Jacobins were the first real political ‘party,’ with clubs dotted throughout France . Jacobins became the first political party to form a real political party .
 In June 1791, the king attempted to flee abroad, but was captured at Varennes, east of Paris, by a postmaster . The king was captured by a Parisian postmaster in 1791 . He is believed to be the only monarch to be captured in France .
 This marked a key turning point, for it lost the king his people's trust . This marked the king's failure to win the trust of his people, he says .
 Between 1789 and 1795, the French Revolution resulted in major social and political upheavals . In April 1792, a new Assembly declared war on Austria and Prussia, hoping to distract attention from the revolution .
 July 9, 1789 Formation of the National Constituent Assembly, which becomes the effective government of France . The assembly was formed in response to France's domestic problems .
 While saluting the revolution with one hand, the king plotted with the other, hoping that French defeat would restore his fortunes . The king plotted to defeat the French with the help of the revolution .
 A Prussian manifesto that threatened the French people if any harm came to Louis inflamed the Parisian radicals, who stormed the Tuileries on August 20, deposing the king . The Tuilerie was the site of the September 18th uprising .
 At the same time, a revolutionary Commune took control of the city and encouraged the massacre of 1,200 ‘counterrevolutionary’ prisoners, provoking international horror . At the time, the city was under attack by the Commune, which took control .
 A third, more radical Assembly was elected in September . A crucial victory at the battle of Valmy on September 20 helped to restore national confidence . A third more radical assembly was elected .
 Queen Marie Antoinette was guillotined on October 16, 1793 . Few mourned when she was executed .
 Deeply unpopular, she was found guilty of treason by the Revolutionary Tribunal . The Revolutionary Tribunal found her guilty of murder .
 July 12, 1790 Civil Constitution of the Clergy brings the Church under state control, following confiscation of their land . The Church's land was confiscated by the state .
 The professional political clubs, most notably the Jacobins and the Cordeliers, increase in influence . July 1790: The Jacobins, the Cordels, and the French Revolution .
 September 20, 1792 National Convention instituted; France is declared a Republic the following day . France was declared a republic the next day . 1792
 In January 1793, the king was found guilty of “the crime of being a king” and through Europe more threatened the nation . France became more militarized in response to the king's conviction .
 It relied on conscription and revolutionary zeal for its citizen armies . It fought a series of revolutionary wars that were bankrolled by loot from newly “liberated” countries .
 The French Revolution's most lasting legacy was its Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen . The Declaration was published on August 26, 1789 .
 This bold document stated that all men are born and remain free and with equal rights . The duty of government was to preserve these ""natural and inviolate rights... liberty, property, security and resistance to oppression" through a constitution .
 The UN's Universal Declaration of Human Rights was published in 1948 . It was the basis for the constitutions of many countries as well as the UN . The Declaration was originally neglected by women's rights .
 August 10, 1792 Storming of the Tuileries and imprisonment of the royal family guillotined, sending shockwaves Foreign invasion once deposes the Girondins .
 July 27, 1794 Robespierre and 21 supporters are overthrown and guillotined, leading to an anti-Jacobin backlash . revolt . revolt led to the death of 21 supporters . revolt. revolt .
 Faced with mounting military and economic problems, the government founded the Revolutionary Tribunal, to provide instant justice . The Committee for Public Safety was to centralize power .
 Increasing conflict within the Convention culminated with the expulsion of a faction known as the Girondins on June 2, and the rise of the Jacobins . The Jacobins were expelled from the Convention in June 18th, 18th and 17th .
 Under Robespierre's leadership, the Jacobins aimed to create a new “Republic of Virtue . The Jacobins and the ""Terror"" were created by the French Revolution in France in 1867 .
 Terror was made “the order of the day” and “war” declared on those suspected of counterrevolutionary sympathies, creating an oppressive climate of informers and instant justice . On September 3, 1793 terror was made "the order the day" and �
 In 10 months, 20,000 ‘enemies of the revolution’ were executed across France . In 10 years of the French revolution, 20.000 “enemies” were executed .
 A decisive military victory over Austria in June 1794 eased the pressure, but there was no letup in the daily flow of victims to the guillotine . The French Revolution was declared France's first French Revolution in 1794 .
 Robespierre and his supporters were finally toppled by fearful fellow deputies . This was followed by an antiJacobin backlash (the ‘White Terror’) and a return to more moderate policies . Robesierre and supporters were toppled by . fellow deputies, and this was . followed
 Radical tensions pulled France in both directions and two elections were annulled . Royalist—radical tensions pulled both France and Royalist-Radical tensions .
 The success of the French Revolution, and its spirit of “liberty, equality, fraternity,” helped to inspire wars of independence far beyond Europe . The French Revolution was inspired by the spirit of liberty, equality and fraternity .
 While the revolution failed in some ways, the legacy of popular insurrection established a radical tradition in Paris that continues today . The legacy of the revolution continues to be a radical legacy in Paris .
 In 1871, there was a shortlived and bloody Paris Commune based on the one from 1792 . The Commune was the first of its kind in France .
 Napoleon Bonaparte was born Napoleone Buonaparte, a member of a poor Corsican noble family of Italian origin . He was the future French emperor was born in Corsican and Italian .
 Corsica became a part of France in 1768, the year before Napoleon's birth . Corsica was a wild island of bandits and vendettas, but became a French colony in 1868 .
 Napoleon learned French at school so he could attend the military school at Brienne-le-Cháteau in France . Napoleon always spoke with a strong Italian accent . Napoleon was nine years old .
 Carve up Drawn in 1805, this caricature by the cartoonist James Gillray demonstrates the greed of great powers . It was created by the Royal Military School in Paris in 1784 .
 Napoleon seizing a slice of Furope while Britain takes most of the rest . notably strong in math, geography, and science . William Pitt the younger is the British prime minister .
 He was commissioned as a sublieutenant of artillery at the age of just 16 . He is now a member of the Royal Household of Warriens .
 Napoleon was elected as head of his family after his father died in 1785 . Napoleon was not the eldest son of his father, but was elected head of the family . Napoleon became head of Napoleon's family in 1783 .
 Corsica remained the focus of his life for some years, to the neglect of his army career . Corsica was the focus for his life in the 1960s .
 Napoleon shifted his ambitions to France after his family left the island in 1793 because of his pro-French views . Napoleon was born in France in 1881 .
 Napoleon carefully controlled his public image, employing only the finest portrait artists of the day to present his desired view of himself to the people . Appointed a brigadier-general by the Jacobins, a prominent political club of Peacemaker . Napoleon signed the Treaty of Mortefontaine
 The Civil Code was drawn up on Napoleon's orders between 1800 and 1804 . Napoleon's Civil Code is often regarded as his most enduring legacy . Napoleon was born in France in 1803 .
 Napoleon's code broadly upheld the rights and freedom of conscience established by the French Revolution . Napoleon ruled over Napoleon's rule of law in France .
 Napoleon was made head of the Army of Italy in March 1796 . Once Napoleon was head of Italy, there was no looking back to the French Revolution .
 Reviving a moribund force, he had a spectacular series of victories, including defeat of the Papal army, that made him a French hero . Reviving the French army, he was made a hero .
 Napoleon was not content with being recognized as a superb general, he said . Napoleon was known as the most powerful general in the world . Napoleon died in 1877 at the age of 13 .
 Brought in as the litary muscle to back a political leading role in government . First ""Gonsul" and from there to absolute imperial power in 1804 . Became the first ""Gonul" in 1803 .
 Marshall Ney inspired the rearguard of the Grande Armée to resist the Russian cossacks . The French withdrew from Russia in 1812, and the French were forced to retreat .
 Napoleon spent almost the entirety of his years in power at war . Napoleon genuinely desired peace on his own terms, but spent most of his time in power on war .
 "He demonstrated his military genius time and again, maneuvering large-scale armies quickly to engage the enemy in decisive battle with maximum application of force," he said .
 It was a style of warfare that often required his men to sustain heavy casualties in the pursuit of victory . It was often a style that often involved sustaining heavy casualties .
 He was popular with the soldiers and his presence on the battlefield always heartened them . Nevertheless, he was popular among the soldiers .
 He knew how to use titles and decorations to reward and inspire effort . He instituted the Légion d'honneur, which he instituted, in France .
 He was often dishonest, lying in battlefield dispatches to aggrandize his own role . "He lied in his dispatches," he said. "He was sometimes dishonest. He lied to the enemy to gain his own glory."
 By the time he invaded Russia in 1812, his grasp of the realities of power had begun to waver . His grasp of power was beginning to wane .
 To the last, he devoted himself to the service of his self-image, Ee writing his memoirs in E 4 captivity . Ee wrote the memoirs while in captivity .
 He left a EM legend, but not the imperial dynasty that he had hoped to found . He left behind a legacy but not an imperial dynasty .
 Horace Vernet depicted the dead Napoleon crowned with laurel leaves, as a Roman emperor would have been, and with Christ-like features . The dead Napoleon was crowned with leaves and laurels .
 September 1785 Commissioned as a sublieutenant in the artillery after a year at the Royal Military School in Paris . Commissioned in 1785 .
 August 10, 1794 . Briefly arrested because of his links with the Jacobins, a radical political group . Arrested in 1794 because he was associated with the radical group .
 March 1796-April 1797 . As commander of the Army of Italy, he claims a series of victories over Austria, and Piedmont in Italy .
 May 1798-August 1799 led Army of the Orient to invade Egypt and Palestine . The invasion was the first of its kind in Egypt, Palestine .
 December 2, 1804 Crowns himself Emperor of France in Notre Dame Cathedral, Paris . Crowned himself Emperor in 1804 .
 December 2, 1805 Defeats the Austrian and Russian armies at Austerlitz . The Austrian, Russian armies defeated the Russian and Austrian armies .
 Napoleon defeated Prussia at the twin battles of Jena and Auerstadt in 1806 . Napoleon's victory over Prussia was a major success for the French .
 July 15, 1809 Marriage to Josephine annulled; marries Austrian Archduchess Marie Louise in March the following year .
 Napoleon's son was styled by Napoleon as the King of Rome . March 20, 1811, was born in Rome . His son was born by Napoleon .
 April 6, 1814 Abdicates after Paris is occupied by the Allies . He is exiled to the Mediterranean island of Elba .
 British and Prussian armies defeated at Waterloo in Belgium in 1815 . Defeated at Waterloo by the British and German armies .
 The change of government occurred during a series of wars in Europe and beyond . The change in government occurred in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The French Revolutionary Wars were initially fought to protect French borders from other European powers . The French Revolution was first fought in France to protect its borders from European rivals .
 Napoleon was tainted by association with the Jacobins after Robespierre's fall . He was welcomed as a hero on his return to Paris in 1797 . Napoleon crushed the last popular revolt in Paris and then conducted a brilliant military campaign .
 He banned democracy, and set up a network of police spies responsible for censorship and for arresting his political opponents . He also banned democracy and used police spies to spy on political opponents and journalists .
 Napoleon was able to harness widespread support for his own dynastic ambitions in 1800 . Napoleon's assassination attempt was an assassination attempt in 1800, but he survived it . Napoleon wanted to establish himself as the French leader .
 In 1804 Napoleon crowned himself “first Emperor of the French” in a ceremony overseen by the Pope, thereby sanctifying his position . Napoleon was crowned Emperor of France in 1804 . Napoleon is the son of Napoleon III .
 Napoleon’s armies took on seven different coalition armies between 1805 and 1815 . The Napoleonic Wars powers were made up of various European powers . Napoleon took on the coalition forces during the war .
 He won his most notable victories in 1805 at Austerlitz in the modern Czech Republic . In 1806 at Jena in Germany against the Prussians; and in 1807 at Friedland against the Russians, forcing them to sue for peace .
 In the French West Indies, sugar plantations were disrupted by slave revolts and foreign invasion . SaintDomingue was the only one to gain independence in 1804 .
 In 1806, the Confederation of the Rhine unified the small German states, such as Bavaria and Saxony, into kingdoms allied to France . Bavaria was one of the smallest German states to have been unified in 1806 .
 Napoleon's armies conquered most of western Europe in a series of notable victories . Napoleon's empire with 44 million French subjects was created in 1805 and 1815 .
 His plans to invade England were thwarted by naval defeat at Trafalgar . However, his obsession with conquest led him to a disastrous campaign in Russia .
 Napoleon was finally brought down at Waterloo at Waterloo in 1815 . Napoleon was defeated by the French at the end of the 18th century .
 Napoleon wanted to restore the Roman Empire by mastering Italy and conquering Britain . Napoleon was obsessed with restoring the Roman empire . Napoleon, however, wanted to conquer Italy and conquer Britain .
 The destruction of two French fleets by English admiral Horatio Nelson at Aboukir Bay, Egypt, in 1798, and Trafalgar off the coast of Spain in 1805 scuppered Napoleon's plans for invading Britain .
 It caused unnecessary wars against Portugal and Russia , creating two simultaneous fronts and provoking his most disastrous defeats . It created unnecessary wars .
 The humiliating retreat from Moscow in 1812, when he lost more than half a million men, was epitomized by the humiliating retreat . These were epitomised by the humiliation of the Crimean War, when more than 500,000 died .
 These campaigns left him vulnerable to a legacy of European resentments and military exhaustion following his defeat at Leipzig in 1813 .
 In 1805 and 1812 he raised two vast armies, known as ""grandes armées,"" from across his empire to fight in his Austrian and Russian campaigns .
 Around a million soldiers died in creating Napoleon's empire . It is estimated that around a million died during Napoleon's reign in France .
 Wellington's Allied army Wt { 3 of British, Dutch, Belgians, ih E bz 1 and Germans . Wt. 3 of the Allied army was British .
 Napoleon's resignation in 1814, Europe's rulers met at the Congress of Vienna to carve out a new balance of power . Napoleon's 1825 Venic is the name of the Venic Islands .
 Most of the hereditary monarchies overthrown by Napoleon were restored, allowing 50 more years of reactionary rule . Most of Europe's monarchies were restored by Napoleon allowing them to continue to rule .
 Napoleon fall paved the way for Britain to become the world's leading imperial power . Napoleon's fall paved way for the British Empire to become world's most powerful .
 Wilberforce was born into a well-to-do Yorkshire family . He grew up in an age when institution of slavery was considered socially acceptable .
 He was brought up by an uncle who introduced him to Methodism, an offshoot of the Church of England . He attended Hull Grammar School, in northern England, and from 1768 .
 Before graduating he decided on a career in politics and fell in with William Pitt the Younger, later British prime minister .
 Between 1784-85, Wilberforce began a period of intense religious reflection . An evangelical parliamentarian, he was a member of the British Parliament .
 Mary Woolnoth, London, became an antislavery campaigner thanks to his early experiences as a slave ship master . She was a former sailor who became a campaigner after her experiences .
 Wilberforce became a fervent supporter of evangelical Christianity . He joined the “Clapham Saints"" under John Venn . Wilberforces was a fervor supporter of the evangelical religion .
 Wilberforce enrolled as an undergraduate at St. John's College, Cambridge, in 1776 . He was at the college where he studied at the time .
 William Pitt the Younger inspired Wilberforce to enter politics . He was later prime minister of the British Empire . Pitt was the first British prime minister to become prime minister .
 House of Commons (elected house of Commons) committed to God, and eager to target immorality and vice . British Parliament is committed to religion .
 In 1787 he moved to Bath, in western England, where his interest first arose in championing the cause of black African slaves . Contrary to popular accounts he was not a founder member of the London Committee for the Abolition of the Slave Trade .
 His ideal of Christian charity did not always extend to his rivals . He snubbed the real workhorse of the abolition movement, Thomas Clarkson, almost until the end of his life .
 In spring of 1791, Wilberforce urged the parliament to completely abolish the slave trade . The confrontation immediately failed .
 Wilberforce doggedly pursued the dream of a total abolition bill each year from 1795-1799 . The bill was regularly thrown out by the powerful West Indies lobby, representing those with financial interests in the region .
 Pitt's government fell early in 1801, replaced by that of Henry Addington . Pitt’s government was replaced by Addington, who was in charge of the Treasury .
 William Pitt the Younger, the British prime minister, addressed the House of Commons in 1793, about a year after the failure of a pivotal antislavery debate . By January 1802, however, Wilberforce had become seriously disillusioned, .
 Wilberforce's biographers claim that the ‘abolition business’ had again become his chief care . Yet he only attended three meetings of the Abolition Society that year, and a further three in 1805 . Pitt was returned to power in 1804, but only attended
 A Whig government under Addington was returned, and in 1807 the antislavery trade bill was trundled out again . The bill was passed by Addington's government in 1808 .
 Lord Howick delivered the main motion, dispensing with rhetorical flourishes and presenting hard economic facts . The abolition of slavery in Britain was abolished by the British Parliament in 1903 .
 The House of Lords was won over and passed the Trade Abolition Bill on March 23, 1807 . The bill was passed in 1807 by the Lords of Lords .
 Withdrawing from public life Wilberforce increasingly claimed bouts of malaise that prevented him from attending debates that he guessed were likely to prove unpopular . He withdrew from public work in 1847 and died in 1842 .
 He began to question if he should resign his seat in Parliament . On September 8, 1812, he declared his intention to step down . He declared his resignation on September 8th 1812 .
 A kneeling and chained African man, whose image was identified with the antislavery movement, is a symbol of suffering . A sculpture of a kneeling African man was identified as an image of an enslaved man .
 When debate was launched in earnest in 1823, he became a virtual bystander in the House of Commons . He was also in the recently formed Anti-Slavery Society .
 Born in what is now Nigeria, Equiano wrote an influential autobiography, which was published in 1789 . Equiano detailed his life as a slave .
 Gustavus Vassa was captured in West Africa at age 11 . He was shipped to Barbados, and then to Virginia, where a Royal Navy officer bought him . Gustavus was named Gustavus after the Swedish king . He died in 1918 .
 Sold again, he was taken to Montserrat, in the Caribbean, where he bought his freedom . He was sold again, sold again and taken to the island of Montserrrat .
 He moved to London in 1786 and became involved in the abolition movement . He became involved with the abolitionist movement .
 In July 1828 he wrote scathingly to the new emancipation champion, Fowell Buxton, about the Duke of Wellington's pro-slavery position . Yet he still took no more active involvement other than the symbolic chairing of an Anti-Slavery Society meeting in 1830
 Born in Hull, the third of the four children of Robert and Elizabeth Wilberforce . Born August 24, 1759, was born in Hull .
 He joins the ""Clapham Saints"" and becomes a fervent evangelical Christian . He becomes an evangelical Christian and joins the Clapham Church .
 London Committee for Abolition of the Slave Trade founded by Thomas Clarkson and others . May 22, 1787 The London Committee was founded by Clarkson and Clarkson .
 October 30, 1787, Wilberforce makes his first contact with the London Committee . October 30 is the date of the first meeting of the London committee .
 April 19, 1791 Opts for confrontation and brings a full abolition motion before the House of Commons against advice . 1791
 May 30, 1797, Marries Barbara Ann Spooner, a landowner's daughter, after a two-week courtship .
 March 23, 1807 Bill against the slave trade carries in the House of Lords after a successful motion, presented by Lord Howick and Sir Samuel Romilly . Bill against slave trade was passed by the Lords in London .
 March 18, 1823 presents radical petition in the Commons on behalf of the dissident Society of Friends for abolition in all British Dominions . March 1823 Presents radical petition .
 June 11, 1823 Wilberforce gives his last speech in the House of Commons . The speech was his last in Parliament .
 State funeral held for Wilberforce in Westminster Abbey in 1833 . August 3, 1833 State funeral was held for the Duke of Cambridge .
 In 1783 Britain returned Florida to Spain, which also controlled the Louisiana Territory . Florida was returned to Spain in 1783 .
 The 1787 Northwest Ordinance allowed the formation of up to five new states to the northwest of the United States . Land ceded by various states was ceded to the U.S. government .
 12 American Indian nations were persuaded to sign the Treaty of Greenville, giving land to the U.S. In 1795, 12 American Indians signed the treaty . The treaty was signed in 1795 by the United States .
 On May 10, 1869 at Promontory Point, Utah, a grand ceremony marked the opening of the first railroad to cross America .
 Leland Stanford swung a silver hammer at a golden spike, a bolt made of gold, to symbolically join the tracks . Stanford was president of the Central Pacific Railroad . Stanford: "It's a good thing to say goodbye to the railroad. It's a bad time for the railroad
 Envoys from the Union Pacific Railroad also took a turn at hammering it home . Envoyes from the U.P. Railroad also visited the site .
 This buffalo skull was painted by the Blackfoot k cau A Tah P nation for their ceremonial -""T ; i LA mercem 2 Sun Dance"
 The rights of ""o m i —— . such American Indian nations a i Ta were usually swept aside by settlers and the U.S. government . The rights were often swept aside .
 Settlers, such as this family, traveled west across the Great Plains, often in large convoys for safety . Settlers often traveled in convoys to safety for safety, often with large groups of people .
 The United States quickly expanded westward to the Mississippi River and beyond . The wagons carried all their worldly goods, plus tools for farming and building .
 The land between the Appalachians and the Mississippi was ceded by the British at independence . The land is between Appalachians, the Mississippi .
 President Jefferson sent Meriwether Lewis, his secretary, and William Clark to explore this practically unknown area . In May 1804, President Jefferson was in the midst of an invasion .
 The independent United States of America that emerged in 1783 was, in reality, the United East Coast . The independent U.S. of America emerged from 1783 to 1783, but was actually the East Coast of the United States .
 In the century that followed independence, the frontier was pushed west across the continent . American dominion stretched from ocean to ocean .
 The route was hard, but having been displaced by the discovery they met friendly Indians and returned of gold in their home in Georgia .
 The discovery of gold in the | Te Waprcen, Fast Saint and ceri packet 1842 confirmed the northeast border Lower Sacramento Valley in Maine . Another agreement in - the . discovery of . gold in . the . northeast border of Lower Sacramento . Valley in . Maine confirmed the
 Florida was acquired from Spain between 1813 and X prospectors west to 1819 . To the south, Florida was in December 1848 lured from Spain .
 In 1846, Oregon Country was split with the British, again along the 49th parallel, providing a Pacific frontier . The split was part of the Oregon frontier .
 U.S. annexation of Mexico in 1845 led to war with Mexico, bringing California, Nevada, Utah, Arizona, and New Mexico into the nation in 1848 .
 The Gadsden Purchase from Mexico in 1853 provided the land for the South Pacific Railroad to California . So confirmed the southern border of the U.S.
 With the purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867, the U.S. completed its continental growth . Alaska was the first state to be purchased by the United States from Russia .
 As politics and war settled the frontiers, countless intrepid migrants settled the land . Land of opportunity as a place of opportunity for migrants .
 3 years after the opening of the Oregon Trail through the Rockies in 1841, 5,000 settlers a year were making the journey . The Oregon Trail was opened three years after it was opened, and settlers were making it a year a year on the trail .
 72,000 people flocked to Nebraska in four years to build houses of earth, and live off the soil . Nebraska had been described by an army expedition in 1820, as . as . "wholly unfit for farming,"" yet 72,00 flocked .
 The completion of a transcontinental railroad in 1869, and three more by 1883, further opened up the west . The completion . of the . completion of the transcontinental . railroad in . 1869 , and three . more by . 1883 .
 The railroads brought z ""E.E. new settlers west and also helped farmers already there, as cattle and grain could be transported easily to cities back in the east . Railroads brought new settlers to the west and helped farmers .
 The massacre of the Sioux ghost dancers at Wounded Knee on December 29, 1390 ended the wars with the American Indians . The massacre ended the American Indian Wars with the Sioux .
 Like these children, all were given a health check before being allowed to enter . All were given health checks before being given access to the hospital .
 There were many opportunities to purchase or otherwise take control of land beyond its shores . There were also opportunities to buy or otherwise control land beyond the shores .
 Alaska was bought from Russia from Russia in 1867 . Hawaii, Midway Island, and Wake Island were annexed in 1898 . Wake Island was annexed in 1896 .
 War with Spain precipitated by sinking of battleship USS Maine off coast of Cuba in 1898 . Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines under American control .
 The following year, the U.S. acquired Samoa as a naval base and refueling station for ships trading with Asia . Samoa was acquired by the United States in 1903 .
 In 1917, the Virgin Islands were purchased from Denmark to protect Caribbean sea routes . They were purchased to protect the Caribbean from other countries .
 The United States has given up some of its empire . The U.S. has also given up control of some of the world's most powerful powers .
 Three former Japanese island groups in the western Pacific became independent in 1994-96 . The Philippines gained independence in 1946, while three former Japanese islands became independent .
 Panama Canal Zone, American since 1903, returned to Panama in 1999 . Canal Zone returned to Canal Zone in 1999; Canal Zone is now Canal Zone of Panama . Canal zone returned to Panamanian nation in 1999 after Canal was returned to canal zone .
 This is reflected in the rich and varied artifacts that represent these cultures . The rich and diverse artifacts from these cultures are reflected in these cultures' diverse cultures .
 Haida totem pole or grave post, which was probably hoop was made from hide and slipped over the mother's erected in the honor of a deceased chief . The Haida people believed to have buried their dead .
 Delaware doll carved from wood carved from ivory or bone was a spirit guardian of health . Soulcatcher used by an effigy was used by a spirit spirit guardian .
 Delaware shaman to capture the soul of a sick people honored her with a feast and offerings . In the fall, the Delaware shaman captured her soul with offerings .
 Arapaho ghost club — warrior doll sold by Mohave people as a souvenir at train used in ceremonial “Ghost Dance” performed by the Stations in the 19th century . The doll was used in the ceremonial ‘ghost dance’
 Tlingit fighting to teach children about Kachina knife with an iron blade and abalone-inlaid ivory handle . Knife with iron blade, abalone inlaid Ivory handle .
 Fox nation bear claw necklace was probably Kwakiutl transformation mask . The necklace was fixed to the property of a chief or renowned warrior . It is believed to have been worn by the tribe of Fox nation .
 The mask is made from otter skin and made from draw cords attached to the beak . The mask was used by Iroquois to create a human face from the fierce eagle .
 Inuit ulu war club made from tinned iron, topped with ivory handle and ivory handle . It was used stone, and trimmed with a feather and hair . Inuit war club was trimmed with feather and a feather .
 Pomo shell nation war club carved from birchwood and used for hunting currency, used to hunting currency . Shell nation war clubs were taken south by traders and used as beavers by traders .
 Inuit finger mask worn by women at ritual money by many of the California Indians .
 Malecite ceremonies to emphasize their flowing hand movements . Canoes were made from white cedar, covered with bark of white Paiute cradleboard, and waterproofed with resin from the black spruce. Canoes used to carry a baby .
 The Constitutional Convention of 1787 allowed individual states to permit slavery . Northern states abolished it, while southern states kept it .
 The issue of slavery itself revolved around state versus federal rights, and whether a slave was a person's property . The U.S. Constitution guaranteed the right to keep a slave property .
 Admitting new free states to the Union would be problematic, as it would upset the balance between slave and free states . It would possibly provoke a federal move to abolish slavery . The U.S. Constitution was formed in 1863 .
 The Missouri statehood bill balanced admission of slave and free states . In 1857 the Supreme Court ruled it unconstitutional, in favor of slave-owning states .
 With increasing numbers of free territories wishing to gain Union status, the southern states began to feel threatened . John Brown's armed raid in 1859 by antislavery militant John Brown to free slaves at Harpers Ferry, Virginia, led to the Southern States feeling threatened .
 In 1861 the United States split apart over the issue of slavery . The U.S. split apart in 1861 over slavery . John Brown: The Civil War was the beginning of the Civil War .
 Lincoln opposed slavery in territories wishing to achieve Union membership, and won the votes of every free state but one . Lincoln wanted to join the U.S. but only won the vote of all free states but one in the South .
 The southern states voted for a proslavery Democrat, John Breckenridge, in 18th century . The southern state voted for the pro-proslavery Democrats .
 Ulysses S Grant trained at West Point military academy but failed to make a success of army life . Grant saw his Missouri farm fail during the 1857 depression .
 His military training won him the rank of colonel when war broke out . Early successes and aggressive tactics earned him promotion . He was promoted to colonel in 1862 .
 Grant was appointed by Lincoln as overall commander of the Union troops in March 1864 . Grant was the president of the Confederate Army during the Second Battle of the Civil War .
 In July 1866 he took control of the United States army, until becoming Republican president in 1869 . In 1869 he became Republican president .
 Kentucky remained neutral, while Delaware, Maryland, and Missouri were loyal to the Union . Delaware remained neutral while Missouri, Delaware, and Maryland were loyal .
 Virginia joined the Confederacy, causing West Virginia to separate and become a Union state . West Virginia became West Virginia in 1861 . Virginia joined West Virginia, which became a Confederate state .
 The first shots were fired by Confederate cannons on April 12, 1861 . Their target was the Union-held Fort Sumter in Charleston Harbor, South Carolina .
 PME casualties for both sides at Gettysburg are 46,000, with the dead aS he | Í st-co t M LL notogra raphers .
 Its simple strategy was to defend itself from attack and win recognition as an independent state . It was a simple strategy to win recognition from the West .
 The Union government had no option but to attack the Confederacy by blockading its coastline and seizing its capital of Richmond, Virginia . The Confederate capital was the capital of the Confederacy, Richmond .
 When numbers were insufficient, conscription was introduced, by the Confederacy in 1862, and by the Union the next year . Conscription was also introduced by the Confederate in 1862 .
 By the war’s end, 50 percent of eligible population in the Union had been mobilized . 75 percent of the Confederacy was mobilized, as were 75 percent in the Confederacy .
 Congress initially would not allow free African-Americans or escaped slaves to join the Union army . Congress changed the law after emancipation in 1863 . Both armies were mainly white .
 Almost 200,000 joined up, although they were paid less than white troops . They could not become officers and could not be officers . They were not allowed to become officers .
 In the Union, many women joined the Sanitary Commission, which ran kitchens and hospitals, and raised funds . Many women joined kitchens, hospitals and raised money for the charity .
 Both armies used versions of this .58-caliber rifle-musket . Standard issue Standard issue .
 In the north it was known as the Springfield, after the Massachusetts armory in which it was made . In the rest of the world it was called the Springfield after the armory .
 Superior Confederate leadership led to early success, notably with Stonewall Jackson’s victory at Bull Run, Virginia in July 1861, reprised in August 1862, when Union forces failed to push Confederates away from Washington .
 Union general Ulysses S Grant held Shiloh, Tennessee in April 1862, and then took Vicksburg on the Mississippi in July 1863, cutting Arkansas, Louisiana, and Texas off from the rest of the Confederacy .
 Union general William Sherman began to advance through Georgia to the sea in fall of 1864 . Sherman then moved north through the Carolinas to Georgia .
 The 2nd Battalion Hilliard’s Alabama Legion attacked Snodgrass Hill during the Battle of Chickamauga, Georgia, September 1863 . In Virginia, Grant's victories against Lee reduced the a v » c pM ^ Se > .
 The fall of the Confederate capital on April 3, 1865 led to Lee’s surrender to Grant at Appomattox Court House on April 9, 1865 .
 Railroads transported men and supplies to the front, messages were telegraphed, iron-clad warships fought for the first time, and photographers and journalists brought the war to people .
 Lincoln had initially fought to preserve the Union, not free the slaves, but abolitionists in the north, and the effect of escaped slaves fighting in the Union army, changed his mind . Lincoln had originally fought to protect the Union from slavery .
 Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation freed the slaves in the Confederacy on January 1, 1863 . Lincoln did not have the constitutional authority to abolish slavery, nor the power in the south .
 The end of the war led to the reunification of the country, but it took years for the new laws to be accepted .
 The Emancipation Proclamation of 1863 became the 13th amendment to the Constitution in 1865 . It was followed by the abolition of slavery in 1863 and 1865 .
 The 14th amendment, passed in 1868, gave the former slaves United States citizenship . The 15th amendment of 1870 guaranteed their right to vote . American Indians had to wait until 1924, and the 15th was passed in 1870 .
 In many cases, however, these were paper rights, as racial discrimination lasted for the next century . In many of these cases, it was paper rights until the end of the century .
 After the war, the south was occupied by federal troops . Federal troops took control of the south .
 Confederate officials were prohibited from holding public office, veterans were required to pledge allegiance to the Union, and newly freed slaves ran in state elections .
 Confederate states were readmitted to the Union only after they had accepted the 14th amendment . Confederate states only readmitted after they accepted the amendment . The 14th Amendment was ratified by the U.S. Congress .
 Lincoln's father, Thomas Lincoln, was a farmer and carpenter who set his son to hard manual labor from an early age . Lincoln was a carpenter and farmer who set him to manual labor, Lincoln says . Lincoln: "I'm not afraid to be afraid to die"
 Lincoln ran with Andrew Johnson as his vice-presidential running mate in 1864 . Andrew Johnson was a Democrat and a Democrat . Lincoln won the presidential election of 1864 with Democrat Andrew Johnson .
 With war-weariness widespread, Lincoln's reelection was far from a foregone conclusion . Lincoln was re-elected in 1860s, but his reelection was not a sure thing .
 In 1858, Lincoln's public debates during the Illinois contest for the Senate attracted nationwide attention . Lincoln's debates in 1858 attracted nationwide interest . Lincoln was elected to the Senate .
 Lincoln adopted a beard in 1860 to improve his electoral chances . Lincoln was at this time clean-shaven, adopting a beard to boost his chances .
 He became a lifelong believer in technological progress and financial economy as escape routes from the backwardness into which he had been born . He says he became a believer in technology and financial technology .
 Lincoln had little schooling, but was encouraged in self-education by his stepmother Sarah . Lincoln's stepmother encouraged him to self-educate himself .
 In higher social circles his backwoods manners were seen as rough and gauche, yet he was successful enough to persuade a plantation-owner's daughter, Mary Todd, to marry him . This photo-portrait was taken by Alexander Gardner in November 1863 .
 It shows the president's stubborn resolve, but also reveals the sadness and strain that afflicted him as a wartime leader . The film shows the strength and determination of the American president .
 Mary actively promoted her husband's political career, but was violently jealous and given to bouts of wild extravagance . She actively promoted his political career but was violent jealous .
 As a couple, they did not find happiness; the death of two sons in childhood preyed on Mary's mind, while Lincoln himself was prone to fits of depression . Mary and Lincoln struggled to find happiness as a couple .
 Lincoln's first foray into Washington D.C. was not a success . Lincoln returned to Illinois to dedicate himself to the law and making money . Lincoln was elected to Congress in 1846 .
 It was the eruption of the slavery issue through the Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 that propelled him back into politics . He was elected to the Senate in 1854, but died in 1881 .
 His attitude to slavery had been formed as a child, since his family attended antislavery Baptist churches . His attitude was formed when he was a child . His family attended anti-slavery Baptist churches, he says .
 His views were based on his personal experience of self-advancement . But it was above all his personal experiences that determined his views .
 Lincoln denounced slavery as morally wrong but did not adopt an abolitionist stance . Lincoln accepted that slavery would persist in the southern states . Lincoln was a reluctant abolitionist .
 His antislavery position during public debates with Ilinois Democrat Stephen A Douglas in 1858 made him a . His statement that the U.S. government “could not endure permanently halfslave and half-free” was seen as an invitation to civil war .
 Lincoln was not the obvious choice for Republican presidential candidate in 1860 . He slipped through as a compromise between conflicting factions . Lincoln was a westerner with limited political experience .
 With the Democrats divided, he won the presidency with less than 40 percent of the popular vote . With the Democratic Party divided, Obama won the White House with a narrow margin .
 Diehard Southerners had made it clear his election would provoke secession from the Union . Diehard Southernoutherners made clear he was likely to provoke secession .
 Lincoln had to sneak into Washington in disguise to take up his office because of the threat of assassination . Lincoln was a Southerner figure of hate for Southerners .
 Lincoln at first fatally underestimated the strength of secessionist sentiment and the force required to overcome it . Lincoln's first mistake was to underestimate the force needed to overcome the secessionist movement .
 Lincoln showed unflinching will for victory in 1861 . Civil war began in 1861 between the northern states and southern states .
 He was despised by the political elite, opposed by factions on both sides of his own party, and threatened by discontented generals . He was also threatened by disgruntled generals .
 Lincoln wrote this letter to his Secretary of War, Simon Cameron, in May 1861, recommending that his friend, Alexander Sympson, be given a contract to supply the army with horses .
 Lincoln constantly urged his generals to prosecute the war with greater energy and resolution . Lincoln's letters include letters from the president and secretary of state .
 Lincoln visits the Union army camp at Antietam in October 1862 . Lincoln visited the camp during his visit .
 He showed a better grasp of the principles of warfare than most of his generals . General McClernand was one of the Union army's many lamentably unsuccessful military commanders .
 It was not until 1864 that he found in Ulysses S Grant a commander-in-chief whose implacable will matched his own . Grant found in 1864 he found a commander in-chief who matched his will .
 Even in the thick of the war, Lincoln found a chance to advance the material progress in which he so firmly believed . Lincoln's legacy will be remembered for his role in the war .
 He oversaw the creation of a National Bank, laid the foundations for the building of the Pacific Railroad, and prepared the way for the carving up of the prairies into small farms with the Homestead Act . He also laid the foundation for the construction of the . Pacific Railroad .
 On slavery, it was only after his reelection in 1864 that he was able to press for a constitutional amendment to abolish the practice . He advocated full citizenship and voting rights for black Americans .
 Lincoln's unequaled rhetoric gave the war a dignity it would otherwise have lacked . Lincoln's Gettysburg Address of 1863 and his second inaugural speech of 1865 were his most famous .
 His assassination by fanatic John Wilkes Booth at the moment of victory for the Union army was a national tragedy . His assassination at the time of victory in the U.S. was the nation's national tragedy.
 Lincoln was shot in the head by John Wilkes Booth at Ford's Theatre . Lincoln was watching Our American Cousin with his wife Mary when he was shot .
 He was carried to a boarding house opposite the theater, where he died early the following morning .
 Lincoln's mother, Nancy Hanks Lincoln, dies at age 34; the following year his father, Thomas Lincoln, marries Sarah Bush Johnston . Lincoln was born December 9, 1818 .
 November 4, 1842 Marries Mary Todd, member of a slave-owning Kentucky family . Marries her slave-owned Kentucky family.
 His unpopular opposition to the U.S. war with Mexico halts his political career . His unpopular anti-war stance ends his career as a politician .
 Lincoln's second son, Edward Baker Lincoln, dies at age 3. February 1, 1850 . Lincoln died at age three . Lincoln's son was born in 1841 .
 May 16, 1860, Wins the Republican nomination for the presidency of the United States as a compromise candidate . May 17, 1860: Wins the GOP nomination for president of the U.S.
 Lincoln is elected 16th President of the U.S. with 39. percent of the popular vote . Seven Southern states respond by seceding from the Union .
 Lincoln promises to uphold the Union, but also to protect slavery in states where it already exists . March 4, 1861, was Lincoln's first presidential address .
 Lincoln calls for military action to 'preserve the Union' at Fort Sumter . Four more states join the Confederacy and the Civil War begins .
 September 22, 1862 Lincoln announces the Emancipation Proclamation, declaring slaves in Confederate states free . It comes into force on January 1, 1863 . The proclamation was signed by Lincoln in 1862 .
 Lincoln is reelected president with 55 percent of the popular vote in 1864 . Lincoln's re-election is supported by a coalition of Republicans and War Democrats . Lincoln was re-elected president of the U.S. in November 1864.
 February 1, 1865 Signs a resolution proposing the 15th Amendment, abolishing slavery in the U.S. President Abraham Lincoln signed a resolution to abolish slavery in America .
 Thousands of laborers and landless peasants fought to reclaim lost lands . Thousands of workers and peasants took part in the fight to reclaim their land .
 The Spanish conquistadors established Spain's claim to the New World . They were bold and brutal adventurers, brutal adventurers .
 In 1515, Vasco Núñez de Balboa was the first European to see the Pacific . Vasco was first European explorer to explore the Pacific in 1515 . He was also the first to discover the Americas .
 Mexico and Peru had rich silver and gold mines, and Mexico City became the capital of New Spain . Peru and Mexico had rich gold and silver mines, with Mexico City becoming capital .
 In the 16th century, Spanish colonists advanced north into what is now Florida and California, and south to today's Venezuela and Argentina . The Spanish-Portuguese settlement settled in Portugal in 17th century .
 In the 18th century, precious metals and stones were discovered, and coffee cultivation began in Brazil . Coffee cultivation in Brazil began in the early 1800s .
 The Portuguese explored Amazonia, and formalized their claim to it in 1750 . The Portuguese explore Amazonia in the early 1700s .
 In 1817 a larger northern armies attacked in a pincer and his son Ferdinand taken hostage and revitalized movement for movement to crush Napoleon . Leaders jostled for power independence emerged, and won the loyalist strength . In 1824 Peru across Spanish America and juntas struggle
 Venezuela, Colombia, | emerged in 1810, led by a radical independence was underway . Not many lasted long, named president of Gran Colombia in Gran Colombia . In Mexico, a unique movement, it was a union of Colombia, Venezuela and Mexico .
 The independence movements in South America rose from opposite ends of the continent . They came from opposite sides of continent .
 In 1817, former Spanish military officer directed 5,000 troops across the Andes from Argentina . San Martín struck at a point in Chile where loyalist forces had not been expecting an invasion .
 Battle of Maipü José de San Martín led his rebel troops over the heights of the Andes to fight Spanish royalists . The battle took place in the Andean mountains .
 The Battle of Maipu, in 1818, gained Chile liberty from Spanish domination . The battle took place in Chile's capital city Maipuna .
 The Spanish army was so demoralized that San Martin was able to liberate Peru . 2,000 died and 3,000 were captured in the Spanish defeat .
 NOS Am already been contemplating ECISTENCIA ; ; . ; ; ; ATA DIJO the idea of independence in the late 18th century .
 Coffee was a nonnative crop introduced by the Europeans . Coffee was the first crop to be introduced by Europeans .
 Before 1800 it was mainly produced by slaves on plantations controlled by colonists . Today it is mainly produced mainly by slaves .
 Hidalgo appealed to the indigenous Mexicans to eject from the village of Dolores . The wealthy classes of Spanish descent should be removed .
 Hidalgo’s untrained army grew to number 80,000 as it conquered towns and larger cities, and threatened Mexico City itself . The untrained, untrained Mexican army now has an untrained force in Mexico City .
 Mexican independence was achieved in 1822 . But by then independence was on its way to being realized .
 Argentina declares independence in 1816 Argentina . In Brazil, the discovery of a conspiracy against Portuguese rule in 1789-98 showed that some groups there had .
 José de San Martin assembles an army for his long-term campaign for Peru . The Peruvian army is the first army of its kind .
 In November the congress declares Mexican independence . of the Portuguese court from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro in 1808, to escape Napoleon's invading troops . of Lisbon .
 King John returned to Portugal, leaving his son Pedro as regent . After 13 years, King John's son Pedro became king . King Pedro was king of Portugal .
 Dom Pedro I proclaimed Brazil independent in 1822, with himself as emperor . He declared Brazil independent with the help of Brazil's first emperor .
 In 1831, he abdicated, leaving his fiveyear-old son, Dom Pedro II, as regent, until 1840, when he was made emperor . In 1840, he became emperor and was made king of Spain .
 He reigned until 1889, when he was deposed, and a republic was proclaimed . He was the first monarch to be deposed from power .
 Former Spanish America split into more than a dozen separate countries . The former Spanish America is now a nation nation .
 Adapting models from northern Europe and the US, republics were set up across the region . The republics are based on models from north and south of Europe .
 Factional fighting caused the first constitutional governments to fail . The unrest led to more centralized regimes by the mid-19th century . The first constitutional government was overthrown in the early 1900s .
 Governments changed rapidly in most regions, and the use of force became common . Use of force was common in most of the world's countries .
 Military men, ^caudillos,"" rose to positions of dominance and consolidated their power through strategic alliances . Military men rose to position of dominance .
 In many countries, difficult financial circumstances contributed to political instability . In some countries, the financial crisis has contributed to instability .
 By the 1860s and 1870s, manufacturers from England, the US, and other nations were welcomed . There was a surge in demand for sugar, coffee, wheat, and beef from the 1800s and 1800s .
 Traditional exports such as silver recovered, and exceeded previous production levels . Traditional exports like silver recovered .
 Simón Bolívar was a South American patriot, and hero of the struggle for independence from Spain . He was the leader of the movement for independence in South America .
 Bolívar began his revolutionary career in Venezuela in 1813, after visits to Europe and the US, where he had absorbed anticolonial ideas . He was born an aristocrat and became a revolutionary leader in Venezuela .
 Bolivar spent his remaining years unsuccessfully trying to forge a union of the newly independent states . He spent those years trying to create a union with the newly formed states .
 When domestic funding was scarce, European investment helped provide money for improved infrastructure . European investment helps provide money to improve infrastructure .
 A Spanish word for a governing group, often used to refer to military officers who seize power and establish an authoritarian government . Foreign firms, from countries such as JUNTA, are often used in Spain .
 Britain, constructed railways, streetcar systems, and electricity networks . Britain's railway and streetcar systems were built in the 1930s .
 In 1876 General Porfirio Díaz forcibly seized power in Mexico and set up a dictatorship . The Mexican Revolution took place in Mexico in 1876 . The revolution was the culmination of the Mexican Revolution .
 He opened up the country to foreign investment . He allowed the owners of foreign estates to take more of the Indian peasants' lands .
 Díaz was overthrown in 1911, but fighting broke out between rival factions . His overthrow was the result of a war between factions .
 Díaz's successor, Francisco Madero, failed to carry out promised agrarian reforms . Madero was overthrown in 1913 after failing to implement promised reforms .
 After centuries of colonial rule, industrialization and democracy came to Latin America only slowly . Industrialization came slowly, but democracy came slowly . Pa Pii was the first Latin American democracy to emerge .
 In 1917, President Venustiano Carranza began to create the modern Mexican state . Land reforms and limits on the Church's power led to the creation of the state .
 Shortages of goods caused by the two World Wars were an incentive to industrialization . Shortages led to the industrialization of the world's largest industries .
 Brazil, Mexico, and Argentina became Latin America's leading producers of iron, steel, and machinery . Argentina, Brazil and Mexico are now the region's leading iron and steel producers .
 Latin America has often been politically unstable . The continent has a history of political instability . Latin America is often unstable and often unstable .
 The 19th century saw major upheaval throughout Latin America, beginning with nationalist revolts . The Brazilian republic and the Mexican Revolution were among the major events of the century .
 At the beginning of the 15th century, European sailors used maps based on the writings of ancient Greek geographer Ptolemy, showing Europe, the Mediterranean, and western Asia .
 European knowledge of the Southern Hemisphere was still sketchy . However, it was not the first time Europeans had seen the southern hemisphere in the past .
 Cook's first Pacific voyage took him around New Zealand and along the coast of eastern Australia . With instructions to chart coastlines and annex trading posts in the name of the British Crown, Cook charted coastlines . Cook was ordered to chart the coastlines of New Zealand, Australia and New
 He led three voyages to the Pacific, and was greatly respected by his crew . He believed in good diet and hygiene .
 Cook was killed in Hawaii in 1779, but few ventured deep into the interior until 1860, when Robert Burke and John Wills left Melbourne and headed north .
 Into Africa Africa posed a great challenge to explorers, as there were still many blank spaces in European maps of the continent . Europe's first map of Africa was published in 1903 .
 The British, Portuguese, F French, and Germans were all eager to lay claim to its lands, with various religious, commercial, political, political and colonial agendas .
 Invented by John Harrison, the chronometer (see 282) allowed the measurement of longitude . Later in the 19th century several explorers, including Richard Burton, used it . Cook's chronometer, K1, 1769 .
 Cook was one of the first to know his exact position while sailing uncharted waters . He circumnavigated Australia proving it was one large island .
 The west coast Swan River colony, founded in 1829, confirmed British claims to the whole continent . In 1866, Dr. Le Se eee oY mapped the continents of Europe .
 His maps, such as the one above of central Africa, changed mapping of Africa . His maps changed maps of Africa in the early 1900s .
 John Hanning Speke, and Verney Cameron, endured great hardships to continue their explorations . John Speke was one of the first explorers to discover the Great Barrier Barrier Reef . Verney and Speke died in the early 1900s .
 David Livingstone attempted to open up trade routes favorable to Britain . Livingstone was a Scottish missionary and missionary to open trade routes to the British Isles .
 He navigated lakes and rivers, including the Zambezi River and Victoria Falls . He crossed Africa from east to west, crossing Africa's rivers and lakes .
 Livingstone and Henry Morton Stanley were important in mapping the continent . Livingstone was sent to find Livingstone when he went missing in 1866-71 .
 On finding him, in 1871, he doffed his hat, and uttered the now famous words, ""Dr. Dr. "Dr. George" Dr. George II II.
 Scottish-Canadian explorer Alexander Mackenzie in 1793, as he Searched Tor the Northwest Passage—a water route to the Pacific Ocean . Livingstone, | presume."" was the Scottish- Canadian explorer .
 Meriwether Lewis and William Clark were sent to explore Louisiana in 1804 . Thomas Jefferson sent Lewis and Clark to explore the mountains and plains beyond it .
 They crossed the U.S. from east to west by canoe, horse, and foot . They reached the Pacific Ocean in 1805 . The men crossed the United States by canoe and horse .
 The North and South poles were so inhospitable they offered little chance for exploitation . But there was prestige in being the first nation to conquer them .
 A pair of Americans, Frederick Cook and Robert Peary, both made claims to have reached the North Pole in 1908 and 1909 . The claims remain in dispute to this day . Cook and Peary made claims that they had reached the Pole in 1909 .
 It took an American expedition led by Lieutenant Charles Wilkes to confirm that Antarctica was a continent . Wilkes led the expedition to the extreme south of Antarctica .
 Roald Amundsen and Robert Falcon Scott sought to demonstrate their technological prowess and endurance . Both the Norwegian and Englishman were keen to demonstrate technological prowess .
 With husky-drawn sleds, Amundsen reached the pole on December 14, 1911 . Amondsen reached pole with husky sleds .
 Halfway there, Scott sent his ponies back and dragged the sleds by hand . Halfway through, Scott's ponies sent their sleds back to help .
 He reached the South Pole a month after Roald Amundsen, but died of starvation on the return journey . He reached South Pole one month after him, but was starved of food on return .
 Geographers were able to draw the first accurate outline of the world . Through such feats of human endeavor, geographers could have drawn an accurate outline .
 By the turn of the 20th century, all seven continents were on the map . Europe, Asia, Africa, North and South America, Australia, Antarctica, and Antarctica were among them .
 Human endurance and scientific curiosity have kept polar and space exploration alive . However, human endurance has kept polar explorers alive .
 The first crossing of Antarctica was accomplished by the British Vivian Fuchs and the New Zealander Edmund Hillary in 195758 . Vivian and Edmund Hillary crossed the Antarctic in the early 1900s . The first time they crossed Antarctica was in the 1960s .
 American Ralph Plaisted became the first to reach the North Pole using surface transport in 1968 . American Ralph Plaisted was the first person to use surface transport to travel to the pole .
 In April 1961, Russian cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person in space . The first time he was in space was on April 4, 1961, when he was launched into space .
 Journay This 1909 French J E cartoon depicts Peary \ and Cook, who claimed to be the first to reach the North Pole .
 Captain James Cook declared the southeastern coast of Australia British and named it New South Wales on August 22, 1770 . Captain Cook declared it British in 1770 and renamed it New Australia .
 The city has evolved 19th century onward onward is walking distance of the as a center of commerce and power . The factories are walking distance from the city center .
 In many ascendancy of industry over heavily industrialized ANCIENT CITIES agriculture, the effects of MMMT cities, a ""factory culture"" Towns and cities emerged of this change of lifestyle arose, in which the in Asia and Egypt in were far more complex .
 The cable car's popularity local mill or factory  flooded into the cities when the . resulted from its replacing horse-drawn transport . Cable cars flooded into cities when they replaced horse drawn transport .
 Industrial In 1850, London, Paris, Constantinople, Constantinople of intellectual, religious, and commercial life. in cities that had existed for centuries. buildings and railroad yards tended to . buildings and . railroad yards . in cities such as St. Louis, New York, Chicago, Paris and London
 At the turn of the 20th century, the majority of people still lived in the country . However, despite this massive increase in city living, many people still live in their country .
 For those forced to move to the cities, life was often squalid and miserable . Squalor, space, and sanitation was often the main factor in life .
 In the first half of the 19th century, the influx of people to the cities outstripped the facilities available . In some poor urban areas, food supply and sanitation were so bad that the high mortality rate (both from malnutrition and from malnutrition) kept urban growth relatively slow .
 The population more than tripled in the 50-year period from 1850 to 1900 . Some of the population even declined .
 Water was polluted with human filth, the air with industrial pollution, and rats and insects quickly spread disease . Rats and insects spread disease, spreading disease .
 The situation was worst in the world's most populous cities, such as London, Paris, Constantinople, and Peking . Peking was the only city with more than a million inhabitants in 1800 .
 German philosopher Friederich Engels wrote The Condition of the English Working Class in 1844 . Engels was inspired by the appalling conditions in the working-class slums close to his father’s cotton mill in Manchester .
 It also added to the demands for improved health and sanitation in city slums in slums .
 Urban planners also came to realize that space was as important to health as sanitation . The expansion of urban areas took place between 1850 and World War I . Urban populations began to expand naturally, not as a result of rural immigration .
 Putting the railroad underground by cutting or boring a tunnel was a means of providing rapid, frequent, and cheap transportation around a crowded city . The railroad was used to provide rapid and frequent, frequent transportation around crowded cities .
 The first subway in the United States opened in Boston in 1897. aimed at improving people's health and comfort . Another was the emergence of model towns.
 While industrialists are often characterized as exploiting the masses, many philanthropists were philanthropists . Many of the world's richest men were philanthropist .
 In 1786, Scottish cotton magnate David Dale built the model town of New Lanark for his workers . His example was followed by several other industrialists during the 19th century, including Robert Owen .
 The idea of building up instead of out to maximize living space began in the medieval period, when city walls restricted outward expansion . American architect William Le Baron was the first American architect to build up .
 The first such town was Letchworth, in Hertfordshire, in 1903 . The population boom was due to be followed by a population boom .
 Harvey’s idea was adopted by the American architect Walter Burley Griffin in his work on Canberra, Australia .
 As cities expanded, so did their infrastructures, as did their infrastructure . The spread of urbanization has led to urbanization in the U.S.
 The improvements in transport led more middle-class workers to move away from downtown areas . The concept of suburban living and the commuter belt gave rise to the concept of suburbs .
 Once Chicago was 10 stories when completed in 1885 and 12 by the time it was demolished in 1931 . This in turn led to expansion of the suburbs, which in some cases meant cities absorbing entire towns and villages into their urban sprawl .
 It is generally acknowledged to be the first skyscraper, not simply because of its height but also because of the method of construction . It is now considered to be one of the world's most famous skyscraper .
 Jenney's use of steel girders, a skeleton frame, and a ""curtain wall" paved the way for modern skyscrapers . Jenney was the first city to build a skyscraper .
 In some countries this resulted in legislation limiting the extent of expansion and the creation of ""green belts"" around cities . Some countries have created green belts around their cities .
 City living was not simply about the buildings in which people lived and worked; it also affected their habits and ways of thinking . City living also affected habits and habits of people living in cities, says author .
 City-dwellers had greater anonymity than rural villagers, which gave them greater license in many aspects of their lives . City dwellers were given greater anonymity, which allowed them greater freedom .
 Piccadilly Circus, London, was built in the early 19th century . By the time of 1910, it had to accommodate early motor cars and traditional horse and carts .
 Paris expanded rapidly from the 1840s due to the arrival of the railroads . The city's population grew rapidly in the late 1800s .
 During the 1850s, Napoleon III ordered a massive remodeling by Georges Haussmann, who replaced entire medieval districts of narrow, cramped streets with wide boulevards . The boulevard is now famous for its wide boulevard .
 World's biggest cities show extraordinary population growth in the world's top five cities . These graphs show the growth of population in the top five most populous cities .
 By 1900, thanks to industry and railways, Chicago was the second-largest American city . The list of top cities changes from mainly Asian cities to European and American ones .
 Average working hours were shorter, leading to a division between work and leisure time . People were earning more money, but the focus of their lives was undergoing a gradual shift away from the workplace . The focus of people's lives has been shifting from work to leisure .
 By the early 20th century, a wide range of diversions were available, including popular theater, music hall, motion pictures, and professional sports . By the 1930s, the world's most popular sport was represented by professional athletes .
 The proportion of the global population living in towns of over 200,000 people in 1800. n PER CENT by 1900. PER CENT . by 1900 . by .
 The number of people worldwide living in cities has continued to rise since the medieval period . People in cities have continued to grow in the past century .
 The shanty town appeared on the fringes of cities in Africa, Asia, and South America . There is a wide gap between rich and poor in some of the world's poorest cities .
 Shanty towns are haphazard collections of unlicensed makeshift makeshift houses that are built from any available waste materials . Shanty towns are hapless collections of unlicensed makeshift buildings .
 The rural poor are drawn to shanty towns in the hopes that living close to the city might bring them employment, housing, health services, education, and utilities . But for the vast majority it is a false hope for them .
 Conditions are far worse than those they have left behind in the country, with hunger and poverty made worse by crime and disease . Conditions have been made worse than the ones they left behind .
 According to the United Nations, more than half the world's population now lives in cities . Almost one-third of that number live in slum areas or shanty towns .
 In urban areas, problems are caused by an excess of artificial light .
 These include adverse effects on human health and disruption of ecosystems governed by sunlight . These include health and environmental disruption .
 During the 20th century, the problems of overcrowding in cities changed from those encountered during the 19th century . Inner City was overcrowded during the 1950s and 1960s .
 Problems of food supply and sanitation were replaced by those of pollution and traffic congestion, together with the perennial problem of overcrowding . Problems were replaced with those of congestion, pollution and congestion .
 The average speed year 1900 and in the year 2000 was the same in 2000 . Londoners were more likely to hit the average speed of traffic in 1900 than in 2000 and 2000 .
 In ancient Greece, it was believed that health depended on the body maintaining a balance of four fluids, or ""humors" Blood, yellow bile, black bile and phlegm were believed to be vital to health .
 Each humor had its own characteristic qualities, combinations of hot, cold, wet, and dry . Each humor was unique, with some of its characteristic qualities .
 A sanguine temperament was believed to produce an excess of blood, which made the person cheerful, even-tempered, and optimistic, though feverish . The blood is thought to produce a person who is cheerful and optimistic .
 They traveled across Europe during the Roman Empire, then spread to the Middle East, and to European colonies . They then traveled to Europe's colonies and spread to Europe .
 Doctors added to the Greek understanding of anatomy . The core theories remained constant, doctors added to anatomy .
 In the 16th century, Andreas Vesalius's On the Workings of the Human Body contained detailed anatomical sketches . The Belgian physician's work on the human body was published in 16th and 17th century .
 Some diseases, such as cancer, produce swellings in solid parts of the body or changes to the appearance of organs such as the lungs and liver .
 The idea that disease was located in the solid parts of the body, not the fluids, was firmly established by Parisian research into pathology in the early 19th century .
 Doctors carefully recorded the progress of many of the diseases suffered by hundreds of patients they treated . In the city's huge hospitals, doctors carefully recorded patients' progress of disease .
 Those who died were dissected to discover how their illness had affected the organs in their body . The organs of those who died had to be dissected .
 Using this approach, doctors were able to monitor the progress of many diseases, and to make precise distinctions between diseases of the heart and the lungs, for example .
 During the rest of the century, doctors explored the structure of the human body in finer detail . Doctors explored the body structure in fine detail .
 They described the various tissues that made up the organs and, using improved microscopes, began to explore the cells that formed the tissues .
 In the 19th century, a number of significant developments in medical science greatly increased doctors' knowledge of anatomy and disease . By experimenting on animals, their patients, and sometimes themselves, doctors began to understand erm Warfare .
 Antesepsis is often associated with the British surgeon Joseph Lister and the use of carbolic acid . Safe surgery owed much to simple ideas like making surgical instruments from steel, and sterilizing them after every operation .
 The role of the liver and pancreas in the digestive system and the function of the kidneys is critical to the health of the human body . The work of Florence Nightingale was published in 1859 .
 This in turn gave them new ways of diagnosing illnesses, such as identifying kidney disease by analyzing the chemicals found in a patient’s urine . It also helped them identify kidney disease and diagnose it .
 Doctors realized they might be able to cure patients by cutting out the diseased part of the body . Surgery is a form of surgery that involves cutting out parts of a solid organ . Surgery could be used to treat disease in solid organs .
 In the 18th century, surgical operations were used only as a last resort, because of the pain involved in cutting into the patient's body, and the high probability of wound infection .
 Surgery began to change with the introduction of anesthetics in the 19th century . Robert Liston's use of ether during an amputation had an impact throughout Europe .
 Now surgeons could work more slowly, reducing blood loss by tying up blood vessels, and carefully cutting out damaged or diseased tissue .
 This allowed surgeons to operate safely, allowing them to devise a range of operations to cure diseases . This allowed them to develop new techniques to treat diseases such as cancer .
 The practice of bloodletting was still used in the 19th century, by 1900 . The idea of asepsis (reduction of contamination) spread slowly .
 The surgeon wears an apron, but no mask, and the room is filled with observers wearing ordinary clothes . The surgery is performed by a surgeon in a room filled with onlookers .
 The idea that disease was located in the body's organs led to a string of inventions helping doctors to ""see" inside of living patients . The idea led to the creation of inventions that helped doctors to 'see' patients .
 René Laennec created the first crude stethoscope in 1816 when he rolled up some papers into a tube . He discovered he could hear sounds made by the lungs and heart .
 The 19th century saw the invention of a number of ""scopes" for seeing into the ear, eye, and the throat . The invention of the 'scopes' was the first of its kind in the world .
 Wilhelm Róntgen discovered that X-rays passed through flesh but not bone in 1895 . The ability to see inside the living body became a reality in 1895 when he discovered the discovery .
 Opium was used to relieve pain, but as an addictive substance it was not without risk . Opium is now a popular form of pain relief known as a form of addiction .
 Doctors could treat serious injuries and broken limbs with the aid of anesthetics and improved surgical methods . Doctors could use anesthetic and surgical techniques to treat broken limbs .
 Quinine (made from the bark of the 4 cinchona tree) was used to treat malaria . Digitalis (made of foxgloves) was an effective treatment for heart conditions . Quinine was used for malaria and digitalis was effective for heart condition .
 In 1897, aspirin (based on a chemical found in willow bark) was launched . The aspirin was launched in 1897 . It is now the world's first aspirin .
 Salvarsan, the first synthetic drug, was introduced in 1910 . It was prescribed in cases of syphilis and was prescribed to treat syphilis .
 Many remedies did not cure disease, but only soothed symptoms . Poultices reduced objective lens stage for specimen slide primary lens to focus light source .
 Bed rest and nutritious food were still the basis of medical care for most forms of illness . Bed rest, nutritious food, and careful nursing were the basis for most medical care .
 Hospitals were crucial to the development of new medical ideas and practices, and in turn these medical innovations completely transformed the nature of the hospital . Caring for the sick Hospitals was crucial to development of medical innovations .
 In the 18th century, hospitals were still charities caring for the sick and poor . Hospitals still cared for the poor and sick and were still a charity .
 In the 19th century, they became centers for treatment, open to all who could afford to pay . In the 21st century, the centers were open to those who could pay for treatment .
 Operating rooms were built to allow students to view surgery, with specialized lights and equipment, and lined with glass and tiles that could be easily cleaned . Students were able to use the operating rooms to learn about surgery .
 They also began to offer specialty treatments for complaints of the ear and eye, or conditions affecting children .
 From 1830, the microscope played a crucial role in understanding the structure of the body . As a result, hospitals treated a greater number of seriously ill patients, and the amount of staff, especially nurses, grew enormously .
 Doctors diagnosed cancer by examining tissues under the microscope . They also confirmed infection by identifying disease-causing bacteria .
 In the late 19th and 20th centuries, the greatest medical developments came in the form of new treatments . In the 19th century, the world's greatest medical breakthroughs came in form of treatments .
 Smallpox vaccination had been developed in the 1790s based on the chance observation that milkmaids who caught cowpox did not catch smallpox .
 Other forms of immunization were developed as doctors began to understand how the body resisted disease . The immunization was developed in the 1930s and 1940s .
 In the 1880s, French scientist Louis Pasteur developed a vaccine against rabies based on a weakened form of the virus .
 This was followed by vaccines against tetanus and diphtheria in the 18905.05.06.06 . Vaccines against diphheria and tetanus were introduced in the same year .
 Mass immunization against common childhood diseases came in the 20th century . Vaccine against polio in 1957 and against measles and mumps in the 1960s .
 Since the 1950s, synthetic drugs have predominated in care . Before then, most drugs were derived from plants . Synthetic drugs predominated .
 Nurses, who were almost always women, played a crucial role in the new hospitals . Nurses played a vital role in hospitals in the 1930s and 1940s .
 They kept wards scrupulously clean and neat to limit the possibility of infection . They monitored patients’ symptoms, and administered medicines .
 Even experienced and skilled nurses were expected to follow the doctors’ directions at all times .
 While the relatively well-equipped hospitals were able to treat a wider range of conditions, many people, particularly the poor, continued to die of infectious diseases .
 Children were particularly vulnerable, and many died from measles, mumps, diphtheria, and scarlet fever . Children were especially vulnerable .
 Doctors could do little to cure these diseases, but they could control their spread . Doctors could control the spread of these diseases by controlling the spread .
 Increased supplies of clean water and improved sanitation helped clean up cities and stop the spread of waterborne infections . Increased supplies helped clean cities and stopped spread of infections .
 Patients suffering from infectious diseases were isolated in special hospitals, or in their homes . Patients were isolated at special hospitals or homes .
 In the late 18th century, nationalism emerged in Europe and the American colonies as a force for liberty, equality, and fraternity . These are not always the same thing .
 nationalism describes loyalty to one’s nation, pride in its history and culture . Until the 18th century the idea of the nation was primary importance . A patriotic state was linked to the monarchy and, in desire to achieve or maintain smaller states, people were unified by independence .
 Nationalism emerged as a political force in the late 18th century . The idea that nations have E^ Europe comprised a small number of the right to form their own political of powerful kingdoms .
 The ideal, known oldest, with the as national self-determination, inspired Netherlands, Portugal, and major upheavals, such as the American Spain, and Sweden Revolution . Only in politically and encouraged nations divided FRENCH independent kingdoms into a collection of small states .
 This was reinforced by loyalty to Italy, to seek unification, and to the crown, the flag, and, later, by patron saints .
 In smaller states and principalities, the word ‘nation’ was used to describe a state or ruled by a prince . Political loyalties were political, but a sense of unity was provided by people united by ethnicity, culture, common language and culture .
 This painting of the July Revolution of 1830 that made Louis-Philippe the French king is both a depiction of and an act of nationalism .
 Napoleon decorated Chauvin with the Saber of Honor, but when his brand of unquestioning nationalism fell out of fashion, he found himself satirized in several French plays . Chauvin was satirized by several plays in France .
 A country whose state boundaries correspond to those of a particular nation is described as a nation-state . A nation state whose state borders correspond to that of its own nation is called a nation state .
 One idea is that nations are simply the outward territorial expression of the divisions between people of different ethnicity or culture . One idea, called primordialism, is that nation is an outward expression of divisions between different people . The idea of primordialist is based on the idea that primordial
 This idea of ‘cultural nationalism’ was first expressed by the 18th-century German philosopher Johann Gottfried von Herder .
 Opposition to this idea States that the concept of nationalism came first, followed by the artificial creation of nations, for political or economic reasons . Opponents of this idea say that the idea of nationalism was created for political reasons .
 National identities evolve by merging with new ethnic and cultural influences . More recently, it has been proposed that national identities evolve with new cultural and ethnic influences .
 Today the idea of the nation-state is well established, but that was not always the case . The idea of nation-states is now well established but not always that was the case.
 As people developed a sense of nationhood they began to demand the right to selfgovernment . Selfgovernment is a form of self-government .
 In America and France the liberal ideals of freedom, equality, and brotherhood led to nation-states that granted citizens unchallengeable rights and were governed in the name of the people . France and the U.S. are the two most liberal nations in the world .
 Once nation-statehood achieved, some less savory aspects of nationalism emerged . Some of the darker aspects of nationalism emerged .
 Napoleon tried to impose the French identity on much of Europe . The belief that the United States had a “manifest destiny"" to take over North America came at the expense of the native population . Napoleon tried the idea of a French identity in Europe .
 The idea that the nation-state should cherish itself above all others could lead to racism, religious intolerance, and imperialism . It could also lead to religious intolerance and imperialism, the author says .
 Britain's imperialism went on to encourage nationalist movements throughout the 20th century . It freed some while subjugating others, and freed others .
 The resulting settlement was essentially conservative . It was an attempt to contain the seeds of nationalism that had shattered the old order of Europe . The resulting settlements were essentially conservative.
 Most monarchies that had been overthrown by Napoleon's armies were restored . Most of the monarchies were restored to their former monarchies .
 In the 18th century a number of national revivals made the concept of national identity a significant force in European politics . In Spain, King Ferdinand VII was given back his father's throne; Italy was divided once again into scores of principalities; the 39-state German state of Germany
 Joseph II, the energetic ruler of the Habsburg Empire from 1780-90, decreed that German replace Latin as the empire's official language . Hungarians in his empire reacted by insisting on the right to use their own tongue .
 The Magyar national reawakening subsequently triggered national revivals among the Slovak, Romanian, Serbian, and Croatian minorities within Hungary . The Hungarian monarchy was abolished in 1945 .
 In 1789, a revolt broke out in the Austrian Netherlands in reaction to the emperor's centralized policies . In Ireland, a swell of nationalism and a mass rebellion for democratic rights erupted against British rule in 1798 .
 These revivals later blossomed into the nationalist movements of the 19th-20th centuries . These revived revivals were later found in nationalist movements .
 The 1815 Treaty of Vienna was an attempt to redraw the borders of Europe and secure peace and stability . The treaty was signed in Vienna, Austria, 1815, and was signed by Russia and Austria .
 Austria was given back most of the territories it had lost in Italy . Norway and Sweden were joined under a single ruler . Russia was handed Finland and given effective control over the new kingdom of Poland .
 The forces to which the age of revolution gave birth were not so easily contained . But the forces of the revolution were not as easily contained.
 Traditional loyalties to the old dynasties of Europe had declined, in their place came national groups and demands for nation-states . In their place were national groups, demands for national-states, according to the historian .
 Over the following century, the old order of Europe would be fundamentally transformed . Over the next century, Europe's old order would be transformed .
 In 1830, revolution also broke out in Belgium (part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands), and an independent Belgian state was formed in 1831 .
 In Paris the Bourbon monarchy, restored to the French throne in 1814, was overthrown and replaced by a republic . In Paris, the Bourbon king was restored in 1815 .
 On hearing of events in France, the people of Vienna, Budapest, and Prague rose up against the Habsburg rulers of the Austrian Empire . The people of Prague, Vienna and Budapest rose up to overthrow the rulers .
 For a time, this empire (which covered much of central and southeastern Europe) showed signs of collapse, but the revolutions of 1848 failed within the Habsburg territories . The revolutions in 1848 did not succeed .
 The national impulse that led to the division of the Ottoman Empire into independent nation-states could also act as a force for unification . National impulse led to divisions of the empire into independent nations .
 Large ethnically diverse states such as the Ottoman Empire were particularly vulnerable to the first type of nationalist movement . The Ottoman Empire was especially vulnerable to nationalist movements .
 During the first part of the 19th century, there was a series of uprisings by Greeks, Serbs, Romanians, and other ethnic groups within the Ottoman Empire . The Ottoman Empire was ruled by the Ottomans .
 Serbia was semi-independent by 1817, and Greece declared its independence from the Ottomans in 1829 . Serbia and Greece were declared independent by 1829, and became independent in 1817 .
 The Greek War of Independence, in particular, caught the imagination of writers and artists such as the poet Byron and painter Delacroix . The Congress of Vienna had divided the Italian peninsula into a patchwork of independent states .
 The idea of a single Italian nation had potent popular appeal . In spite of this, the idea of an Italian nation still had potent appeal .
 Cavour, the Prime Minister of Piedmont in northern Italy, provoked a war against Austria in AP 1859 . Cavour provoked the war in 1859 with the help of his wife, the Empress of the Netherlands, who died in the war .
 With the help of France, Piedmont repelled a Austria, leaving the way — open for Cavour to take control of most of northern and central Italy . With the . help of . France, the . way — left the way open for . Cavour, who is now
 The following year the charismatic Italian patriot Giuseppe Garibaldi invaded southern Italy with an army of a thousand volunteer “Red Shirts"" and conquered Sicily and Naples . The following . year the . Italian patriot invaded southern . Italy with a thousand . volunteer ‘Red . Sh
 This cartoon depicts Abdul Hamid II, the last Ottoman emperor, having his empire whipped out from underneath him by Bulgaria and Austria . The sick man of Europe is depicted as the last emperor .
 Such displays showed off military strength, and helped build nationalistic pride . Such displays were often seen as a sign of national pride .
 At the time of the 1848 revolutions, Germany was a loose confederation of states, of which the most powerful was Prussia . Prussia was one of Germany's most powerful states .
 Bismarck’s primary objective was to secure the supremacy of Prussia in Central Europe, but by encouraging the other German states to unify under Prussia, he was also the architect of the German nation .
 Prussia joined forces with Austria to annex the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein from Denmark . The process began in 1864, when Prussia and Austria joined forces to take control of the region .
 Two years later Bismarck was ready to deal with Austria, Prussia’s chief rival for dominance in Germany . Austria was the Prussian capital of Austria in the early 1900s .
 Prussia defeated Austria at the Battle of Koniggratz . Prussia allied with Italy and several smaller German states . Austria counted Saxony and Bavaria among their allies .
 Southern principalities of Germany joined Prussia in its war against France in 1870 . Final unity came when the southern principalities joined the Prussian army .
 A German victory led to the proclamation of a unified German Empire in 1871 . The victory in the German city of Dresden led to a German victory .
 The principle that nations share a unique, common identity based on a common culture and history was well established by the late 19th century .
 Otto von Bismarck became prime minister of Prussia in 1862 . He was the first German prime minister to hold office in Prussia .
 His ambition was to unite Germany under Prussian leadership . He believed that the result could only be achieved by force .
 Victory in the Franco-Prussian War persuaded the other German States to join together to form an empire . The Empire of Germany was formed after the defeat of the Prussian War .
 Bismarck introduced some social reforms in an attempt to reduce the appeal of socialism . Although conservative, he introduced some reforms in a bid to reduce socialism's appeal .
 National languages became paramount, often at the expense of regional dialects . P ia P J Y^ National languages were paramount in the 1960s .
 During the struggle to unify Italy, the Italian dialect spoken in Tuscany was chosen, and energetically promoted by writers such as Alessandro Manzoni, who wrote his great patriotic novel, The Betrothed, in this new national language .
 Symbols of national identity, such as music and literature, flourished in the 1930s . Symbols such as national identity and national pride flourished .
 Military campaigns cemented a growing patriotic fervor with symbolic state emblems and flags . The U.S. military has been involved in a number of military campaigns in recent years .
 National Days were created, education systems enforced a standard curriculum, and fanfares, marches, and national anthems became prolific across Europe .
 In some areas, a particular national identity was enforced by the state in an attempt to suppress or maintain control over other ethnic groups . In some parts of the country, the state was trying to impose a particular identity on others .
 National symbols and rituals such as the flag and Pledge of Allegiance could help forge the identity of a young nation . The US was largely made of immigrants .
 As liberal nationalism gave way to imperialist nationalism, based on national pride and expansion, a strong army became essential . Militarism became essential as liberal nationalism focused on civil rights and constitution .
 Until Napoleon, armies were essentially professional forces whose manpower was drawn from the less socially and economically useful elements of the population . The French Revolution was the first French Revolution in France . Napoleon was Napoleon's first French-style army .
 Napoleonic armies replaced with loyalty based on national patriotism . The idea of loyalty to the king was replaced with national patriotism by the idea of social revolution . Social revolution in France was the result of the revolution .
 Napoleon was able to raise the type of mass armies that came to characterize the national armies of the 19th and 20th centuries . This made it possible for Napoleon to raise a mass army . Napoleon's mass armies came to be the kind of national armies that characterized national armies .
 The entire population was expected to contribute to the war, and conscription was gradually introduced across Europe . Conscription was introduced gradually across Europe in the 1930s .
 The Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78 was the first war in which repeating rifles were uniformly used . Modern repeating rifles increased the accuracy of fire . breech-loading cannon, which loaded from the rear, replaced front-loading cannons .
 By the outbreak of the RussoJapanese War , the use of indirect heavy artillery fire was standard practice .
 The armies of the early 20th century had an unprecedented killing capacity . The result was that the armies had a killing capacity. The result of this was that they had unprecedented killing capabilities .
 Colonial acquisitions were greeted with enthusiasm and enthusiasm . There was a growing sense that nations were in competition with each other . Colonial acquisition was met with enthusiasm .
 Italians, Serbs, Romanians, Greeks, and Bulgarians dreamed of extending their national borders to include their people who were living outside of their nationstate . Italians and Serbs were among those who wanted to extend their borders .
 This expansionist nationalism pitted the nation-states against each other, says historian John Sutter . Sutter: The expansionist nationalist movement was a form of state-sanctioned nationalism .
 In 1912, a coalition of Bulgaria, Serbia, Montenegro, and Greece invaded, occupied, and partitioned the Ottoman Empire's European provinces . The coalition of nations invaded and occupied the Ottoman empire's eastern provinces in 1912 .
 Disagreement over the spoils led to the Second Balkan War in which Greece and Serbia gained large territories . Greece lost large territories in the war . Serbia and Greece gained large territory in the conflict .
 A war of independence and civil war was fought in 1918, and Finland officially became a republic in 1919 . Finland became an independent republic in 1918 and a republic of Finland was formed in 1918 .
 Poland had disappeared from the map in 1785, partitioned between Russia, Prussia, and Austria . Poland was part of the Russian-Prussian-Austrian partitioned into three countries .
 In 1915, the Germans expelled the Russians from Poland and promised Poland independence . Poland was promised independence by the Germans .
 In 1921, the British signed a treaty with the Irish majority party Sinn Féin to bring about Irish Independence, except for the six northern counties . In 1922 the Irish Free State came into being .
 By the early 20th century, nation-states replaced small principalities in Europe . World War I was the first major war in the history of the world .
 These were also joined by a new generation of powers, whose interests were largely economic . These were joined by the new generations of powers in the world .
 Rivalries between the powers intensified and their ambitions came into conflict . The conflict was the height of the conflict in the Middle East .
 Karl Marx was born into a well-to-do German Jewish family in Trier . The evolutionary socialist and R philosopher was born in Germany in 1848 . He was the son of a wealthy Jewish family .
 His father converted to Christianity to avoid persecution by the Prussian authorities . His father was also a convert to Christianity .
 Karl was sent to university to become a lawyer like his father, but instead immersed himself in the study of philosophy and radical politics . Karl is the son of former British Prime Minister David Cameron .
 Rebelling against his social origins, he became an atheist and a savage critic of the prosperous middle classes .
 When Marx was a young man in the 1840s, Europe seemed to many people to be ripe for revolution . Marx was born in Russia, but died in 1903 at the hands of a German revolution .
 Marx became a political journalist, plunging into arguments against the authorities and fellow radicals with whom he disagreed . Marx became known for his energy-passioned arguments against authorities and others .
 Marx formed lifelong friendship with Friedrich Engels in Paris in August 1844 . Marx formed friendship with Engels in France . Marx met Engels in the early days of his career in Paris .
 Engels was the son of a German industrialist, with a business in Lancashire, England . Engels provided financial support as well as intellectual collaboration to justify a future transformation of society .
 In 1844 Marx formed a close friendship with Friedrich Engels, the son of a wealthy cottonpe’ 1 mill owner . Marx and Engels met in 1844 at the age of 1844 . Engels was a member of the Marx family .
 Marx and Engels shared the belief that Victorian patriarch was a gentle father and husband . Despite his enthusiasm for violent revolution, Karl Marx was gentle and gentle .
 He reserved an intellectual hatred for people with his political views he disagreed with . He reserved his hatred for those with whose political views disagreed .
 Marx had no influence on the uprising, but hailed it as “the glorious harbinger of a new society” industrial workers, inspired to rise up against the capitalists who exploited their labor, could be the vehicle for revolutionary change, he says .
 Marx and Engels joined a small subversive organization known as the League of the Just in 1847 . The League was soon renamed the Communist League, soon renamed Communist League .
 The Communist Manifesto is a powerful appeal for the overthrow of society by a worldwide workers' revolution . It was written by the Communist Party of Russia and the Soviet Union .
 In 1848, there were revolts in many cities across Europe, including Paris, Berlin, and Vienna . The document was a timely document .
 Marx contributed to the agitation with his writings, though neither he nor the Communist League had any significant impact on events . Neither Marx nor the League had significant impact .
 After the suppression of the uprisings in 1849, life for radicals such as Marx became impossible in continental Europe . Life for radicals became impossible for Marx such as Karl Marx in Europe .
 He moved to Britain, a relatively liberal country that was tolerant of the activities of political refugees . He moved in to Britain .
 In the 1850s the prospect of a triumph for the workers' revolution seemed remote, and the Communist League withered away . Theorizing revolution is the work of Marxists .
 Marx devoted himself to an immense theoretical effort, intended to place the revolutionary critique of capitalist society on a secure scientific and philosophical basis . Marx instead devoted his attention to his theoretical effort to put the critique of capitalism on a scientific scientific basis .
 Marx did not work to support himself and his growing family, depending mostly on handouts from Engels . Marx earned some money from journalism, but did not earn enough to support his family .
 He was free to write full-time, becoming a familiar presence in the British Museum Reading Room in London .
 The major result of his labors was the first volume of his analysis of capitalism, Das Kapital, in 1867 . The major work of his work was the analysis of Karl Marx's theory of capitalism .
 The Manifesto of 1848 is the most succinct statement of Marx's and Engels' ideas . In 1864 he joined the International Working Men's The Communist Manifesto . He joined the Communist Party in 1864 .
 Association is an attempt to coordinate the efforts of various left-wing groups . Association was formed to coordinate efforts of assorted left-left groups .
 Marx immediately established himself as a dominant force in the group, but his inability to tolerate the views of those who did not share his own ideas led to conflicts . Marx was the leader of the Communist Party in Russia in the 1930s .
 When a revolutionary Commune briefly took control of Paris in 1871 (an uprising provoked by France's defeat in war with Prussia) the International played only the most marginal role in events .
 Marx wrote a pamphlet in praise of the uprising, the International received much of the blame for it, giving Marx unprecedented notoriety . Yet after Marx wrote the pamphlet Marx wrote it, he was accused of being a traitor .
 In 19th-century Europe, the bourgeoisie, or middle class, owned the means of production . The bourgeoisie owned factories and machinery .
 By paying the working class less than their labor was worth, the bourgeoisie accumulated capital . The working class was paid less than they were worth, according to the bourgeois .
 Marx and Engels collaborated on the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, a radical newspaper that they edited in 1848-49 . According to communist ideals, it was the historic role of the working class to carry out a revolution, establishing a ""dictatorship of the proletariat""
 Marx was an excellent journalist, writing with humor and style as well as insightful political analysis . Marx was also an excellent political commentator . He was a well-known journalist for many years .
 KARL MARX, from the Communist Communist Party of 1848, was a leader of the movement . He was a member of the Communist Party in the early 1900s . He is credited with inspiring social revolution in the United States .
 His writings, combining German philosophy and economic analysis, were often dauntingly intellectual . His writings combine German philosophy with economic analysis .
 Marx proved the inevitability of the fall of capitalism and of a workers’ revolution, Marx said . Yet conviction spread that Marx had proved that Marx proved that capitalism had to fall and revolution . Yet a conviction spread .
 After his death, Marxism was adopted as a belief system by revolutionary groups . It became the official ideology of states such as the Soviet Union and Communist China .
 June 19, 1843 Marries Prussian aristocrats daughter Jenny von Westphalen . Marries Prussian aristocrat Jenny von Westphen .
 August 28, 1844 Friedrich Engels meets Marx in Paris and shows him his work on The Condition of the Working Class in England . Marx and Engels' lifelong collaboration begins . Engels and Marx met in Paris in 1844 .
 Marx and Engels move to Brussels, Belgium, after being expelled from Paris . Marx, Engels were expelled from France in 1845 . Engels and Marx were later exiled from Belgium .
 March 1848 Arrested and expelled from Brussels, Marx moves to Paris, where a revolution has overthrown the monarchy . Marx was expelled from the Belgian capital in 1848 after a revolution in Paris .
 June 1848-May 1849 Marx returns to Cologne and edits a radical newspaper, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung . When the paper is suppressed he returns to Paris .
 Marx was expelled from Paris in 1849 . Marx moved to London, where he settled for the rest of his life . Marx died in 1883 .
 April 6, 1855, Edgar Marx's best-loved son, eight-year-old Edgar, dies . Four of Marx's seven children die between 1850 and 1857 .
 Land was held by a vassal on behalf of a lord or a king in return for loyalty and military service . Land held by vassals was held in the return of loyalty to the lord or king . Land was also held by the king or a lord in exchange for loyalty
 Serfs, mostly unfree peasants, labored for the vassals in a state of virtual slavery in return for the right to farm some of the land for themselves . Serfs labored in the state-like slavery in the early 1800s in return to the land . Ser
 During the 17th and 18th centuries a trading system called mercantilism, operated in Europe, particularly England, France, and the Netherlands . The trading system operated in England, the Netherlands and France .
 It aimed to amass national wealth, especially in the form of gold bullion . It was aimed at amassing national wealth in the way of amassing wealth .
 Under this system the means of production are privately owned and goods are produced for a profit . The system is known as the 'private ownership' of the means and production .
 Capitalism promotes a free market that is regulated by supply and demand . Capitalism promotes the free market by regulating supply of demand, not demand .
 Humanist values run counter to the harsh treatment of working people during the Industrial Revolution . They made an important contribution to the development of socialist thinking . The Humanist Revolution was founded in the 18th century .
 The drive by 19th-century industrialists to maximize profits resulted in dirty and dangerous conditions for most working people . Workers lived in factories like these Pittsburgh steel mills and in overcrowded, inadequate housing .
 These appalling conditions were the subject of numerous campaigns by social reformers . The appalling conditions in the area were subject to numerous campaigns .
 Factory owners enjoyed huge profits during the Industrial Revolution, but new working class was impoverished . Factory owners enjoy huge profits but the new working-class was impoverished.
 The hope of making the world a fairer place had existed for centuries . This inequality gave rise to political ideas that aimed to organize and inspire workers, so that they could share the wealth they created .
 The Industrial Revolution was largely in response to the Industrial Revolution . The idea developed into a political philosophy called socialism . However, it was largely developed into socialism .
 Socialism seeks to share wealth by putting it in the hands of its creators—the working class . Socialism is not socialism, but socialism is a form of socialism, it's a way of sharing wealth .
 A central issue of socialist debate was whether this could be achieved gradually or through a revolution in which the working class seized power . However, a central issue in the debate of socialism was whether it could be done gradually or in a revolution . The working class should seize power in order to achieve
 Early 19th-century socialists included Robert Owen, a Welsh industrialist . Owen came to believe in the construction of societies in which property was owned collectively .
 After establishing an experimental model community around his cotton mill at New Lanark in Scotland, he continued to attempt to found cooperative communities, most notably in New Harmony, Idaho, though this was not a success .
 Men and women should have equal rights, according to Utopian socialists . The idea was a radical belief for the age held by Utopians in the U.S. in the early 1900s .
 Henri Saint-Simon looked for a society in which there would be equal opportunities for all, while his followers proposed an end to private property . In France, he was often called the ""father of French socialism”
 Anarchism was among the many other radical ideas to emerge in the early 19th century . It held that the state itself could be replaced by a system of voluntary cooperation between workers .
 Marx viewed history as a series of class struggles that would ultimately lead to the end of capitalism and the arrival of an ideal, classless society without private property, and free from exploitation and want—a theory he called communism .
 He published his beliefs in the Communist Manifesto, which he wrote with Friedrich Engels .
 Marx believed that such change could only be reached through a process of violent revolution . Marx believed such change was only possible through a violent revolution, Marx said .
 It is highly unlikely that many working class people read the work of Marx or other socialist figures, but their discontent was evident . The rise of Marxism was evident in the working class in the 1930s .
 In 1848 Europe was shaken by a series of revolutions, which erupted as a result of various factors, including high unemployment . The revolutions were the result of high unemployment and high unemployment in Europe .
 Although all the revolutions were quashed, labor movements emerged strong . The labor movement emerged strong in the early 1900s .
 Marx played a more direct role in one of these movements in 1864, when a group of workers and intellectuals formed the International Working Men's Association, or First International . Marx was a member of the First International, or the International Workers' Association .
 Alternative version of socialism, known as ""social democracy,"" was gaining momentum in Germany and spreading to other European nations . Social democracy was beginning to gain momentum .
 French newspaper report Karl Marx featured on the front page of the newspaper L'Illustration in November 1871 . Inspired by the work of the German philosopher Ferdinand Lasalle, social democrats asserted that it was possible to be a socialist .
 Nine months earlier Parisian workers had set up the Commune, a short-lived government that was hailed as the first example of ""the dictatorship of the proletariat" for a fair government to free workers .
 In his eyes, capitalism and the growth of socialism were steps toward revolution and communism, he said . In the 1930s, he called capitalism and socialism a step toward revolution .
 Marx sought revolution in Russia, though he had envisaged it happening in more industrialized societies, like Britain . The revolution Marx sought eventually took place in Russia . Marx envisaged revolution in industrialized societies like Britain, but it took place only in Russia.
 In 1800 Robert Owen set up a model community at this mill in Lanark, Scotland . New Lanark was set up by Robert Owen in 1800s .
 From the early 19th century, British workers organized themselves into associations called trade unions to protect their common interests . The unions were created to protect workers' interests .
 Political parties espousing social democracy have held power for long periods during the 20th century . Social democracy has held power in Scandinavian countries, Germany, France, Scandinavia .
 They created societies in which wealth was redistributed among all their citizens . Wealth was distributed among all citizens . The socialists created societies where wealth was shared among citizens .
 Romanticism saw the beginning of the distinction between art and science . Elevating the importance of self-expression, intuition, emotion, and the imagination over reason .
 Before Romanticism, Enlightenment thinkers sought answers to profound questions in science and reason . E4 BEFORE: Enlightenment thinkers seek answers to questions about the nature of the universe . Before romanticism was Romanticism was the focus of science .
 Classicists follow the formal rules of art set down by ancient cultures . Classicists followed the formal rule of art in ancient art .
 French philosopher René Descartes advocated doubting everything until rational grounds had been established for believing it . Descarte's philosophy led enlightened thinkers to challenge previously accepted truths . The French philosopher's work was published in 17th century .
 Romanticism gave Germans a sense of national unity at a time when ""Germany"" was little more than a fragmented group of states . Its celebration of emotion is typical of Romantic poetry .
 German writers and poets advocated sturm und drang, flouting convention by rebelling against their rational educations and emphasizing emotion in their work . Led by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (see below) with his novel The Sorrows of Young Werther .
 The German pioneers also established other motifs that would become characteristic of the ves lum EU i (ons ae movement)
 Romanticism found its first expression not in France but among German writers, as a form of “cultural nationalism” Goethe was a major inspiration for the Romantic movement .
 GERMAN WRITER AND THINKER superior to reason. French Poet, "THE SALON OF 1846,” 1846 . French poet Charles Baudelaire was considered a genius .
 This led to the cult of the artist as hero, capable of expressing thoughts and feelings beyond the realms of ordinary people . The cult of artists as hero has led to a cult of art, leading to the belief that the artist is a hero .
 Romantic ideal was that art should be a form of self-expression rather than a commodity . Artists should not be treated as hired hands. Art for art for art's sake .
 Painters began to distance themselves from their craftbased heritage and . increasingly art became an imaginative product rather than merely . merely a possession of the artist's patron . Painters became more creative and more imaginative in the 1930s .
 This reinforced the Romantic idea of the artist as a gifted individual, intrinsically different from ‘ordinary’ people . Byron, Beethoven and Wagner all believed to have been gifted artists . Byron was the focus of the Romantic notion of a gifted person, not ordinary people .
 Many painters abandoned the strict rules of classicism and instead brought personal significance to their work .
 Turner in England, Géricault and Delacroix in France, and Caspar David Friedrich in Germany, explored the subjects of nature, individual consciousness, and the cultural history of their nations . Turner in . England, Théodore . Géicault and Eugene Del
 Poets explored themes of childhood, subjective experience, and the mysteries of the natural world . Poets used traditional poetic forms to explore themes such as childhood and subjective experience .
 He presented himself as a restless hero, in perpetual search of a deeper understanding through his work . He was also a restless, restless hero in search of deeper understanding .
 Perhaps the best expression of Romanticism is found in classical music . Classical music is a form of form of art .
 19th century composers produced masterpieces that are still popular today . Ludwig van Beethoven's symphonies, the Romantic songs of Franz Schubert, and the epic operas of Richard Wagner produced many masterpieces . The 19th-century composers also produced symph
 Claude Debussy declared that it was a Art song Gretchen am Spinnrade, a selection of text from “art song" On hearing Beethoven’s Ninth symphony, the French composer . Debussy's Ninth Symphony was a musical rendering of a literary text .
 Gothic revival Romanticism celebrated the medieval Gothic style in art, literature, and architecture . It is a typical example of a lied .
 Keble College, Oxford, England, controversial for use of Gothic-style red brick rather than traditional stone . ‘Universal nightmare’ for all other composers, because no one would ever be capable of bettering it .
 The cult of the individual Romanticism fundamentally changed the way society views art and the artist . Romanticism reintroduced the classical idea that the creative act sets the artist apart .
 This contributed to a separation of arts and sciences and to the notion of the avant garde—of artists ahead of their time, pioneering new ways of thinking . This contributed . to the separation of Arts and Sciences and to notion of avant Garde .
 The Death of Byron is depicted lying on his deathbed by the Flemish Romantic painter Joseph-Denis Odevaere . Lord Byron's deathbed is depicted by the painter .
 Byron, who tried to help liberate Greece from Ottoman rule, is presented as a classical Greek hero . Byron is portrayed as a hero of classical Greek culture . Byron was born in 18th century .
 After 5x Artistic movements continued to spring from reactions to what was going on in society, as well as influencing social change themselves .
 In 1848 a growing reaction against materialism and industrialization in Britain contributed to the foundation of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood . John Everett Millais, Dante Gabriel Rossetti, and William Holman Hunt founded the group .
 Rossetti and his sister Christina were both notable poets . They had strong links to the literary world, and Rossetti was a prominent poet .
 As art became more of a commodity for the middle classes, its subject matter became tied to their values . Art became a commodity and subject matter was tied to the values of the middle class .
 Realism was a reaction against idealization in art and a rejection of literary or exotic subjects . Realism is a reaction to idealization and idealization of art and rejection of exotic subjects. Realism was a reaction .
 French painter Gustave Courbet embodied its ideals, believing that an artist should only paint scenes of everyday life . Courbet believed that a painter should only depict everyday life in his painting .
 ADAM AND EVE believe that the world was Darwin's grandfather, created exactly as stated in Erasmus Darwin, who in the Bible . Other creationists challenges came from ADAM .
 The 1794 noted a progressional Church believed that the world was created change in animals . Based on a literal reading of this, the 1794 note noted that the church believed that animals were responsible for the creation .
 Earth naturalist Jean-Baptiste de and its species of plants and animals, including Lamarck, also proposed a humans, are unchanging . French between 6000 and 40008cE, and that Earth .
 Charles' theory of progressive Darwin was influenced by theologians such as William Paley . Paley argued that the natural world was too complex not to have had a creator .
 The theory of evolution is often called “Darwinism,” after the British naturalist Charles Darwin . Charles Darwin's 1871 Origin of Species was published in 1871 . Darwin's evolutionary theory is often known as "Darwinistism"
 Darwin published the results of his research in the first evolutionary theory based on scientific evidence . Darwin published his theory in 1859 .
 His controversial work known as On the Origin of Species changed our view of the world . The controversial work was published in 1883 .
 The idea that humankind and animals had evolved from more primitive creatures was nothing new, even in Darwin’s day . Omana, lthough the uproar caused by On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection might suggest otherwise .
 Scottish encyclopedist Robert Chambers anonymously published Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation in 1844 . Chambers scandalized Victorian society by anonymously publishing the book . Some 2,500 years later, Chambers published the book again anonymously .
 Darwin's theory of natural selection was based on the realization that separate species were all derived from common ancestors . Darwin's Theory of Natural Selection was inspired by the discovery of the species' common ancestors.
 Frontispiece to his Evidence as to Man's Place in Nature, 1865, reveals the similarities in the skeletons of gibbon, orangutan, chimpanzee, gorilla, and human .
 Mar. time, contradicting the Biblical notion that they had been unchanged since their creation by God . The Bible said they were unchanged since they were created by God.
 Chambers' ideas were unscientific and unsubstantiated, but the very idea of evolution was enough to ensure that the book sold in huge numbers . Chambers’ ideas were . unscientified and unsubstitivated, but .
 Darwin traveled as a naturalist aboard HMS Beagle, on a scientific survey of South American waters . Darwin traveled aboard the Beagle from 1831 to 1836 . Darwin is credited with leading scientific discoveries in South America .
 Darwin found evidence to support the geologist Charles Lyell’s idea that the world had evolved through gradual processes . Darwin began to forge his own theory several years later that he forged his own idea .
 In the meantime he read Thomas Malthus’s “Essay on the Principle of Population” (see 291), which argued that the size of an animal population is limited by its food supply . The size of a population is only limited by food supply, Malth
 Darwin's friend, ornithologist John Gould, realized that finches that Darwin brought back from his voyage shared common ancestors . Darwin wondered why .
 Darwin began to work on what he called his theory of “transmutation” in 1842 . Darwin’s theory of "transmutation” was published in 1843 . Darwin's theory of 'transmutations' is published in a book, "Trans
 Darwin finally published when it emerged that zoogeographer Alfred Wallace was working on a similar theory . Darwin's theory was published in Darwin's first published work .
 Charles Lyell persuaded Darwin to submit a paper to London’s Linnean Society (a biological society) which was read on July 1, 1858, the same night as Wallace’e essay . Charles Darwin submitted the paper to the society, and it was read by
 Charles Darwin collected biological 2, 9 UU and anatomical specimens during the voyage of the Beagle . Details of the details of the specimens were put in 12 catalogs .
 Darwin’s theory was natural selection . Natural selection was the novel element in Darwin's theory of evolution . The Descent of Man was published in The Darwinistist's first published book, The Great War .
 Wallace's idea that individuals compete with each other for resources differed from Wallace’s idea that they competed against the environment . Wallace's version, that individuals competed against each other, differed from that of Wallace's .
 Darwin's theory has been highly influential, and is widely taught, but debate over the origin of life on Earth continues . Humanity’s descent from the apes was a minor part of his 1871 book, The Descent of Man .
 As Darwin completed his book, Austrian botanist Gregor Mendel was researching heredity in plants . Mendel's work was published in the same year as Darwin's book, Darwin published his book .
 Mendel's work led to the new science of genetics, which explains how the mutations necessary for natural selection occur and are passed on . In the 20th century, after years of neglect, Mendel led to a new science that explains how mutations occur .
 After the voyage, he gained wide respect for the papers he published describing his findings, and then, plagued by illness, he painstakingly prepared the publication that was to change the course of scientific history .
 Darwin was buried in London's Westminster Abbey alongside Isaac Newton . He was buried alongside the physicist Isaac Newton in London .
 This was controversial, gaining both support and criticism from scientific and religious figures . This was supported by religious figures, including religious leaders .
 Many people still doubt that complex living things such as human beings could have been created by entirely natural processes . After InTELLIGENT DESIGN: After InDesign . After Design: After Design .
 Popular in the 19th century, the idea was revived in the late 20th century . The idea was popular in the mid-20th century and was revived again in the 20th Century .
 Galileo Galilei asserted his belief that Earth revolved around the Sun in 1622 in his book Dialogues on the Two Chief World Systems . Galilei's theory was first put forward a century earlier . Galileo's theory of the Earth revolving around the sun was first published in 16
 During the 17th century the emergence of scientific societies such as the Royal Society in Britain and the Académie des Sciences in France provided forums for debate and the formalization of the scientific method .
 The societies also gave science respectability, though it continued to face opposition from the Church .
 Newton believed that God was the force behind the natural systems his science had sought to explain, with the universe as a clockwork machine created by God . Newton believed the universe was created by the God, who created it .
 Darwin's book, which advanced the theory that all creatures had evolved through natural selection, critically undermined the literal interpretation of the Bible . The Bible held that God created the world, including humans, during a period of six days around 6,000 years ago . Darwin's theory was critical to
 Charles Darwin published On The Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection in 1859 . Charles Darwin put forward his theory of evolution . Darwin's theory was published on The Origin Of Species by By Means of Selection .
 This sparked a public debate over the roles of religion and science in providing the means by which humans understood the world around them .
 Their debate became known as ""the moment that science clashed with religion."" its position . The debate was known as the moment when religion clashed with science .
 Huxley quipped that he would rather be descended from a monkey than a bishop . Bishop Wilberforce attacked him over a perceived lack of evidence . Huxleys quipped: 'I'm not a bishop'
 This challenge to previously accepted ideas was not a deliberate attack on religion by science . It came simply from the fact that discoveries were being made that were at odds with Christian doctrine .
 The Creation of Adam Michelangelo's depiction of God creating Man adorns the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel in Rome . Michelangelo depicted the creation of Man creating Man in Michelangelo’s creation of the Bible . The creation was created by Michelangelo in the 17th century .
 It is part of a series of panels depicting stories from the book of Genesis, the first book of the Bible . The panels depict stories from Genesis, which was published in 2000 .
 Many Christians were willing to consider Biblical chronology as Science has continued its attempts to explain the universe . Creationism still causes debate today, while the issue of Creationism is still debated today .
 The six days of creation were interpreted as epochs, or geological time periods . The six-day creation was created in a geological time period .
 The idea that humans themselves were descended from apes was much harder to accept . The ‘monkey theory’ was derided as the “monkey theory" in the 1960s . The idea of human descent from apes is much less accepted now .
 Some found a way to reconcile the information with their religious beliefs . Some found it easy to reconcile with their beliefs .
 In 1869 Dmitri Mendeleev wrote the name of each chemical element on a card with its chemical properties and atomic weight . The card was created by a Russian chemist .
 He arranged the cards in a grid according to property and weight . The modern periodic table has reversed this system .
 Science gained credibility alongside religion, rather than instead of instead of replacing it . Christianity proved resilient to change, and Christianity was resilient to the change .
 The reduction of the Church's influence by the state following the French Revolution in 1789 resulted in greater religious freedom throughout Europe, with a move away from state religions toward more numerous denominations .
 Georges Lemaitre, a Belgian scientist and Catholic priest, proposed that the universe was created by the explosion of a ""quantum singularity" or “big bang” in 1927 .
 ALBERT EINSTEIN led to increased church building in many European cities . Albert Einstein led to an increase in church numbers in Europe .
 Scientific progress continued, with people experiencing its effects through technology and medical advances .
 As scientific knowledge filtered through society, it became more accessible to the public . It became easier to access to scientific knowledge through scientific knowledge .
 Despite the fears of the Church, society was not faced with a stark choice between science or God . Despite the Church's fears, society did not have to choose between science and God .
 Advances in science and belief led to acceptance of belief, not belief, in many cases . Instead, they led to the acceptance of both science and beliefs .
 The discovery of fossilized ancient creatures such as these ammonites seriously undermined the teachings of the Bible regarding the age of Earth and the way it was created . Ammonites are believed to have been the world's oldest creatures .
 The belief that the universe was created by a god, rather than being formed by a process of evolution . After creationism .
 In mainstream Western thinking, scientific theories have largely replaced Creationism . Creationism has been replaced by scientific theories .
 Creationism usually refers to Christian fundamentalists who oppose the teaching of scientific theories such as evolution and the Big Bang . However, there is still a vociferous creationist minority, and in modern usage Creationism is Creationism .
 By the late 17th century, dramatic advances had been made in mathematics, astronomy, and biology . By the 1770s, the world had seen dramatic advances in mathematics and astronomy .
 Coal was used to power steam engines that drained mines and eventually drove machinery . Coal was also used in the mines to power mines and drive machinery .
 Charles Babbage worked on the development of an Analytical Engine in the 1840s . Had it been completed, it would have been capable of performing calculations similar to the early computers of the 19405 .
 Ada Lovelace, a woman fascinated by mathematics, saw the possibilities of the machine . Ada saw the possibility of making the world's first machine possible .
 Richard Gatling's mechanical gun of the 1860s consisted of six barrels mounted in a revolving frame . Six barrels were mounted in the revolving frame of a revolving gun .
 The four essentials of technological advances are the right idea, the method to execute it, the perfect moment in time, and the availability of the right materials . Ingenious Inventions are the four essentials to make technological advances .
 Factories filled with labor force as agricultural manual work gave way to mechanization . Factories were filled with a labor force in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Manufacturing produced cheaper goods for a mass market, encouraged by the rise in wages and standards of living . Manufacturing is now producing cheaper products for the mass market . Manufacturers are encouraged to produce cheaper products to meet mass market demand .
 The traditional workplace, and the home, were being rapidly transformed . The traditional home and workplace were being transformed in a new way .
 Michael Faraday was a great man in the 19th century . Faraday died in his home town of Cambridge, Cambridge, in 1843 . He died in 1846 at the hands of a doctor at the age of 92 .
 Faraday discovered that an electric current was produced in a coil of wire when a magnet was moved through the coil . Faraday made the discovery of the electric current in a wire .
 His experiments with electricity in the 1830s led to dramatic developments in the sphere of communications . His experiments in electricity led to a revolution in communications technology .
 In 1837, British scientists William Cook and Charles Wheatstone patented the electric telegraph . The method was a method of sending messages through wires to a remote receiver . It was patented in 1837 .
 Two British men, Bryan Donkin and John Hall, developed tin cans in 1810 . By 1876 the inventor Alexander Graham Bell, a Briton living in Britain, had invented the invention .
 While early tin cans were opened with a hammer and chisel, lighter steel cans made the can opener possible . Today's tin can opener is a modern invention .
 Another electrical discovery in 1887, Heinrich Hertz proved the existence of radio waves, which revolutionized communications . The discovery was made by Hertz, a German scientist who discovered radio waves .
 In 1906 Marconi achieved his final goal by transmitting speech over the airwaves using radio transmissions . Marconi's final goal was to transmit speech using the radio in 1906 .
 By the turn of the 20th century wars were being fought with more advanced weapons . Food was preserved in new tin cans, and domestic refrigeration was evolving .
 Cars emerged on the roads, shipbuilding was prolific, railroads stretched across continents, and the first plane was about to take off . The first plane, the first airplane, took off in 1903 in the first year .
 In the US, Wilbur and Orville Wright progressed by way of gliders to a fabriccovered wooden biplane . In the UK, the Wright brothers built a fabric-covered wooden plane .
 Domestic life was being slowly transformed by sewing machines, washing machines, electric stoves, electric heaters, and vacuum cleaners . Electric stoves were being slowly replaced with electric heater heaters .
 Film of workers leaving the Lumière factory during their lunch hour was shown . They listened to gramophones, which played flat discs, in 1895 .
 Berliner gramophone Emile Berliner created the forerunner of modern records and record players . Berliner's Berliner record players were the precursor to modern record players and records .
 This 1890s model plays grooved flat discs, which were cheaply produced . It was made of cheaply-made discs with grooved grooves .
 Alexander Graham Bell had transmitted speech along a wire by 1876 . Bell “Box’ telephone’s ‘Box” telephone was invented in 1876. Bell ‘box’ was the first to transmit speech on a wire .
 The early Bell telephone has a combined trumpetlike mouthpiece and earpiece . The camera was developed in 1908, 60 years after the earliest models .
 Powered by a amins» P single-cylinder engine, there were two forward speeds and no reverse gear . Powered by an amins » P single engine, the car has two forward and reverse gears and two forward speed .
 American inventor Thomas Edison was a self-taught inventor . Edison was the inventor of the first steam engine . Edison's invention was the subject of numerous patents .
 From the age of 12 he began devoting all of his spare time to scientific experimentation . Attending school for only three months, from the aged of 12, he attended school for three months . Attended school for just three months before he was given the opportunity to study science .
 George Eastman developed cheap cameras such as this example in the early 1900s . Eastman Kodak Brownie was developed by the American American .
 With Orville F^ | k 3 DE | telephone, the plane rose to 10 ft fa E l successful and landed heavily after 12 seconds . The plane was the first to take off from the airfield in the world .
 Of the 9j | | | electric lamp, three flights that day, the longest lasted 59 seconds . The longest lasted "^ d | andhe ret 59 seconds"
 Science continued to progress in the 20th century, making technology accessible, and breaking down barriers to communication . Science continues to progress through the decades .
 Late 19th-century Leclanché cell is an early example of a battery battery . The battery was developed in the 1880s and 1890s .
 James Ritty invented the cash register in 1879 to stop theft by cashiers . The American invented the register to stop cashiers stealing . The cash register was invented by Ritty to stop thieves .
 The Americas were the greatest attraction for European settlers in Europe . The Americas was the biggest attraction to European settlers .
 In 1652 the Dutch founded a settlement at Cape Town, southern Africa, to provision their ships . Cape Town was founded by the Dutch in 1652 to supply ships .
 The world in 1900 European influence stretched across the world . Imperialism—empire-building—expanded so rapidly that by 1900, extensive European influence was evident .
 Portugal, Germany, and Denmark all controlled parts of Africa, Southeast Asia, and South America . Britain, Russia, and France were the pre-eminent .
 The newly discovered continents of the world offered huge wealth, for example, but once this was realized, traders preferred to do business under their own administration .
 When Britain seized South Africa, it was because they wanted to deal with the British, rather than native Africans or the Dutch Afrikaner settlers, called Boers . The British took control of South Africa in the early 1900s .
 It became apparent that they were an abundant source of cheap labor . It also became obvious that they also became an abundant resource of cheap labour .
 Another factor in imperial growth was the political rivalries of the major European powers . Political rivalries were also a factor .
 In cases, colonization was a matter of claiming a nation b another power could get there . In cases of colonization, it was a simple matter to claim a nation .
 Many felt it their duty to spread Christianity, believing it was, in the poet Rudyard Kipling's words, the . white man's burden"" to “civilize” the native population . Many felt that it was the . “white man's . burden"
 Communities of merchants were established, with garrisons protecting them . Only rarely did the colonists take formal control of them .
 The colonial nations found Australasia and North America sparsely inhabited . The colonial nation's colonial possessions were found sparsely populated .
 New lands beckoned European settlers. But elsewhere, such as India, they were not so welcoming . Empire and migration led to European settlement .
 In the 19th century, Britain's maritime prowess established it as the leading colonial power . It led to large-scale migration to South Africa .
 In the 19th century, millions arrived from across the Atlantic Ocean . The frontier of the U.S. moved west .
 In Victoria, Australia, the discovery of gold in the 1850s triggered a rise in the population from 76,000 to 540,000 in just ten years . The population in Victoria, Victoria, rose from 76 to 540000 in ten years.
 Colonists exported their dress, language, and religions around the globe . Colonists have exported their dresses, language and religions to the world .
 By 1900, much of the inhabited world was governed, directly or indirectly, by Europeans, or those of European descent . granted, or won, their independence . granted or won their independence, by 1900, or by any means .
 In North and South America and Australia, European rule left a permanent stamp on the continent . In Australia and the U.S. European rule has left a lasting legacy in Australia .
 By 1976, 21 African countries had military governments . This often led to dictatorships . By 1976 Africa had 21 countries with military governments.
 100,000 highly skilled African workers went to Europe, but they often faced discrimination . Africa's development failures in Africa and new immigration and refugee policies in Europe saw mass migration .
 Indigenous peoples such as the forest people of the Amazon, the tribal people of India, and the Inuit of the Arctic lost their land during colonization . The Inuit lost their place in the Arctic .
 There is still a threat of territorial invasion, and the plundering of resources, in these places . There is also a threat to territorial invasion of these places, says the BBC .
 Queen Victoria was the longest reigning monarch in British history . She was the only child of the Duke of Kent, fourth son of George III, and his German wife, Princess Victoria .
 On the death of William IV in 1837, the 18-year-old Princess Victoria acceded to the throne . She was the daughter of William III, the son of Prince William IV .
 She had slept in her mother’s room, and one of her first decisions, on moving into Buckingham Palace, was to insist on a bedroom of her own . Until then, she had slept with her mother's room .
 The Queen and her consort exemplified respectable ‘Victorian’ family values . As a loving couple with a happy home life, the queen and consort were seen here with some of their nine children .
 After his death, Victoria reputedly made decisions based on what she thought he would have done . She is believed to have made decisions after his death based on his actions .
 Victoria’s first prime minister, Lord Melbourne, was her early mentor . But within a couple of years he was replaced by the love of her life, Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha . Albert was the fatherly Lord Melbourne .
 As one of Victoria’s German cousins, Albert was considered an appropriate husband . Albert was one of Queen's German cousins .
 He was just three months younger than Victoria when he was born . The same midwife had assisted at both of their births .
 Photography, an Invention of her reign, made Victoria an international icon, spreading her image around the world . Victoria's reign was the beginning of the Victoria era, when she became an icon .
 F intelligent, deeply serious young man, fluent in several languages and acutely conscious of his duties as the unofficial king of England . F intelligent and deeply serious, he is also a fluent speaker of several languages .
 Victoria and Albert presented the public with the novel spectacle of a young and serenely happy royal family . Albert and Albert were married at the age of 18 .
 For the birth of her eighth baby, Prince Leopold, Victoria had pain relief in the shape of newly available chloroform . The pain relief was used to ease the pain of childbirth .
 She found it “soothing, quieting and delightful beyond measure,"" and this royal endorsement made it easier for other women to opt for pain relief in childbirth .
 To reach their new homes at Balmoral in Scotland and Osborne on the Isle of Wight, the royal family took advantage of the railroads, another recent invention . The royal family's new homes in Scotland are Balmoral and Osborne .
 For Victoria, Balmoral Castle, with its specially designed turrets and tartans, was a In 1856. For Victoria it was a specially designed castle .
 She was laid to rest in the Frogmore mausoleum at Windsor Castle, alongside Albert .
 Victoria Cross is a military decoration for conspicuous bravery . It was created by Queen Victoria Exhibiting the world . The Victoria Cross was created in 1903 .
 Her husband's interest in art and design culminated in the Great Exhibition OR 1851 . 112,000 items from across the world were displayed in the Crystal Palace in Hyde Park, London .
 She had a much better relationship with his rival, Benjamin Disraeli, who coaxed and flattered the widowed queen into renewing her interest and participation in public life . The queen's relationship with the British prime minister was described as a "miracle"
 It was Disraeli who had Victoria proclaimed Empress of India, a title and a role in which she took great interest and pride . Victoria took great pride in her role in the role .
 The queen-empress commanded global esteem and affection in 1897 . Ten years later, on the occasion of the Diamond Jubilee of 1897, she commanded global . The Queen-Empress of 1897 was the Queen of England .
 Soon afterward, her health began to fail, and she was 81 when she died in January 1901 .
 The widow of Windsor Albert’s sudden death from typhoid in 1861 was a shock from which Victoria never fully recovered . Victoria never recovered from the shock of her sudden death .
 As the “widow of Windsor,” she withdrew from public life and lost some of her early popularity . She withdrew from her early public life after the death of Windsor .
 Alexandrina Victoria was born at Kensington Palace, London, May 24, 1819 . She was the first queen of the British Empire .
 William IV becomes King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland in 1830 . With no legitimate children to succeed him, his niece Victoria becomes heiress presumptive . William IV's niece Victoria is heir presumptive .
 May 24, 1837, is 18 and becomes eligible to assume the throne if her uncle dies . She turns 18 in 1837 and is eligible to take the throne .
 June 20, 1837 Becomes Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland when William IV dies of heart failure . She is Queen of United Kingdom and Ireland .
 February 10, 1840 Marries Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha in the Chapel Royal at St. George's Chapel Royal .
 May 6, 1840 England issues its first postage stamp, costing one penny, which bears the image of Queen Victoria . The stamp was issued by Queen Victoria in 1841 .
 Edward Oxford fires two bullets into her coach in 1840 . Edward Oxford is the first of a total of seven attempts on her life . She is pregnant at the time .
 Her first child, the Princess Royal Victoria Adelaide Mary, was born in 1840 . November 21, 1840 .
 Victoria opens the Great Exhibition in Hyde Park, London, in May 1851 . Exhibition showcases international culture and industry . Victoria opened the exhibition in 1851.
 June 26, 1857 Victoria Cross awarded for first time; 62 soldiers and sailors receive it . 62 soldiers, sailors receive the Victoria Cross .
 Devastated by the death of Albert, Victoria sinks into depression and starts a period of isolation . Victoria withdraws from public life after the death, withdrawing from public .
 May 1, 1876 Proclaimed the ""Empress of India"" by the British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli . Proclaimed to be the Empress of India by the Prime Minister of India .
 Queen Victoria's reign surpasses that of George III as the longest in English, Scottish, and British history . Victoria was crowned Queen of England in 1896 .
 January 22, 1901 Dies of a cerebral hemorrhage at Osborne House on the Isle of Wight, bringing to an end a reign of nearly 64 years . The Queen of England died in 1901 .
 The Portuguese captured the Malaysian peninsula in 1511, moved on to the Spice Islands in 1513, and then China, Japan, and Indonesia . The Portuguese also captured the Chinese, Japanese and Indonesian islands .
 The Spanish arrived next, setting up plantations in the Philippines in 1565 . The Spaniards set up plantations on the island in 1566 .
 Two private trading companies set up colonies in Asia . The English East India Company set up in India . The Dutch East India company set up a colony in Asia.
 The explosive power of European firearms ensured that the colonizing powers swiftly overcame indigenous populations . The Dene-Harding revolver was used by the colonizers of indigenous people .
 Until then, Britain had transported convicts to North America, but the American Revolution made this impossible . The American Revolution was the first time convicts had been transported to the United States .
 The use of Britain's new Australian colony for this purpose had been proposed in 1779, by English botanist Sir Joseph Banks .
 The natives seemed more peaceful than the Maoris of New Zealand—and this was to prove and armed resistance proved ineffectual . Armed resistance proved unsuccessful .
 Foreign diseases, to which the Aboriginal population had little resistance, also caused widespread mortality . Foreign diseases were to blame for the deaths of Aboriginal people .
 Smallpox epidemic broke out in 1789, followed by influenza, typhus, chicken pox, whooping cough, tuberculosis, and syphilis .
 The chiefs ceded sovereignty in return for protection and guarantees against further encroachment on their lands . The chiefs were granted sovereignty in exchange for protection from further encroachments .
 The New Zealand (or Maori) Wars were fought between 1843-47 and 1860-72 . The treaty was not upheld, and the settlers’ continuing demands for land led to the New Zealand Wars .
 Maoris were equipped with firearms acquired through decades of trading, and fought back staunchly . The Maoris fought back strongly, using guns acquired through years of trading .
 The first outbreak of war was contained relatively quickly, but the second became a protracted Colonial Resistance . Resistance to the European colonization of Australia, New Zealand, and Southeast Asia brought very different outcomes for indigenous populations .
 In Australia and New Zealand, it led to the subjugation of the Aboriginals and Maoris; in Southeast Asia, to eventual independence their downfall . In Australia, New Zealand and New South Africa, it was led to subjugation .
 When James Cook landed in 1770 (see BEFORE), there were 300,000-350,000 Aboriginals in Australia . There were 350,000 people when Cook landed .
 Relations between native inhabitants and settlers were amicable, but as the colony expanded, the Aboriginals resisted . Initially, relations between natives and settlers was amicable .
 Aboriginal population was concentrated in the same fertile areas as the most populous parts of modern Australia . Their arrows and spears were no match for British guns, however, .
 British governors were instructed to protect Aboriginals, but they often imposed British values and, im the late 19th century, removed native children (the ‘Stolen Generation’) from their families, and moved them into state institutions . British governors often removed British children from their
 Maori resistance to European settlers in New Zealand was more fierce . European settlers came to New Zealand in the early 1900s . Maori were the first to resist European settlers .
 Abel Tasman and Cook received violent receptions, but Cook noted that tribal differences made united resistance unlikely . Abel Tasman was the first Dutch explorer to be attacked by Tasmanians .
 European and U.S. seal and whale hunters were trading with the Maoris in the early 19th century . European and United States seal hunters were also trading with Maoris .
 Treaty of guerrilla campaign cost around 1,000 Europeans and some 2,000 Maoris . Treaty of Treaty of Gueragement cost the lives of around 1.000 Europeans . Treaty was negotiated between Britain and the Maoris in order to protect British interests .
 A million acres of Maori land was confiscated in the 19th century, and most Maoris were confined to New Zealand's less fertile North Island . The Dutch took control of most of what is now Indonesia .
 In the 1790s, the Dutch East India Company (see BEFORE) collapsed and the Dutch government took over . The Dutch government was in charge of the company .
 From 1830 it forced Indonesian peasants to grow export crops, such as indigo and coffee, at set prices . Dutch investors allowed Dutch investors to lease land and establish plantations in Indonesia .
 The Dutch fought a series of wars between 1821 and 1901 . This led to an outbreak of nationalist resistance, leading to the outbreak of nationalistic resistance . It led to the death of the Dutch in the early 1800s .
 Emperor Napoleon III invaded Vietnam in 1858, but resistance was strong from the Chinese, who claimed sovereignty over Vietnam, and from the indigenous population . The murder or French Christians there provided the pretext for Napoleon III to invade . Napoleon III was killed or killed by French Christians .
 France took control of southern Vietnam and established a protectorate in Cambodia in 1863 . In 1863, France took over southern Vietnam, establishing an protectorate of Cambodia .
 Between 1874 and 1884, the French set up more protectorates in northern and central Vietnam . The French established a more protectorate of Vietnam in 1874 to 1884 .
 In 1887, these were incorporated, along with Cambodia, in the Union of French Indochina . Cambodia and Vietnam were incorporated in the union of the union .
 John Freeth was an English poet who lived in Malacca and Singapore . He wrote about Malacca, Singapore and Singapore in 1731-1808 .
 During the 19th and early 20th century Britain set up protectorates over a number of Malay states including part of Brunei and North Borneo . The protectorates were set up by the British government in the early 1900s .
 The British established highly profitable tin mines and rubber plantations in Malaya . The British set up highly profitable mines and plantations .
 Instead of exploiting the indigenous population, they imported Chinese labor for the mines, and Indian workers for the plantations, while encouraging the Malays to farm for a living .
 The result was a more peaceful coexistence than in many other European colonies in Southeast Asia . The result of the colony's colonial rule was peaceful and prosperous .
 Maori wahaika is a short dub made from wood, whalebone, or stone . Weapons were used for close fighting in Maori Maori .
 Britain granted commonwealth status to Australia in 1901, and New Zealand in 1907, recognizing their self-government within the empire . New Zealand became a nation of self-governors in 1907 .
 British Southeast Asian colonies were made independent between 1957 and 1984 . They became independent from British colonial rule in Southeast Asia .
 Aboriginal population declined to 60,000 in 1921 and the interwar period saw renewed confiscation of land . The Aboriginal population in NSW was at the peak of the 1920s .
 Aboriginals declared Australia | Day, the national holiday, to be a day of mourning . In 1938, on the 150th anniversary of European colonization, Australia was declared a national holiday .
 As the Mughal Empire's controlling grip on the area weakened, British influence increased . British influence in the area increased as the empire weakened .
 The lucrative spice trade had tempted the Portuguese to India since the mid-15th century . The Portuguese had been in the region since the 15th century.
 By the 16th century, India was visited by Italians, English, French, and Dutch, all eager to trade, seek adventure, or spread Christianity in the area .
 These companies acted as + trade organizations, and later provided a military presence @ inthe region . These ""3g companies" acted as . trade organizations . Later provided . military presence .
 As the British fortunes rose, the fragile Mughal Empire went into decline . However, as the British fortune rose, it went down in decline .
 Short reigns, protracted war, and peasant revolts undermined the Mughals . The Mughal empire was one of the world's most powerful statesmen .
 Indian provinces became more independent of central rule, paving the way for British interference . British rule paved the way to British interference in India .
 The desire for power and wealth has led nations to expand their influence far beyond their frontiers . The British Raj is the most powerful and most powerful in the world .
 The British Raj was the culmination of decades of British involvement and domination in the Indian subcontinent . The long-established English East India Company enabled Britain to enjoy unprecedented privileges in India .
 To protect this situation, the EIC has increased the number of troops deemed necessary to defend its establishments .
 Rivalry with other trading companies, especially the French, was fierce and led to the Seven Years War . Rivalry led to a slow, stuttering campaign for British expansion .
 In 1756, under Robert Clive, the British claimed the richest Mughal province, Bengal, in the northeast of the country . The British claimed Bengal in 1756 .
 The recapture of Calcutta by Clive in late 1756 and the storming of nearby French Chandernagore in early 1757 were milestones in the British domination of India . Clive’s success at Plassey in June of that year was also a milestone in the
 In 1763, the Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II formally inducted Clive and the EIC into the hierarchy . Clive was officially inducted by the Emperor in 1763 . Clive and Clive were the first to be inducted into the Muggal hierarchy .
 As Diwan for Bengal, the EIC received a title that amounted to Viceroy Curzon at the Maharajah's Palace . Nathaniel George Curzon ruled in place of the monarch .
 Devastating famines, and a dispute with Lord Kitchener, chief of the Indian army, led to his resignation .
 The British gained administrative powers throughout India and became more of a government than a trading concern . The British became a government rather than a trade concern .
 British influence knew no bounds, from the building of roads, an extensive railroad network, and schools, to an administrative system of officials that emerged as a model for the British civil service . British influence was evident in the early 1900s, with roads, schools, and a railroad network .
 Hinduism was seen as something from which the people were to be emancipated . Hindus were to emancipate themselves from Hinduism, according to Hinduism .
 By the late 1770s the East India Company was burdened with massive military expenditure and was in dire financial straits . This evangelical zeal led to the eventual erosion of British tolerance of Indian faiths .
 The Regulating Act of 1773 resulted in the EIC's becoming The Siege of Lucknow . The British Garrison in Lucknow, in northern India, was besieged by Indian rebels on July 1, 1857 .
 The siege was finally ended by Sir Colin Campbell's relief force in November 1857 . Despite the large numbers of mutineers, the siege was eventually ended in November .
 Indian locomotive The Fairy Queen was built in Britain in 1855 for the East Indian Railways . It is the world's oldest working engine and is subject to increased supervision .
 EIC had to surrender its monopoly of trade in India, allowing other corporations to operate in the region . When its royal charter— sovereign permission to operate as a corporation — was renewed in 1813 .
 Under the EIC, there was some rebellious behavior among Indian soldiers serving in the British army . They were aggrieved at their treatment . The Indian mutiny was the first of its kind .
 Rumors spread that the British had introduced a new rifle and cartridge into the Indian Army in 1857 . The flash point was reached in Meerut, northern India, when rumor spread .
 The cartridges were lubricated with grease containing pig and cow fat, offending both Hindu and Muslim soldiers . Soldiers had to bite open the lubricated cartridges to get lubricated . The cartridges had to be bitten open and lubricated by a grease made of cow fat .
 The revolt spread across the country, and was quelled in 1859 after much bloodshed . The revolt was finally quelled after a series of bloodshed .
 In 1858 a royal decree stated that all EIC rights were to be handed over to the British Crown . The EIC was given all of its rights to the Crown in 1858 .
 Indian artists often painted Christian subjects in order to appeal to the increasing Christian population of the country and patrons of the British Raj .
 After the Indian Mutiny and the decline of the EIC, many policies remained unchanged . British attitudes toward Indians shifted from openness to insularity .
 As more British families arrived with their servants, private clubs became symbols of wealth and snobbery . Private clubs were set up as symbols of British wealth .
 Exporporations such as cotton, wheat, and tea enriched the British, but profits rarely reached native pockets .
 The British insisted on an economic policy of laissez-faire, or free trade, refusing to free trade . In the 20th century, demands for Indian independence grew .
 At the end of the 19th century, calls for Indian independence were growing . Calls for independence in India were growing in India .
 Bengal's population was mainly Hindu in the west and Muslim in the east . Bengal was mainly Muslim in east and Hindu in west . The city was known for its religious traditions .
 BENJAMIN DISRAELI: 1881 impose tariffs or subsidies on imports and exports . Disraeli: "Tariffs or subsidies" imposed on imports or exports .
 They invested in the country’s infrastructure, especially trains, which assisted economic development, and irrigation works . Instead of investing in the infrastructure, they invested in infrastructure, including trains and irrigation .
 On tea estates that proliferated from the 1850s, indentured labor was widely employed . On the tea estates in the 1800s, it was common for indentured laborers .
 Most Indians lived in abject poverty, a state not helped by severe famines in the second half of the 19th century . The state was not helped .
 Their plight, and the continued deployment of Indian troops on imperial service in other countries, stirred nationalist feelings, resulting in an awakening Indian political consciousness .
 As the main nationalist political party, it was initially moderate and widely representative . The party was initially a moderate nationalist party . It was initially widely representative and initially moderate .
 By the beginning of the 20th century, a younger, more politically militant generation of Indians emerged, calling for independence from British rule .
 After arduous constitutional negotiations, the British agreed to transfer power on August 15, 1947 . The transfer of power was the result of a series of negotiations .
 Opium Wars of the mid-19th century were the culmination of more than 50 years of strained Anglo-Chinese relations . A nationalist movement arose in the early 20th century and independence was granted in 1948 .
 In 1784 a British merchant ship, the Lady Hughes, fired a cannon salute and accidentally killed two Chinese officials . Two Chinese officials were killed in the resulting incident .
 Chinese law required that whoever was responsible should be surrendered to the authorities . Chinese law requires that whoever is responsible for the incident should be surrender to authorities .
 The gunner was reluctantly handed over, and he was immediately strangled . The weaponner was forced to hand over the gunner, but he was killed .
 In 1792, Lord Macartney led a large British delegation to the summer palace of Emperor Qianlong at Rehe . He requested the accreditation of a British minister at court, the opening of more ports, and the provision of an island base .
 He refused to perform the ceremonial ceremonial three prostrations and nine head knockings . He was granted an audience but refused to do the kotow .
 Qianlong accepted Macartney's gifts but rejected all the envoy's requests . Qianlong was the first Chinese leader to accept the gifts from Macartney .
 By 1838, use of opium, a highly addictive drug, was spiraling out of control in China . The Opium Wars began in 1838 and ended in 1839 .
 In 1906, opium cultivation was finally banned and opium dens were forced to close . Opium dens were closed in 1906 and opium cultivation banned .
 The apparatus for opium smoking was confiscated and burned in public bonfires . Leading official, Lin Zexu, was appointed to suppress trade in Guangzhou, Guangzhou .
 On his arrival, Lin confiscated all opium stocks, and forced foreign residents to sign a bond agreeing to stop trading in the drug . Lin also made a bond to stop foreign residents signing a ban on opium trading .
 The British government, having learned that its citizens had been imprisoned, sent an expeditionary force to China . British government had learned of its citizens being imprisoned .
 This force blockaded Guangzhou and, moving north, threatened the capital Beijing . This force blocked Guangzhou, then moved north, threatening the capital .
 In 1842, a larger expeditionary force brought about a Chinese surrender, ending the First Opium War . The war ended in 1842 with the help of a larger force in China .
 China was compelled to negotiate the Treaty of Nanjing . It ceded Hong Kong to Britain, admitted missionaries, controlled external tariffs, opened five treaty ports, and removed Westerners from Chinese jurisdiction . China was forced to negotiate a treaty of peace between China and Britain .
 The outcome of the conflict between Britain and China was largely determined by weaponry . Sword used in Opium Wars was the weapon used in the conflict .
 Chinese swords captured by British naval officer in 1842 were no match for British firearms . They were captured by a British officer in the same year .
 By 1860 China had been defeated, and was forced to grant further privileges to Britain . The privileges were later extended to other Western powers . By 1860, China had already been defeated .
 China in the mid-19th century was under threat from a series of internal rebellions, the largest of which was the Taiping Rebellion . China was not only under attack from foreign powers, it was also under threat of internal rebellion .
 Hong Xiuquan had a series of dreams that led him to believe he had a mission to restore China to Christianity . In 1836, a Christian teacher had dreams that convinced him to return to China .
 He made converts among peasants and miners in Guangxi, south China, in 1851 . In January 1851 declared the establishment of the Taiping Tianguo, the Heavenly Kingdom of Great Peace .
 China's first modern army, the Anhui Army, adopted Western-style drills and weapons . It was raised by statesman Li Hongzhang to campaign against a series of mid-19th-century rebellions . In 1853, Taiping rebels were defeated by the Chinese
 Hunan army, organized on a network of personal loyalty, captured Nanjing in 1864 . Hunan was financed by a new tax on internal trade . Nanjing was captured by Hunan's army in the summer of 1864.
 Hong Xiuquan committed suicide and the rebellion came to an end . pockets of Taiping resistance continued until 1868, though pockets of resistance continued to exist .
 After 1860, the number of Protestant and Catholic missionaries operating in China rose sharply . The number of Protestants and Catholics working in China increased sharply .
 Missionaries initially concentrated on converting the population, but later ran schools and hospitals . Missionaries also ran schools, hospitals and schools .
 The origins of this conflict lay in a struggle between China and Japan over influence in Korea . Their presence of their presence was a crucial moment in the conflict .
 The Huai army was defeated at Pyongyang in present-day North Korea . First the Huai was defeated by the North Korean army in the first battle .
 The Chinese Beiyang fleet engaged the Japanese fleet off the mouth of the Yalu River, at the border of North Korea and China . In September 1894, the Beiyan fleet engaged .
 China was forced to sign the Treaty of Shimonoseki, recognizing Korean independence, and ceding Taiwan to Japan . Anti-missionary incidents occurred, the most notorious being the massacre of French Sisters of Charity at Tianjin in 1870 .
 Mongol Grand Secretary complained self-strengthening ideas were not compatible with Confucian government . In 1866 Wojen, a Mongol Grand . Secretary, complained that self-strenning ideas were incompatible with traditional Confucalian government .
 Li Hongzhang started a steamship company to compete with foreign shipping on the Yangzi in 1872 . He established coal mines that led to the building of China's first railroad .
 Russia obtained agreement to extend the TransSiberian railroad across Manchuria . Germany seized Qingdao in the north; France obtained commercial concessions in the southwest . Britain gained a 99-year lease on the ""New Territories,"" opposite Hong Kong Island .
 In 1856, a concubine named Yehonola gave birth to the future Tongzhi emperor . The future emperor was born in 1856 in China . He was born to Yehonolola .
 Britain sent 2,000 troops to stop them, but the Empress Dowager ordered the Imperial army to turn them away . Britain was forced to turn away 2,200 troops from the Imperial Army .
 Westerners were executed and thousands of Chinese Christians were killed . Westerners and Christians were executed in China . Thousands of Christians were also killed in the crackdown .
 In the aftermath of the siege, Chinese officials were executed and compensation was paid to the West . The siege took place in China's capital, Beijing, during the summer of 2008 .
 For centuries, the Imperial court and the warrior classes wrestled for control . The Imperial court was the center of the world's most famous battles .
 Oda Nobunaga, Toyotomi Hideyoshi, and Tokugawa leyasu displayed superior military tactics to unify Japan . Leyasu was made a shogun in 1603, and was recognized as the greatest power in the land .
 With Japan reunified, leyasu's aim was to maintain control . Tokugawa ruled Japan for decades .
 From 1635 Japanese subjects were unable to leave Japan . Those Japanese who were overseas at the time were refused reentry on pain of death . All foreign influences were discouraged, and from 1635 were refused entry .
 Christianity was banned, and foreign merchants and missionaries expelled . Christianity was also banned in the early 1900s .
 For two centuries, descendants of the Tokugawa shoguns kept the peace, and the population prospered . The country is now a closed country .
 From the early 19th century, environmental and political troubles caused the shoguns' grip on power to slip . Environmental and political problems led to the downfall of the shogunate .
 Famine and earthquakes caused thousands of deaths, trade within Japan widened the gap between rich and poor . Foreigners sailed into Japanese waters in the 1930s .
 The ""Land of the Rising Sun,"" as it is known to most Japanese, has had a turbulent history . The country is known for its turbulent history, including the rise of the sun .
 Ambitious and industrious Japan quickly caught up with the West, but success came at a heavy price . Success came at the cost of the West .
 E -n 'ee n apan's development from E a land of feudal lords into a world power began in the 19th century . E-n'ee 'ee' is a world-renowned world power in the Middle East .
 Commodore Matthew Perry was sent to Edo in 1853 in command of four warships . During the reunification of Japan, Japan was closed to foreign visitors and trade .
 Perry demanded the opening of Japanese ports for trade, making it clear he would return . Perry: "I would return. I would return to Japan. I will return" Perry said .
 In 1854, Perry returned with an even larger fleet, and the shogunate signed the Treaty of Kanagawa . Perry returned to Japan in 1854 and returned with a larger fleet . The treaty was signed after Perry's return to Japan .
 Similar treaties with Britain, France, Russia, and the Netherlands followed . Similar treaties were made with the Netherlands and Britain .
 Japan gradually lost control over its own customs duties . They too were successful in demanding rights to trade, and eventually lost control of customs duties.
 Following the Meiji Restoration, the new regime thought that Western ideas might make Japan stronger and more able to compete . Western ideas were thought to be making Japan stronger .
 In 1873, conscription was introduced so that all men, not just those from the noble class, could join the military . It was introduced in 1873 to allow all men not just noble class to join military .
 The image was issued only seven years after the Meiji Restoration opened Japan to foreign ideas teachers .
 In 1882 the Bank of Japan opened with a standardized decimal currency based on the yen . A modern mint was set up, and in 1882, a modern mint set up .
 Perhaps the greatest symbol of Japan's modernization was the railway . The railway was one of the country's greatest symbols of modernization .
 The first was opened in October 1872, and within 15 years 1,000 miles of track had been laid . Within 15 years there had been more than a million miles of tracks laid .
 Suburbs grew as people now lived away from their place of work, and the age of commuting had begun . Suburbbs grew in the 1970s as people moved to live away from work . Suburban suburbs are now the most populated areas in the world .
 The samurai were hereditary leaders who commanded armies that included a warrior class known as the samurai . They included the samurai, a samurai class of warriors who fought for their country .
 After years of turmoil, there was a revived sense of national identity and pride in Japan . Japan at war was one of the world's most turbulent periods .
 Korea called for military aid from China to put down a rebellion in 1894 . In the spring of 1894, Korea called to China for military help to end a rebellion . Korea called in China to help put down the rebellion .
 The rebellion was swiftly dealt with, but both sides had interests in Korea and stayed on . Both sides were quickly dealt with by the end .
 The Japanese were determined to fight, and officially declared war on August 1 . The Japanese government declared war against the U.S. on August 31, 1941 .
 In the battles that followed, Japan proved superior, especially at sea . Japan proved to be superior at sea and in the battles .
 The naval base of Port Arthur in Manchuria, on the northeast coast of China, was seized in November . The Chinese fleet was destroyed at Weihai in the eastern province of Shandong in February 1895 .
 The Treaty of Shimonoseki in 1895 saw China abandon its interests in Korea and cede territory to Japan, including Taiwan . China ceded its interests to Japan in 1895 .
 Japan also gained rights in Manchuria, which had rich natural resources of lumber, iron, oil, gold, and uranium . The region was also rich in lumber and iron .
 Russia convinced French and German governments that Japan should give up its stronghold in Manchuria because it caused instability . Russia reacted by persuading France and Germany to give up the Manchurian stronghold . Russia says the situation caused instability in the region .
 Russia refused to withdraw its troops from China, following an uprising against foreign influences known as the Boxer Rebellion . The increasing tension with Russia eventually erupted into war in 1904 .
 The ensuing Portsmouth Treaty, signed in September 1905, recognized Japan’s interests in Korea . It granted them occupation of the Liaodong Peninsula in Manchuria .
 It disbanded the army and annexed the nation in 1910 with no international opposition . The annexation took place in 1910 without any international opposition.
 Japan had succeeded in its aims—it was now taken seriously by Western powers . Japan's aim was to take seriously by the West, and it had succeeded .
 The unequal treaties, which had caused so much bitterness, were revised . Full tariff control was restored in 1911 .
 Japan has gone from being virtually dismissed as a backward country to a major world power . In a mere half-century, Japan had gone from virtually dismissed to being a major power .
 Economic depression and dissatisfaction with Japan's role in world affairs eventually led to war . Economic depression led to Japan's involvement in World War II .
 Rural incomes fell sharply and the gap between rich and poor, city and countryside widened . The gap between the rich and the poor has widened in rural areas .
 Both the military and public became increasingly angry, and many blamed the influence of Western ideas . Many blamed Western ideas for the rise of the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 Japan maintained an uneasy relationship with foreign powers . Japan maintained a relationship with some of the world's most powerful powers .
 The Washington Arms Limitation Treaty of 1922 limited Japan to three warships, compared with five American and five British warships .
 U.S. naval officer Matthew Perry demanded the opening of Japanese ports in 1854 . The shoguns seemed incapable of dealing with the foreign threat . Shoguns were unable to deal with the threat .
 A group of leading samurai formed an alliance, believing that only the restoration of the emperor could save Japan . The group of samurai believed that only Japan could save itself .
 The period of modernization that followed was called the Meiji (1868— 1912), but not all were content . The Meiji period was known as Japan's first modernization .
 Traditional forces, including samurai infuriated at being barred from carrying swords, were defeated by the new conscript army . Traditional forces including samurai angered by the ban were defeated .
 The emperor promised a national assembly, and in 1889 the first-ever formal constitution adopted outside North America and Europe was proclaimed . In 1889, the first ever formal constitution was proclaimed in France .
 In this woodcut, Meiji officers in Western-style uniforms are shown accepting the surrender of the samurai rebels . The woodcut was taken in Tokyo, Japan, during the Meiji era .
 A Japanese naval squadron is shown steaming in to bombard Port Arthur, Manchuria, and attack Russian ships . A Japanese squadron of ships is shown here steaming into Port Arthur .
 During the RussoJapanese war, Japan proved militarily superior, especially at sea . Japan proved military superior at sea at sea during the war .
 The Prophet Muhammad was both a political and a spiritual leader . He was both political and spiritual leader of the Islamic world . Muhammad was a religious leader .
 His first successor, Abu-Bekr, proclaimed a Holy War against Byzantium and Persia . His successor Abu-bekr proclaimed a holy war against Byzantine, Persia .
 Tughril Beg, conquered Iran, conquered Georgia, Armenia, and much of Asia Minor . His successor, Alp Arslan, led the Seljuks to conquer Georgia, Armenia, and many of the region .
 They overran Syria and in 1071 defeated the Byzantine emperor Romanus IV in eastern Turkey . In 1071, they defeated Romanus III and defeated him in a war of ten years .
 A number of Islamic states emerged during the 16th century . The Islamic state was one of several Islamic states .
 Islamic teachings carried around the world by missionaries and merchants . Islamic teachings were carried by missionaries, merchants .
 Enver Pasha was born in the Black Sea town of Apana in 1881 . He was the son of Pasha, who was assassinated in 1918 .
 He joined a secret group hoping for modernization of the Ottoman Empire . Enrolling with the military, he was posted to Greece, where he joined a group .
 In 1908 Pasha was one of the leaders of the Young Turks that rebelled against the rule of the Sultan Abdul Hamid . In 1908 he led the Young Turkish rebels against the Sultan . Pasha is a member of the Ottoman Empire .
 During World War I, as minister of war, he aligned Turkey with Germany and Austria— Hungary . He aligned Turkey's borders with Germany, Austria and Hungary during the war .
 On defeat in 1918, Pasha fled to Turkistan, where he was killed in 1922 . Pasha was killed by his death in Turkistan after being defeated in 1918 .
 A series of Jiliad revivalist movements led to the emergence of Islamist states in Nigeria, Libya, and the Sudan . The movements have led to Islamist states including Libya and Sudan .
 During the 19th century, European expansion became an important force in Muslim societies . The major states that remained independent responded by undertaking a wide range of reforms .
 In the Ottoman Empire reforms began with attempts by Selim III, who reigned between 1789-1807, to institute a Nizam-i cedid, or “New System” of military and bureaucratic organization .
 Five times a day millions of Muslims face Mecca to pray . Mahmud II went on to restore the power and The Young Turks Revolt . He was killed by his successor, Mahmud I, in 2003 .
 Peace is the avowed aim of Islam, but the spread of Islam has not been without its conflicts . Peace is also the aim of the Muslim world, but there have been conflicts .
 Muslim societies, such as the Young Turks and the Ottoman Empire, have struggled to define themselves in the modern world . Islam consolidated its hold on the Middle East and made further gains in India, East Asia and Europe .
 By the 18th century, Europeans came to dominate much of the Muslim world from north Africa to southeast Asia . This Western imperialism prompted a religious and political crisis in Islam .
 Some believed Islam could be restricted to private life and that public life might embrace modern, European ideas about technology, education, and law . Some believed that Islam could embrace modern ideas .
 He was convinced that science and technology could be successfully adopted by Islamic countries without compromise to their religion or culture . He traveled all over the Muslim world strengthening communities in the hope of driving out Western powers .
 In the late 19th century, other modernists, such as the Indian Syed Ahmad Khan, recommended the reformation of Islamic society along similar lines .
 He founded Muhammedan AngloOriental College at Aligarh, northern India, in 1875 . College was where Muslims could study Western ideas without alienating themselves from their religion .
 Conservative Muslim leaders were convinced that Muslim impotence in the face of Christian imperialism was a result of divergence from Islam and deviation from their traditions . Rejecting the West was a reaction to the West, they were convinced .
 YOUNG TURKS , 1910 authority to the central government that had been usurped by powerful local lords . Young Turks had been given authority by local lords who had usurped it .
 Crimean War found Britain and the Ottomans allied against Russia . As the empire sought to modernize, it gained the support of the British . The Crimean War was the result of the Crimean War .
 In 1876 Abd al-Hamid II came to the throne, and Russia declared war on him . Russia declared the war in 1876, and he died of his injuries .
 Islamist states are guided by sharia—Islamic religious law . on the Ottoman Empire im 1877, in an attempt to liberate the Balkan Peninsula from Ottoman rule . Islamist states follow sharia law, which is based on Islamic law .
 In a swift campaign, the Russians drove the Ottomans back and forced them to sign the disastrous Treaty of San Stefano in 1878 . The Russians forced the Ottoman Empire to sign a disastrous treaty with them in Italy .
 This treaty deprived them of most of their European territories, including Bulgaria . The treaty deprived the British from most of the European Union territory .
 Tunisia was lost to the French in 1881 and Egypt to the British in 1882 . Further territorial losses included the loss of Tunisia to France and Egypt in 1883 .
 Abd al-Hamid continued the reform process in order to maintain greater control over the remaining empire .
 In 1902 a meeting in Paris brought together the leadership of the ""Young Turks”—a coalition group composed of fervent nationalists wishing to save Turkey from decay and ruin . The Young Turks were a coalition group of nationalist nationalists . In 1902, the Young Turks met in Paris to discuss
 In the early 1900s, Bulgarian and Macedonian terrorists started bombing Ottoman government buildings, demanding total independence from the Ottoman Empire .
 The two rebellions eventually joined in 1908 when an army regiment stationed in Macedonia rebelled and fled into the hills . Both rebellions were eventually joined when the army regiment was stationed in the country .
 The 20th century witnessed continued polarization between the Islamic world and the West . It was LA RÉVOLUTION EN TURQUIE .
 WIE A led to parts of Turkey being distributed to Greece . T Vietoire des Jeunes-Tures was distributed to areas of Greece .
 The late 1960s signaled a turning point and the dawn of a new phase in Islam . Islam is still alive in the Middle East .
 The Arab-Israeli War in MUSTAFA KEMAL in Mustafa Kemal was the Arab-Turkish War of 1908 . The Young Turks’ successful revolution of 1908 was the result of the Turkish War of Independence .
 The sultan surrendered himself as a prisoner in his palace, the Yildiz Kiosk. joined by Macedonian rebels as well as large numbers of Young Turks . After they marched on Constantinople, the sultan was captured by the Young Turks.
 A constitution was adopted and a parliament created and the Young Turks of the CUP were in command of the empire . Enver Pasha (see left) would become the best known for his role in the revolution . The CUP was led by a triumvirate, led by
 The Young Turks continued the Ottoman reform process, opening schools to women and overseeing legislative progress in women’s rights .
 Enver Pasha revolutionized the army with the help of a chibouk, a traditional smoking pipe . Enver is now leading the country's largest army in the Middle East .
 Pasha had trained in Germany and wanted to improve the efficiency of the Ottoman Armed Forces along German lines . Pasha wanted to replace the Ottoman army with the German-style army .
 After 2 1967 and the loss of Jerusalem to Israel, Israel was a blow to Muslim pride, provoking a call for a return to Islam . Israel's victory over Jerusalem in 1967 was a major blow to the Muslim community .
 Portuguese explorers began charting the coast of Africa in 1419 . Portuguese explorers charted the African coast of 1419.
 European trading nations had secured coastal settlements around Africa by 1600 . The interior of the continent remained largely uncharted by Europeans . Many explorers feared contracting malaria in the vast tropical expanses .
 In 1820, the development of quinine, an effective treatment for the disease, allowed the exploration of the tropics . The discovery of the disease in 1820 allowed the explorers to explore the tropical islands .
 From the 1840s the Scottish missionary David Livingstone journeyed extensively in central and southern Africa . Livingstone was a missionary in the area from 1818 to 1841 .
 Expeditions in the 1850s and 1860s by Richard Burton, John Speke, and James Grant located the great central lakes and the source of the Nile . Richard Burton was the first explorer to discover the Nile in Egypt .
 Government staff based in Africa in the early 20th century enjoyed many privileges, including servants who tended to their every need . By the end of the Privileged few, the privileged few were the only ones in the world .
 Sufism is a mystical tradition within Islam . The most profound example of these was Sufistism, a form of mysticism .
 In 1816, Shaka became king of the Zulus of southeastern Africa . Shaka was born in 1816 . He was the son of Shaka .
 Shaka led the Zulus in raids on neighboring Nguni villages, which they razed . The Zulus were led by Shaka, who led them to the city .
 KwaZulu-Natal is the name of Kwa-Zulu Natal, the southern African region of Africa . It is today known as KwaNatal . The kingdom was created by King Zulu Zulu in 17th century .
 Rival European countries raced to gain possession of African territory during the late 19th century . The Scramble for Africa was inspired by accounts by explorers and missionaries of vast untapped resources in Africa .
 The race became known as the “Scramble for Africa’s” century . Europeans charted the courses of the Nile, Niger, Congo, and Zambezi rivers . Europeans now knew about the vast resources .
 In 1869, the opening of the Suez Canal, a direct trade route from Europe to Asia, focused European attention on the continent’s economic and strategic importance . The canal was the first direct route to Asia from Europe .
 Former Ottoman territory of Algeria was conquered by France in the 1830s . Angola was held by Portugal, along with trading posts on the west coast . British and French trading stations in west Africa were also held .
 The Cape Colony was administered by the United Kingdom, and just north of Cape Colony there was the Orange Free State and the Transvaal .
 These two states were established by Boers , after the Great Trek of 1835-36 .
 This was a mass migration of 12,000 Boers, known as the “pioneers,” who left Cape Colony in a search for new pastureland and to escape unwelcome British rule . This was the first mass migration to Cape Colony .
 Cultural groups were being torn apart by the continuing slave trade, and new states were emerging in East, Central, and West Africa .
 The Europeans capitalized on these disruptions, conquering territory with reasonable ease . The Europeans took advantage of these disruptions to conquer territory .
 In some cases, African and European leaders agreed joint control over territory . In others, they used military force to take control of territory . The Anglo-Zulu wars in 1879 were fought in Africa and Europe .
 The competition between the Europeans often resulted in violent conflict . The continent was divided between Europe and Africa .
 In southern Africa the first of two wars between the Boers and the British took place from late 1880 to early 1881 . North Africa became a theater for AngloFrench rivalry . The first of the two wars took place in southern Africa from 1880-1881 .
 Between November 15, 1884 and February 26, 1885, the Berlin Conference was convened by German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck (see 333) in an attempt to settle rival claims . The conference was held in Berlin, Germany, Austria, Russia and Germany .
 At the conference it was agreed imperial powers could only claim colonies if they had agreed treaties with chiefs, and had administrative powers in the region . Imperial powers were only able to claim colonies as long as they had agreements with chiefs .
 By the close of the century, virtually all of the continent was under European control .
 Portugal expanded its empire to include Mozambique; Belgium took over the enormous Congo region; “If | could, | would annex other 39 pla nets.” Belgium took control of the Congo region . ‘If | can’t,’, would annex
 Both Germany and Germany gained new colonies in southern Africa . They exploited the continent's resources to benefit industry and commerce in their own countries .
 France and Britain acquired new territory in West Africa and East Africa . Britain also built a network of colonies in East Africa running from South Africa to Egypt . The two countries also acquired new territories in Africa .
 By 1914, the French had occupied Morocco and the Italians had conquered Tripoli . The French occupied Morocco, the Italians occupied Tripoli and occupied Tripoli .
 Only Ethiopia remained fully free, having beaten an Italian force at the Battle of Adowa in 1896 . Only Ethiopia is now fully free .
 Europeans made no attempt to develop their colonies, exploiting them as raw materials and markets for their manufactured goods . Africa under foreign rule was largely dominated by the colonial powers .
 Africans were excluded from decisions that affected their lives, and European settlers established themselves in relatively temperate areas of Africa .
 Africans were forced to undertake waged labor, working on railroads, plantations, and mining operations . They were also forced to pay property taxes, and to pay these taxes, they imposed property taxes . To pay this taxes Africans were .
 This grew into violent anticolonial resistance, which spread across the continent m the early 20th century . This grew to violent anti-colonial resistance, spreading across Europe .
 In 1904—05, the Herero of central Namibia rose up against their German rulers . Ch Lacoste rey was the king of Namibia .
 In 1912, Zulus united to form the South African National Congress . The ANC was formed by Zulus to further the rights of native peoples . It became the ANC in 1912 to further their rights .
 This marked the beginning of an organized movement for self-rule in Africa . This was the first organized movement in Africa for self rule in Africa.
 Transvaal Boers launched the first Anglo-Boer war in December 1880 . The war was in retaliation for the British annexation of the Transvaall in 1877 . The Boers fought the British in response to the British's annexation .
 In March 1881 the British admitted defeat and granted the Transvaal self-rule . The British conceded defeat and gave the South African government self rule in 1881 .
 After a long, hardfought struggle, the British, aided by Canadian troops, won and absorbed the Boer republics of the Orange Free State and Transvaal into the British Empire . The British Empire was formed in the early 1900s .
 After World War II, Africa's colonial rulers faced demands for self-rule . African nations faced demands to become independent from colonial rule .
 Almost two million Africans served in the armies of their colonizers during World War I. AFRICAN NATIONALISM is a form of nationalism .
 When the soldiers returned home, they yet again faced the exploitation and indignities of colonial rule . The soldiers faced the indignities they faced .
 Many men joined the independence movements, which had been increasing in strength since before the war . Discontent grew, and many men joined independence movements .
 There have been long and protracted struggles for black majority rule in Zimbabwe and South Africa .
 Majority rule was achieved in Zimbabwe in 1980 when Robert Mugabe, leader of Zanu PF, was voted into power . Majority rule of Zimbabwe was achieved when Mugabe was elected to power .
 It has been a period of opposing political beliefs and ruthless dictators, of rapidly expanding populations and diminishing resources . It has also been the period of opposition political beliefs, of ruthless dictators .
 The U.S. has been one of the fastest-growing economies in the world . But it has also been a source of startling technological innovation and unprecedented prosperity .
 Italy enters World War on Allied side; U.S. invades Haiti and Dominican Republic . Red Army badge: 1915 Italy entered World War . Italy entered WWI as a result of World War II .
 Edwin Hubble discovers galaxies beyond our own and the expansion of the universe . Edwin Hubble discovered galaxies beyond ours and the expanding the universe. Edwin Hubble also discovered the universe's first galaxies .
 Great Powers vie for influence in the Balkans; assassination of Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo sets the ""powder keg keg of Europe” alight . 1914 assassination of Franz Ferdinand was assassination of Austria's Archduk Ferdinand .
 Germany invades di M pont T League of Nations France and the — ""solet founded. France" France . Germany invaded France in 1940 .
 Military e coup in Spain. vy Spanish flu. A Collectivization Wall Street Crash leads to global economic depression . A Collectivistization Wall St. Crash . The World War II crash led to economic collapse .
 Exchange of 1 Turkish and Greek populations ends Turkish-Greek conflict . Exchange of Greek populations ended Turkish-Turkish conflict . Turkish-Greece conflict ended in 2011 .
 World War II not only led to part a consequence of the Great Depression, was also directly spawned . World War I was the “war to end all wars”" not only . but led to . part of the . Great Depression as a result of the war .
 This was the beginning of an Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. This was an Africa-Southeast Asia. It was the start of a continent-wide revolution in Africa .
 In some regions an era of ideological confrontation that lasted until 1991 . In some parts of the world, ideological confrontation was an ideological confrontation until 1991.
 World War I, though in sustained economic growth followed the conflict, saw sustained growth in the economy . World War II was the only sustained economic boom after the conflict .
 Spitfire Mk. V Hiroshima 1933 . Hitler appointed chancellor in Germany . Spitfires Mk V. V . V Hiroshima .
 Germany annexes Austria and, with British and French agreement, Sudetenland . Germany annexed Austria and Sudetanland . The annexation of Austria was part of a treaty between Germany and France .
 U.S. repulses Japanese carrier fleet; German invasion of USSR stalls at Stalingrad; Axis forces defeated at El Alamein . U.N. forces defeated in Spanish Civil War; United States invades North Africa; killings begin at Auschwitz . Communists establish Pu'
 1940 German forces conquer Denmark, Norway, Holland, Luxembourg, Belgium, and France . Italy declares war on Britain and France; | Battle of Britain; Japan | allied with Germany | and Italy .
 Brussels liberated; rearmament begins . United States in France; Paris and of the Long Knives""; remilitarizes Rhineland . U.S. enters war on Allied Brussels liberated .
 USSR joins League of | between Germany Malaya, Burma, Burma and German offensive J Nations . USSR join League of . | between Malaya and Burma, German offensive . J Nations.
 East and West Germany established, the former as part of the Communist Bloc . West Germany became West Germany in the 1950s . East-West Germany was part of West Germany during the 1960s and '90s .
 Morocco P and Tunisia gain SE independence from France and Sudan from Britain . Morocco P. and Tunisia P. P. join SE from France . Tunisia and Sudan P. become the first nations to claim SE independence .
 Uganda, Jamaica, i.i. and Trinidad and Tobago 4 gain independence from Britain. Uganda, Jambos, Jamaica and Trinidad & Tobago gain independence in 1948 .
 Over —4 five million women | in the United States are using the contraceptive pill . Over 5 million women are in the U.S. using the pill .
 Israel takes Sinai, Gaza Strip, West Bank, Golan Heights, and Jerusalem . Israeli forces take over Gaza Strip and West Bank . Israel also takes over the Sinai and Gaza Strip .
 People want peace so much that one of these days governments had better get out of the way and let them have it, says U.S. President Dwight D EISENHOWER . Pinochet protest 1970 military rule in Somalia .
 First black homelands in South Africa; race riots in Soweto recession . First black home country in the country's first black majority in the 1970s .
 1974 Coup in Ethiopia: Haile Selassie ousted. 1974 coup in Ethiopia . 1974 coup led to the overthrow of the Prime Minister of Ethiopia . Egyptian-Israeli rapprochement .
 Death of Mao in China; 1980 Saddam Hussein launches Iran-Iraq | War. Death of China's leader in China . Iran-U.S. relations with Iraq. Iran-Iranian relations.
 Eastern Bloc governments toppled; Solidarity elected in Poland . Berlin Wall breached; Berlin Wall was breached . Eastern bloc governments toppled in wake of collapse of Berlin Wall . Poland's Solidarity government elected in Solidarity .
 UN coalition expels Iraqi forces from Kuwait . Clinton, y Arafat, and Rabin 1991 UN coalition expelled Iraqi troops from Kuwait.
 India and Pakistan test nuclear weapons in 1998 . DVDs launched in a bid to prevent further nuclear tests .
 NATO troops in ""B kosovo A Petronas Towers" Russia restarts Chechen war with Chechen rebels in Chechnya . NATO troops are in the region of Kosovo .
 Sudan rejects UN peacekeeping force, launches genocide in Darfur; around 400,000 die . Sudan rejects U.N. peacekeepers force, says it launched genocide in Sudan . Sudan denies genocide, says Darfur is genocide, wants UN peacekeepers .
 Iran develops nuclear program despite international pressure and UN sanctions . Iran has been accused of trying to develop nuclear weapons program .
 Hamid Karzai re-elected president of Afghanistan but Taliban attacks worsen . Taliban attacks on Afghan capital Kabul continue to escalate .
 Ads promote y global companies in Haiti . Haiti earthquake leaves 230,000 dead .
 Deepwater Horizon oil platform explodes in Gulf of Mexico, starting oil leak that takes six months to plug . Gulf of Louisiana was hit by the explosion of an oil platform that exploded in 2010 . The explosion was the first to hit the deepwater Horizon, a deepwater oil platform .
 China's economy grew by 10. percent in 2006, according to CNN.com's George Santayana . In 2006, China's economic growth was 10.6 percent .
 It was once one of the world's weakest economies but is now among the strongest . The U.S. economy has grown dramatically in recent years .
 The spark that caused the European tinderbox to ignite into World War I was lit in the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo . The Assassination of the assassination of the Bosniya was the first assassination of World War One .
 The assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand triggered a series of reactions that would lead to a full-scale European war within five weeks . The assassination sparked a war that soon spread around the world .
 Archduke and his wife Sofia were making an official visit to Sarajevo to inspect military maneuvers . The archduke was visiting Sarajeva to inspect a military exercise .
 Hungary had occupied the Turkish province of Bosnia-Herzegovina since 1878 and fully annexed it in 1908 . Austria was occupied by Hungary in 1878 but fully annexed in 1908.
 Neighboring Serbia resented this, as the province was mainly populated by Serbs, so relations between the two states were tense . Neighboring Serbs resented the province as it was predominantly populated by ethnic Serbs .
 As the royal couple drove to an official reception at the town hall, a bomb was thrown into their car . It was the first bomb to be thrown into the car by the Royal couple .
 It bounced off the rear canopy and exploded under the car behind, injuring two royal aides and 18 others . Two royal aides, 18 others were injured in the blast .
 After the reception, the archduke changed his route out of the town but on the way, his driver took a wrong turning and halted . The driver took the wrong turn and halted his car in the street .
 By chance, a group of conspirators involved in the earlier incident but not detained by the police were loitering there . The group was not detained, but later loitered in the area .
 Gavrilo Princip, 19, leaped onto the car's running board and shot the royal couple at point-blank range . The archduke was hit in the neck and his wife in the abdomen . Princip was shot by a 19-year-old student at
 He and his five fellow assassins were members of the Black Hand, a secret nationalist society led by Colonel Dragutin Dimitrijevic, head of Serbia’s military intelligence .
 Austria-Hungary then accused the Serbian government of complicity in the assassination . Austria then accused Serbia of complicity . The Serbian government was accused of involvement in the murder .
 Hungary issued an ultimatum on July 23 that would have effectively ended Serbian independence . When this was confirmed, Austria— Hungary — Austria— Austria— issued the threat . Austria: Hungary issued a ultimatum on July 23 to end Serbian independence.
 Serbia's reply was received in Austria just two minutes short of the 48-hour deadline . Serbia received a reply from Austria in time to meet the deadline . Austria had 48 hours to respond to Serbia's request .
 Austria had agreed to almost all of its demands, but also appealed to Russia for help . Russia has agreed to Austria's demands but also offered to refer the dispute to the International Court . Austria has agreed almost all but agreed to most of its own terms with Russia .
 Austria-Hungary mobilized its forces, declaring war on Serbia on July 28 . The next day, July 26, Hungary mobilized its troops, declaring its first war against Serbia .
 Gavrilo Princip, 19, was arrested after the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife, Sofia, in Sarajevo .
 The origins of the world war lie in European rivalries stretching back more than 40 years . SIR EDWARD GREY, BRITISH FOREIGN SECRETARY, 1914 BEFORE .
 The German defeat of France in 1871 had made the two countries bitter enemies . The two countries had been bitter enemies since the defeat of Germany in the war of 1871 . The Germans defeated France in the battle of the Crimean War in Crimea .
 Germany constructed defensive alliances with first Austria-Hungary and then Italy . France looked to Russia and Britain, while Germany looked to Austria and Russia .
 A naval arms race between Britain and Germany added to the growing military tension . Germany and the U.S. engaged in an arms race in the 1950s .
 General von Schlieffen drew up a plan for Germany to deliver a knockout blow against France . The plan was drawn up by the German chief of the general staff in 1905 . He wanted to turn to face the slow-to-mobilized Russian army .
 The beginning of the twentieth century saw Europe divided into two armed camps . Europe was torn apart by the threat of Soviet Russia .
 Germany had formed an alliance with Austria-Hungary in 1879 as it felt threatened by the hostile nations at its borders . The alliance was meant to protect its interests in Central Europe and the Balkans . Germany formed the alliance in order to protect itself and its interests .
 France, Russia, and later Britain formed their own alliance to protect themselves against possible German aggression . The alliance was formed in part to protect itself from possible German invasion .
 Austria accused Serbia of complicity in the murder, and gained German support . Austria accused Serbians of complicity and gained support from Germany .
 Austria refused a compromise with Serbia and, on July 28, declared war . Austria refused to a compromise and declared war against Serbia . Austria was defeated by Serbia in the war .
 Continental war was unavoidable as both sides honored commitments to their allies . Both sides agreed commitments to each other's allies .
 Russia mobilized its troops in support of Serbia, and when German demands for it to stop were refused, Germany declared war on Russia on August 1 . Russia mobilized troops in Serbia, but when it was refused, German demands were refused .
 Germany declared war on France on August 3 and implemented the Schlieffen Plan sending its army through Belgium in an attempt to knock France out of the war, before turning its attention on Russia . Knowing that France would support Russia, Germany then declared war .
 In July 1914, a war broke out in the Balkans that within days spread to the rest of Europe . Britain initially held back, but honored its [he Great War]
 The war was expected to be over by Christmas but it dragged on for more than four years . That war was also expected to end by Christmas .
 World War I guarantee of Belgian independence, agreed by treaty in 1839, and declared war against Germany on August 4 . We know it now as the guarantee of Belgium independence .
 Initial German advance halted in early September, 50 miles east of Paris, by a combined French and British army . The initial German advance was halted by a joint French, British and French army .
 Both sides raced north toward the English Channel to try to break through around the side of their enemy's lines . Both sides then raced north to try and break through the enemy's line .
 When this failed, the two sides dug in along the length of the Western Front . The two sides fought for control of the war in the early 1940s .
 Stalemate lasted there until almost the end of the war, as the defensive capabilities of the machine gun prevented any significant advance by either side .
 The order to climb out of the relative safety of the trench and advance was often met with terror . Allied attempts to break the deadlock at Neuve were often met by terror .
 German attacks on the French city of Verdun were intended to make France “bleed to eem” By the time the battle ended in stalemate there were more than 750,000 casualties .
 A Russian advance into German East Prussia was halted at Tannenberg in August and the Masurian Lakes in September . The Russian advance was halted in September and September .
 In the Balkans, Serbia repelled an Austrian invasion, but the entry into the war on Germany’s side by the Ottoman Empire in November 1914 and Bulgaria in September 1915 tipped the scales . The entry of Bulgaria into the conflict on Germany's side by Turkey in September 1914 tipped the
 Serbia and its ally Montenegro were overrun, while Romania was defeated the following year . By January, Serbia and allies Montenegro and Serbia were overrun . Romania and Romania were defeated the next year .
 An Allied attempt to force the Ottomans out of the war by invading the Gallipoli peninsula in Turkey failed miserably in 1915 .
 British and French imperial troops occupied German colonies in Africa and the Pacific . The Japanese seized German colonies  in the western Pacific and China .
 British and Indian troops also invaded THE GREAT WA Trench life . Infantrymen wait in a trench near the front line .
 Conditions in the trenches were appalling—muddy, waterlogged, and infested with rats . Conditions were appalling . Conditions in trenches were muddy and waterlogging, infested, and in fact infested by rats .
 In 1916 the British incited the Arabs to revolt against Ottoman rule . Ottoman Mesopotamia was the birthplace of the British Empire .
 At sea, the expected clash between the naval fleets of Britain and Germany never really happened . The expected clash never really took place .
 German U-boats did substantial damage to Allied shipping, but the British navy was the stronger force . There were battles in the South Atlantic and at Jutland in the North Sea, but there was no damage to British shipping .
 World War quickly escalated into a global conflict because so many of the European powers involved in it had alliances and empires that they were determined to protect . The Great War was the first World War to be fought in Europe .
 April 2, 1915 The Second Battle of Ypres sees mustard gas used for the first time . April 2: 1915 The battle was the first to use mustard gas in a major battle .
 Austria-Hungary declares war on Serbia following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand . 1917 was a difficult year for all sides . Austria and Serbia were at odds with each other .
 Germany ran out of wheat flour during the winter, while Britain had run out of sugar by April . Britain had only enough sugar for the entire month of the war .
 Germany declares war on Russia and France and invades Belgium, triggering Britain to declare war on Germany . Britain declares war against Germany in August 1914, triggering the war .
 There are massive British losses at the First battle of Ypres . October 15, 1914, was the first battle of the First Battle of the Ypres.
 Troops from Australia and New Zealand land at Gallipoli in 1915 . April 25, 1915 troops from Australia, New Zealand and Australia land in Turkey . Troops arrived in Turkey in the spring of 1915 .
 Publication of a telegram sent by the German foreign minister to Mexico outraged Americans . Publication of the telegram outraged Americans, and in April the United States declared war .
 The second event was the mass use of tanks by the British at the Battle of Cambrai in November 1917 . The British used tanks in the battle of the same year .
 Tanks were one of the few developments in U.S. military technology during the war, along with airships and planes for reconnaissance, or bombardment .
 The French army mutinied in April as a result of the losses it had endured . The mutiny was the result of a series of losses suffered by the French army .
 The Italians had weakened the Austro-Hungarians, but when the Germans attacked in November, only the swift deployment of British and French troops saved Italy . The Italians were defeated by the Germans .
 The Allies launched a new attack on the Western Front at Arras in April, and in July at Ypres, Ypres . The Allies attacked in April and July .
 It was vital in the United States and Europe, where U-boat attacks and an economic blockade reduced food supplies . The U.S. and Europe were hit by U.boat attacks, economic blockade .
 In February 1917, Germany announced it would attack all foreign ships, in order to starve Britain out of the war . In 1917, the Germans announced they would attack British ships in an attempt to starve the country .
 The threat to U.S. shipping was clear, but Germany tried to divert American attention by encouraging Mexico to work . Women were required to work in industry, services, and on the land .
 By the end of the war, one million British women worked in munitions and engineering works . One million women were involved in munitions, engineering and engineering .
 In March 1918, Germany and Russia signed a peace treaty at BrestLitovsk . The final nine months of the war were spent in Russia and Germany .
 Germany now shifted all its troops to the Western Front, and attacked on March 21 before United States troops arrived . Germany attacked before the United States arrived .
 The Germans outran their supplies and the attack was halted on July 18 . But the German forces were able to stop the attack . The battle was halted by the end of the battle .
 A mass tank advance by the British at Amiens on August 8 and French-US attacks to the south forced the Germans back into Belgium then forced them back into the country . The Germans were defeated by the French and British forces in Belgium .
 Germany’s Bulgarian allies sued for peace at the end of September, while the Italians won a massive victory against the Austro-Hungarians in October .
 Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman empires both signed an armistice with the Allies . The Austo-Hungarians and the Ottoman empires then both signed a peace treaty with the Allied forces .
 In Germany, food and fuel shortages led to the country collapsing from within . Food shortages led the country to collapse from within. Germany's economy has been hit hard by fuel shortages .
 Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicated and the new government agreed armistice terms . After the naval fleet mutinied at Kiel, the German army was forced to hand over the throne .
 July 1, 1916 Battle of the Somme begins, with massive British losses . British soldiers killed in the Battle of Somme .
 The Third battle of Ypres, also known as Passchendaele, took place on May 31, 1916 and July 31, 1917 .
 The U.S. declares war on Germany in response to the sinking of United States ships by U-boats . March 3, 1918 Russia agrees to April 6, 1917 The United States declares war against Germany . March 1, 1918 The United Kingdom declared war against the Germans .
 Battle of Jutland was the only large-scale naval battle of the war . Allies fought in the push Germany back the Battle of the Jutlands . Allied forces defeated Germany in the battle . Allies made peace with Germany with Germany .
 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. beyond the Hindenburg line on the Western Front. beyond Hindenburg Line on the . Western Front . Treaty . beyond the . Hindenburg .
 An estimated 6. million 2 civilians also died from 1 the fighting, or blockade, and disease . An estimated . 6 million 2 civilian deaths also occurred .
 The war had short-term political effects in redrawing the map of Europe, but had longer-lasting social and economic consequences . Allied Powers were victorious in the war, but the war had long-term economic and political consequences .
 It lost its colonies to the Allies as ""mandates" under the supervision of the League of Nations . It gave up territory to France, Belgium, Denmark, and Poland .
 Germany's armed forces were limited in size . Rhineland was demilitarized and the industrial Saar region became a League of Nations mandate . The industrial region of Saar was the industrial region .
 The treaties of St Germain with Austria (September 1919), Neuilly with Bulgaria , and Trianon with Hungary redrew the map of Central and Eastern Europe . defeated nations paying war reparations .
 Treaty of Sevres with the Ottoman Empire was agreed in August 1920 but later rewritten at Lausanne in July 1923 . Treaty was agreed at the end of the 1920s but rewritten in 1923 . The Treaty was signed in 1920s and signed in 1922 .
 The profusion of red Flanders poppies grew along the Western Front after the war inspired the British Legion to sell them to raise money for injured soldiers . The British Legion raised the money to raise funds for injured troops .
 On or near November 11 each year, commemorations are held across Europe to remember those who were killed or injured .
 World War | has been identified as the first ‘total war’ in history, as the entire national economy, industry, and population were directed toward winning the war . World War II was the first total war in history .
 The British success in this total mobilization was one of the main reasons ttt, and the Allies, overcame Germany .
 Nicholas was an autocrat, believing that only he had the authority to rule Russia . However, he lacked the strength of will to fulfill this role .
 To remain a dominant European force, Russia desperately needed to industrialize . Modernization came with inevitable demands for civil rights from impoverished Russian workers .
 Nicholas, a natural conservative, repeatedly failed to work with moderate forces and reform society, losing the opportunity to transform Russia into a modern nation . Nicholas failed to reform society and failed to reach out to moderate forces, he says .
 In 1902, the party divided into two strands; the Bolsheviks, led by Lenin, and the more moderate Mensheviks, who believed in a more gradual process of change . In 1902 the party split into two factions; the Menshevik and Bolsheviks .
 Russia signed the Treaty of Portsmouth in 1905, bringing an end to the conflict . Weakened by successive defeats, Russia signed a treaty of peace with the US .
 Petrograd experienced a brutal massacre when 200,000 disaffected workers and their families marched on the Winter Palace (the residence of the czar) to demand better pay and working conditions . The massacre took place in Petrograd, Russia, in 1918 .
 The protesters were met by Cossack cavalry who, sabers drawn, charged the crowd, killing many . Many were killed by the Cossacks .
 The Bolsheviks went on to create the world's first Communist state . Nicholas II agreed to instigate a new constitution for Russia in the wake of the 1905 revolution .
 The czar retained the ability to disband the Duma at will, which he duly did when the assembly met in 1906 and 1907 . However, he retained the power to do so .
 Two subsequent Dumas met in 1907-1912 and 1912-17 . They were in constant conflict with Nicholas, who struggled to remain in control of the worsening political situation .
 The outbreak of World War I in August 1914 briefly united Russians against a common German enemy . Russia was briefly united against the common enemy in 1914 . Russia and Russia were united against each other during the conflict .
 By 1917, resentment toward the czar had increased . The war effort created high prices and food shortages . resentment toward czar increased .
 With violence erupting on the streets of Petrograd and Moscow, Nicholas was finally forced to abdicate . Nicholas was forced to step down as a result of the violence .
 The Duma handed over power to the Provisional Government, which aimed to establish a liberal democracy . The Provisional government was formed from the Duma .
 The government refused to withdraw from the war . But discontent was still in the air, as the government continued to fight .
 Petrograd Soviet of Workers and Soldiers was one of many workers' councils springing up all over the country . The power was increasingly contested by the Petrograd Soviets .
 The Petrograd Soviet had the crucial support of troops garrisoned in the capital . The Soviet Union was based in Petrograd, Russia .
 It denounced the new government as ""bourgeois"" (middle class) and claimed to be the only true representative of the Russian people . It claimed that it was the only representative of Russia .
 Lenin convinced that collapse of world capitalism, as predicted by Karl Marx, was imminent . Lenin was convinced that world capitalism was about to collapse . Lenin believed the collapse of capitalism was imminent, and predicted it would happen .
 In April the Bolshevik newspaper Pravda published Lenin's demands for the overthrow of the government and withdrawal from the ""imperialist" war . In April 1917 Lenin demanded that the government be overthrown and withdrawn .
 Lenin's antiwar stance gained mass support in July, when a Russian offensive ended with huge casualties . Lenin's stance was supported by mass support when the Russian offensive in July ended with casualties .
 For three days, soldiers and workers rioted in Petrograd for three days . The prime minister, Prince Lvov, resigned after the uprising .
 Lenin's followers soon received assistance from an unlikely source . Lenin's supporters soon received help from the unlikely source of money .
 Fearing that Kornilov intended to seize power for himself, Kerensky asked the Bolsheviks for assistance . They duly provided, in the form of a mass of workers, who persuaded the troops to turn around .
 Lenin became politicized after his elder brother was hanged for his part in a plot to kill Czar Alexander IIl. The Kornilov affair seriously weakened the Provisional Government, and in October Lenin secretly returned . Lenin returned to Russia in October .
 Lenin spent several years in Europe, where he studied Marxist theory . Lenin spent his time in Europe studying Marxist theory in Europe . Lenin died in 1918 .
 Lenin came to power in the October Revolution, but died less than seven years later . Lenin was the leader of the Russian Revolution in 1917 .
 His politics provided the inspiration for further Marxist revolutions in many countries . However, his politics led to further Marxist revolution .
 On May 1, 1917, a massive labor demonstration took place in Petrograd, Russia . May Day was the first May Day of Soviet Russia .
 On October 25, Trotsky’s men executed an almost bloodless coup in Petrograd, Russia . Trotsky's men executed the coup on October 25—according to the old Russian calendar, November 7 in modern one .
 The battleship Aurora dropped anchor in then Neva River with guns trained on the Winter Palace, where Kerensky’s government was in session . Aurora flew the Bolshevik Red Flag from its mast .
 After firing of a single blank shell from the ship and two shells from another gun position, the government surrendered . The government surrendered after the firing of two shells .
 Lenin promised to transfer lands of the aristocracy, the church, and the crown to peasant committees . He promised to establish workers’ control over Russia’s industries . Lenin issued a powerful address to the Russian people .
 Bolsheviks secured supremacy over other political groups . Soviets took over control across Russia, ensuring that they alone would form the new government . The Bolsheviks moved quickly to secure supremacy over others .
 Lenin’s immediate concern was to make peace with Germany and end an exhausting and costly war . Lenin was not interested in making peace with the Germans and ending the war . He said he wanted to end the war and end it in peace .
 In the aftermath of the Russian Revolution, the Bolsheviks faced both internal and international opposition . Firmly believing that revolution would soon spread across the capitalist world, he accepted Germany’s peace terms, failing to anticipate the furious international reaction .
 After his abdication Nicholas II and his family were kept under house arrest . They acted ruthlessly to tighten their grip on power . The family moved to Ekaterinburg in the Urals in 1918 .
 On July 17, as anti-Bolshevik forces were advancing, Nicholas, his wife, their five children and servants were taken into the cellar of the house and shot . Nicholas's wife, five children, servants and servants died in July .
 The family’s execution removed one of many threats to the Bolsheviks’ rule . The family was executed by Bolsheviks in 1918 .
 In 1918 the anti-Bolshevik White Army launched attacks against the new regime . In 1918, the White Army attacked the new Russian regime .
 During the next three years the Bolshevik Red Army fought invasions in the Baltic, the Caucasus, Siberia, and Ukraine . The Red Army was involved in invasions across the Baltic and the Caucasus .
 By the end of 1920 the counter-revolutionaries were defeated and absolute Bolshevik military and political power was established . The Red Army became the Soviet Union in 1920 .
 Russia was renamed the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics or Soviet Union in 1922 . Russia was then known as the Soviet Union .
 During the civil war, the Soviet economy teetered on the brink of collapse, and money became virtually worthless . During the war, money was virtually worthless. The Soviet economy was virtually bankrupted .
 The state seized surplus food from peasant farmers without payment . The urban population and the army were close to starvation . The army was close to starving .
 Lenin's 'New Economic Policy' replaced seizures with a regulated tax . As trade increased, the economy revived . Lenin's ‘New Economic . Policy’ was replaced with regulated tax and as trade .
 Also known as the ‘Third International, Comintern was founded to promote worldwide revolution . Comintern founded in 1950s to promote world revolution .
 The future dictator of the Soviet Union was born in 1878 in Georgia, in the southeastern Russian Empire . He was the son of former President of the USSR .
 Joseph Dzugashvili attended a theological college in the Georgian capital, Tblisi, where he became involved in radical politics .
 In Russia, Stalin engaged in practical subversive activities, ranging from armed robbery to distributing illegal pamphlets . In Russia he engaged in armed robbery, armed robbery and distributing illegal papers .
 His efforts attracted the attention of both the Bolshevik leadership and the police . The Bolshevik leader and police were involved in his efforts .
 The future dictator was photographed and his fingerprints were recorded . His fingerprints were also recorded . The future leader was photographed with his fingerprints .
 Rise to power Stalin proved himself a tough enforcer of Lenin’s policies during the upheavations that brought the Bolsheviks to power in 1917 and the Civil War that followed . He proved himself as a tough, tough enforger of Lenin's policies .
 Once the Soviet Union was established he became one of the most powerful men in the country . Hardworking and devious, he became a powerful man in the USSR .
 Stalin's maneuvering after Lenin's death in 1924 was masterly exercise in political manipulation . Stalin’s maneuvering is masterly in Soviet history, says historian John Avlon .
 Stalin's official portrait of 1940 is intended to suggest his farsighted wisdom . Stalin was the Father of the people . He was Stalin's 'Father of the People'
 Stalin established himself as the country’s undisputed leader in the 1930s . Leon Trotsky was exiled from the Soviet Union in 1929, but Stalin was the undisputed head of state .
 Stalin celebrated his 50th birthday that year, discreetly adjusting his birth date to 1879 . In an early example of his taste for rewriting the past, Stalin changed his birth year to '1879'
 The celebrations initiated the personality cult that was to continue for the rest of his life . The celebrations started with the birth of his personality cult, which he would continue to live with .
 In practice, this meant building up the power of the Soviet Union, the one country where Marxist revolution had succeeded . The Soviet Union was one of the countries where it had succeeded in the revolution .
 Stalin aimed to transform the Soviet Union into a major international power from 1928-29 . Stalin's use of terror to achieve radical change reflected his belief in the use of terrorism to achieve change .
 During the 1930s, millions of Soviet citizens were killed by the state, used as slave labor in prison camps, or died in famines . Stalin's censors distorted the past to preserve the myth of his infallibility to preserve Stalin's .
 Individuals who had fallen out of favor were eliminated from the historical record . Individuals who were no longer included in the record were eliminated .
 Nikolai Yezhov, known as the ""Poisoned Dwarf," was responsible for the worst of the Stalinist purges . In charge of the secret police in 1956—38, he was known for his role in the purges of Stalinist Russia .
 When he was also executed on Stalin's orders in 1940, all traces of his association with the Great Leader were eradicated . All traces of the former Soviet Union leader were wiped out .
 Yezhov's image was removed from this photo taken at the Moscow-Volga canal . Stalin's policies contributed to the removal of the image from the photo .
 Stalin's entourage lived in constant fear of arrest, torture, or execution . The situation in the country was mirrored at Stalin's ‘court’ in the Kremlin, Moscow . Behind closed doors, the situation was behind closed doors . Stalin's 'court' in Moscow was a
 The assassination of Sergei Kirov, a member of Stalin's inner circle, in 1934 precipitated a wave of arrests and executions . It is possible that Stalin himself had Kirovs killed, though it is possible he did .
 Thousands were executed after grotesque “show trials’s” in which they confessed to absurd crimes . Thousands of people were executed in grotesque "show trials" Thousands of them were executed .
 He entered an alliance with Nazi Germany in 1939 that arguably gave him time to strengthen his military position before the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 . Shrewd and cunning, he entered into a relationship with the Nazis .
 President Obama showed poor judgment in refusing to believe evidence of imminent German attack . Yet he showed poor judgement in not believing evidence of impending attack .
 His military policy of “no retreat, no surrender’s vastly inflated Soviet losses in the early battles of the war . Yet he later bowed to his generals’ judgment, and bowed to them .
 Stalin used his military advantage to bargain for greater Soviet influence in eastern Europe . Stalin used it to negotiate for greater Russian influence in the region .
 He is pictured with Churchill and Roosevelt at the Yalta Conference, where they planned the future of postwar Europe .
 This German cartoon satirizes the Stalinist state by showing it as fighting against itself .
 In sharp contrast, this statue depicts Stalin as a regal leader. boost morale boost morale .
 He handled the wartime alliance with the United States and Britain in masterly fashion . He won the trust of U.S. president Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and the respect of Winston Churchill .
 Victory over Nazi Germany in May 1945 took Stalin to the pinnacle of power . He became increasingly paranoid as ever more bizarre plots against him were allegedly uncovered by his secret police .
 Stalin was responsible for the deaths of at least five million Soviet citizens, yet throughout the country people wept at the news of his death . Stalin's death was the result of his assassination .
 The horrors of his rule were denounced only three years later by his successor, Khrushchev . The horrors were only denounced three years after his death by his predecessor .
 Stalin seems destined to be remembered, like Ivan the Terrible or Peter the Great, as one of the monster-heroes of Russian history . Stalin seems to be destined for being remembered as a monster hero of Russia .
 Born Joseph Vissarionovich Dzugashvili in Gori, Georgia, son of a cobbler . Died December 18, 1878 at the age of 55 .
 October 9, 1917 Joins the Bolshevik Committee to make an armed seizure of power . Joins Bolsheviks to make a 'armed seizure' of power in 1917 .
 March 1919 Joins the Politburo, the most powerful body of the Bolshevik regime . Joins Russia's most powerful political body, the Leninist Party .
 Lenin calls for Stalin to be removed from his post in his “last testament’s” last testament . In 1922, Lenin called for the removal of Stalin .
 Trotsky, Zinoviev, and Kamenev expelled from the Politburo . October 19, 1926 . Trotsky was the only member of the party to be expelled from Russia .
 November-December 1943 Stalin meets U.S. president Roosevelt and British prime minister Churchill in Tehran; and again in Yalta in 1945 . Stalin meets Roosevelt and Churchill again in Tehran .
 March 1948 Coup in Czechoslovakia completes the Stalinist takeover of Eastern Europe . March 1948 coup was the first in a series of events to take place in the Czechoslovak Republic .
 July 1948-May 1949 USSR blockades Berlin, trying to evict US, British, and French forces . US, UK, French, French and German forces blockaded Berlin .
 With Stalin's backing, North Korea invades South Korea, starting the Korean War . June 25, 1950, with the help of Soviet-backed North Korea, South Korea invaded South Korea .
 Lenin favored Joseph Stalin, a rising star in the party . Disagreements with Trotsky and other members led Lenin to favor Stalin . Lenin favored Stalin over Trotsky .
 Lenin's version of communism mutated into what became known as Stalinism . Stalinism was a Soviet state of communism under Stalin's rule .
 Between 1928-37, Stalin instituted the first and second Five Year Plans, huge and ambitious schemes that aimed to transform the Soviet Union into an industrialized society . The Soviet Union was one of the world's most industrialized countries .
 In 1921, with revolution achieved, and civil war at an end, the Soviet Union entered a 20-year period of relative peace . The Hammer and The Hammer were first published in Russia in 1921 .
 Land belonging to peasants and kulaks was confiscated and turned into vast farms that were collectively run and worked by cooperatives . Land belongs to peasants but was confiscated, turned into farms that collectively run by cooperators .
 It was initially The 50 MILLION 77. of Russians who moved into cities and industrialized regions between 1928 and 1937, the time of Stalin's Five Year Plans . The 50 million Russians moved to cities and industrial areas between 1928- 1937 .
 Sickle disastrous, producing reduced grain yields, violence, and famine . Sufferers of famine, famine, disease, famine and disease .
 Over time, agriculture adjusted and living standards slowly began to rise . But over time, food prices began to plummet .
 Stalin cultivated a propaganda image of himself as father of his people, even godlike . Throughout his rule, the Soviet people suffered appalling hardships . Stalin cultivated image as father to his people .
 Living standards were often subhuman, work was compulsory, and absenteeism was a crime . Work was compulsory in Britain, with absenteeism a crime, in the 1930s .
 The official truth Pravda, meaning “truth,” was the official newspaper of the Soviet Union between 1918 and 1991 . Criticism of the communist system could lead to a sentence in those same forced labor camps created IINE .
 Without mechanized equipment, Soviet women's brigade uses crude rakes to gather up the hay harvest on a collective farm in 1941 .
 Images such as this one tried to show that the peasants Aum were happily carrying out . The reality was often very different . used to promote himself .
 In the 1930s, the first Soviet farm tractors were produced . Stalin i | wae Sr a ~ il | | | i | Soviet farm tractor was produced in the Soviet Union .
 A network of new prison camps was erected west of Moscow to house the thousands who fell foul of Stalin’s demands . Prison camps were set up to house thousands of people who had fallen foul of the demands .
 The period 1936 to 1938, known as the ‘Great Terror, saw the secret police launching witch-hunts against the party elite and the army . It was the period 1936-1938, when secret police launched witch-hunt against party elite .
 Political opponents were forced to confess to plotting against Stalin and summarily executed . Political opponents of the Stalinist regime were executed for plotting against them .
 These figures raise the hammer, symbol of the industrial worker, and the sickle . Ra symbol of socialism . Ra Symbol of socialism.
 Leon Trotsky was a key figure in the Russian Revolution, a brilliant Marxist theorist, and a believer in international “permanent revolution” In the early days of the Soviet Union he served as the People's Commissar for Foreign Affairs and created the Red Army .
 After a power struggle with Stalin, he was expelled from the Soviet Union in 1929 . He was expelled in 1929 from the country .
 Trotsky found asylum in Mexico after being sentenced to death in his absence by a Moscow court . He was found guilty of plotting Stalin's death, but was later released from prison .
 In 1940 a Stalinist agent, who had befriended | Trotsky, assassinated him by driving an ice pick into his skull . Trotsky was assassinated by a Soviet agent in 1940 .
 The German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941 caught Stalin by surprise . After a bitterly fought war, Stalin's nation was ultimately victorious in the war .
 Stalin secured the territories of eastern Poland and the Baltic States for Russia in 1945 . At the 1945 conferences of Yalta and Potsdam, he secured eastern Poland, the Baltic states for Russia .
 New communist regimes emerged in Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and East Germany . New communist regime emerged in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The Eastern Bloc was organized under Moscow’s control, replicating Soviet policies and institutions . These became known as the Soviet Eastern blocs, known as 'Eastern Bloc'
 The Soviet Union had become the only world power to rival the U.S. The United States was the only superpower in the world .
 Despite the hardships that the Soviet people had suffered during Stalin's rule, there was genuine grief on his death in 1953 . Stalin's death was marked by genuine grief .
 His legacy was a difficult one for the leadership of the Soviet Union . However, his legacy was difficult for the leaders .
 Stalin died in mysterious circumstances after eating dinner with close political colleagues . Lavrenty Beria, former head of his secret police, and Nikita Khrushchev . Stalin died after eating with close colleagues, including Lavrently Beria .
 It has been suggested that he had swallowed warfarin, a type of rat poison . It has also been suggested he swallowed the drug, which is thought to have been used to kill rats .
 Lenin's body was embalmed, and displayed in the Lenin Mausoleum in Red Square . Lenin's remains are displayed in Lenin's mausoleum .
 After Stalin's crimes were exposed, his remains were removed from the Kremlin wall in 1961 . His remains were reburied in 1961, and rebaried in the Kremlin Wall .
 Khrushchev began a process known as De-Stalinization, introducing basic legal rights, allowing writers and artists greater freedoms, and releasing political prisoners .
 Khrushchev also encouraged foreign visitors to the Soviet Union, but travel abroad for citizens remained strictly controlled .
 Stalinism finally began to diminish and a lesser cult of Lenin returned . The dominance of Stalinism was finally beginning to diminish . Lenin's cult of the Soviet Union returned .
 The Hungarian people rebelled against Soviet rule in Hungary in 1956 . That year, riots broke out in Poland, and the Hungarian people revolted .
 Propaganda celebrated the glory of the socialist government and its policies and achievements, while damning its enemies . Propaganda produced during the period celebrated the success of the government .
 The red wedge represents the Red Army driving into the heart of the White Army . The Red and White Army are driving into each other's heart .
 Poster declaring ""We are Building Socialism"" and showing images of vast factories, strong workers, and busy production lines . Poster declared: "We are building socialism"
 Anti-US poster from the Cold War period showing an inflated Statue of Liberty supporting a fat capitalist .
 The postwar recession was reasonably shortlived in North America . North America's post-WWII recession was relatively shortlived .
 North American economies showed consistent growth from 1922 until 1927 . Factories that produced goods for the war effort soon adapted to producing consumer goods, such as radios and cars .
 European agriculture and industries failed to adjust to the reduced demand of peacetime trade . Millions of soldiers returned home, many could not find jobs after the war .
 Germans thought they would win the war and intended to force the losers to pay for their costs . They chose not to finance it through taxation through taxation .
 The government ordered the Reichsbank to print more and more money to cover its ever-increasing war expenses . Instead of printing more money, the Reich's bank was forced to print even more money .
 At the peak of hyperinflation the exchange rate was one trillion marks to the U.S. dollar to the dollar .
 In 1918 in Germany a loaf of bread cost 0.63 marks . In 1918 a bread price in Germany was £0.63 mark .
 During the hyperinflation crisis the price rose to 201,000,000 marks in November 1923 . The price of the country's currency was also at the peak of the 1923-1924 crisis .
 The economic slump that gripped the U.S. spread across the globe . Economic depression was a major factor in depression in the United States .
 Ill-conceived government measures exacerbated the hardships suffered in many countries, says CNN.com.com's John Defterios.com . The world's most recent news is that many countries are suffering from economic hardship .
 The United States stock market collapsed in October 1929, triggering worldwide economic recession . The Great Depression was triggered by the collapse of the U.S. stock market .
 By 1927 the U.S. was overproducing goods for which it did not have a market . Authoritarian regimes rose to power as people lost faith in democratic governments . Authorities rose in power in the early 1920s .
 Agricultural and factory production soon slowed down, leading to the loss of millions of jobs . Agricultural and . factory production slowed down leading to millions of . jobs .
 In October 1929, stock prices began to decline and investors lost confidence in their shares, opting to sell them all . The Wall Street Crash was the first major Wall Street crash of the Great Depression .
 Government intervention in what became known as 17 MILLION shares sold on U.S. stock exchange in 1921 . Some banks also involved in what was known as '17 MILLION Shares sold on US stock exchange'
 Many banks had made loans to businesses in frantic trading in 1929 . When people hit by the depression needed to withdraw their savings, the banks often did not have the money to give them .
 This caused other bank customers to panic and demand their cash, so many banks were ruined . This caused many banks to be ruined, and many customers panicked and demanded their cash .
 As people lost their jobs and savings, mortgages on many homes and farms were foreclosed . Many properties were repossessed and the properties were sold .
 European countries, including Germany, needed these loans to pay for their imports, and were unable to do so once the funds were taken away . European countries including Germany were forced to rely on the loans to buy imports .
 Other parts of the world were also badly hit as much of their trade relied on selling food and raw materials to Europe and North America . Other countries were also hit hard by the global economic downturn .
 1929 United States loans to and investments in Europe end, causing a worldwide slump in productivity and prices . 1929 U.S. loans to Europe end causing a world slump of productivity, prices and productivity .
 Britain introduces protective import tariffs, but in the Ottawa Agreements gives preferential rates for its overseas territories .
 Austria's largest bank collapses in May 1931 . The collapse sets off a series of banking collapses all over central Europe . May 1931 is the first major collapse in central Europe since the collapse of Yugoslavia .
 March 9-June 15, 1933 The American Congress passes Roosevelt's New Deal program . FDR's New FDR program was passed by Congress in 1933 .
 The Smoot-Hawley Tariff is the highest tax on imports to the United States in history . It is signed into law by the American Congress .
 President Hoover halts war reparations by Germany as part of an effort to limit the financial fallout of the banking collapse . Hoover was president of the Depression in 1931 .
 January 30, 1933, Hitler becomes German chancellor . He won the post by exploiting popular resentment of the depressed economic and social conditions .
 Family moved to California in search of work on the farms there . Farm values in California fell to 45 percent of 1929 values in 1932 . Family moved from Missouri to California .
 Roosevelt extended United States government responsibilities into new economic areas . Roosevelt created social welfare assistance on a national level . Roosevelt extended U.S. government responsibilities in new areas .
 Ultimately this large-scale government intervention worked and was adopted by other liberal democracies . Ultimately, the government intervention was successful, and it is now widely accepted .
 Mass unemployment and poverty caused great anger, leading to civil unrest in some countries . Rise of the far-right has led to the rise of the anti-Islamist movement . Mass unemployment, poverty and unemployment have caused anger in many countries .
 Delegates from 44 Allied nations met in 1944 to plan for the end of World War I . Delegates met in an effort to avoid the economic problems that arose after the war . The Great Depression after World War II led to the collapse of the economy .
 International Monetary Fund was established to implement international monetary rules . New rules for financial and commercial transactions between states in the developed world were drawn up .
 World Bank was established to provide financing and advice for the economies of developing countries . The World Bank is based in Washington, DC .
 Some states set about building empires to secure supplies of raw materials . Some of the world's most powerful nations built empires to get their raw materials supplies .
 The renewed war in Europe created new jobs in armament factories . It revitalized the world economy and ended the economic depression .
 Roosevelt's New Deal was a series of programs that aimed to tackle economic depression and rescue millions of Americans living in need . The New Deal began in 1933 .
 The program vastly increased the scope of the federal government's activities . The program was vastly increased in scope .
 It built more than 20 dams and hydroelectric stations, turning the Colorado river basin into a vast wealth-producing area . It turned the Colorado River basin into an area of wealth producing power .
 The concept of an eternal, ideal German Volk and Volksgerst emerged in the 19th century . The group distributed a daily bulletin of the same name .
 Friedrich Nietzsche envisioned a master morality in which strength triumphs over weakness, unrestricted by the ""tyranny"" of virtue . George Hegel spoke of the German spirit as the ""spirit of the new world" and Friedrich Nietzsche .
 In 1919, Italian patriots, led by poet Gabriele D'Annunzio, occupied the Italian-speaking port of Fiume on the Croatian coast . In 1919 the Italian nationalists seized the port on their way to Croatia .
 This action was born of fury at gaining a mere 9,000 square miles in post-World War | peace settlements . This action, which had popular support in Italy, was born in Italy .
 Unemployment was rife as economies struggled to adapt to peacetime conditions . The U.S. economy struggled to cope with peacetime unemployment rates .
 The emergence of fascism and Nazism in Europe was made possible by a range of conditions . Disillusioned with existing forms of government, people were drawn to a new brand of nationalism known as fascism .
 Violence and lawlessness erupted across much of Eastern Europe, Germany, Italy, and Spain . Violence erupted between communists and political opponents in Eastern Europe and Italy .
 Political thinking on the left was fractured, with communist, socialist, and trade union groups often in conflict with each other . Political thinking was fractured in the 1960s, with many left-wing groups often involved in conflict .
 On the right of the political spectrum, the nationalist philosophies of fascism began to gain ground . On the left, fascism is gaining ground in Germany .
 Fascists loathed communism ’s internationalist thinking and had no faith in democratic government . Fascists were opposed to the idea of democratic government in the 1930s .
 With no attachment to church or monarchy, fascists put all their faith in love of their nation . Fascists favor a strong, ordered state, favoring a strong and ordered state . Fascism is not a religion, but a nationalistic state .
 The massive human and economic costs of the World War I left Italy's government undermined . The massive cost of the war in Italy was the result of a war that left the country in ruins .
 In 1920, bands of “Blackshirts’—adopting the Roman symbol of the fasces, which represented their belief in collective strength and authority over individual freedom—began to take the law into their own hands, attacking FASCISM . A radical nationalist ideology
 Fascists believe in strong, authoritarian leadership and a collective, classless society bound by racial allegiance . socialists and striking trade unions . Fascists say they want strong authoritarian leadership, strong classless leadership .
 Fascists were widely seen as the protectors of law and order in absence of government authority . Fascists ruled out of government in the absence of any government authority in the 1930s .
 In October Italian coin ""Fascist"" comes from the Roman fasces—a bundle of sticks (weak on their own but collectively strong) surrounding an ax—a symbol of authority . The coin is called "Fascist" and comes from "Fascascia"
 King Victor Emmanuel III refused to back his Prime Minister's request for military support and invited Mussolini to form a new government . Mussolini's government was overthrown and Mussolini was forced to resign .
 Mussolini assumed absolute power in 1926, dissolving all other political parties and brutally silencing political opponents . In 1926 Mussolini took control of the Italian government . He brutally silenced opponents .
 Mussolini cultivated an image of himself as Italy's one true leader, the choice of the masses . Known to his people as “Il Duce,” or “the Leader,’s the Leader”
 A bitter civil war ensued which lasted until the nationalist victory in 1939 . A bitter war ensued between the two sides of the war .
 Some NeoNazis believe in reviving Hitler's national socialism . Some, termed NeoNazis, have called themselves Neo-Nazis .
 Neofascist groups share elements of Nazi beliefs and tend to concentrate on a nationalistic, anti-immigration stance . Neoffascist groups tend to focus on nationalistic nationalism .
 Nazis held annual rallies for the party to preserve Aryan racial purity in the 1930s . Nuremberg rallies were held to preserve the party's racial purity .
 Later, the Jews were to be wiped out in the on Germany by its victorious enemies . The Jews were later wiped out by the Nazis .
 Nazism's goal was to unite all German-speaking people in a great German Reich, or empire, that would last for a millennium . Thousands of soldiers stand listening to Hitler speak of nation .
 Mass movements with fascist ideologies arose in many countries during the 1920s and 1930s . Fascism was a form of fascism in many of the world's most prominent movements .
 Oswald Mosley formed the British Union of Fascists in 1933 . Mosley was a member of the British fascist party . He was the leader of the UK's first fascist party in the 1930s .
 Mosley’s “Blackshirts’ acted as guards at political rallies and fought with left-wing and Jewish groups . Mosley's ‘Blackshirt’ was a symbol of anti-Semitism in the 1930s .
 Mussolini’s Blackshirts were ordered to march on the Italian capital, Rome, in 1922 .
 In 1918 the government of Germany’s new Weimar Republic also faced huge problems . In 1918, the government faced a series of major problems .
 Jews (at whose door he laid blame for all Germany's ills), would soon catch the public ear . Economic troubles were made worse and Jews (as well as Jews) were soon catching the public eye. Economic troubles would be made worse .
 In 1915 he broke with the socialists over intervention in World War | and became a radical nationalist . In 1915, he became radical nationalist.
 Republican movements pressed for greater democracy, and support for anarchism took root . Anarchism was an expression of opposition to democracy .
 King Alfonso XIII became increasingly dictatorial in response to violent strikes in Spain . In response to the violent strikes, Alfonso XI became increasingly repressive .
 In 1921 Spain was defeated in a rebellion by tribes in its Moroccan colony, which aggravated the economic crisis . Domestic violence escalated and domestic violence escalated in Spain . Spain's economy was hit by a series of economic and political crises .
 General Miguel Primo de Rivera led a coup d'état in September 1923 . He became military dictator until he lost the army's support and resigned in 1930 .
 Alfonso Alfonso was forced into exile . Alfonso died in exile . The result was overwhelming majorities in favor of a republic .
 The left-wing Second Republic alienated many groups with its reforms . The Second Republic was the country's second government .
 In 1933, a right-wing election victory led to a general strike on October 4, 1934 . In 1934, an armed rising in Asturias, northern Spain, led to an armed uprising . In 1932, an election victory in Spain led to the general strike .
 Left-wing Popular Front won the 1956 general election, but its radical rhetoric alarmed conservatives . The Popular Front's radical rhetoric has alarmed conservatives since 1956 .
 Tension mounted as street battles between rival groups and widespread strikes paralyzed the nation . that society should have no police, ANARCHISM is a political belief government laws, or other authority, should not be tolerated .
 Spain’s new left-wing Popular Front government promised liberty, prosperity, and justice, but some people considered their policies to be too progressive . Some of the military tactics that were employed during the fighting foreshadowed those later used in World War I. n February 21, 1936
 On July 17 and 18, Spanish military forces based in Morocco revolted against the elected government . Spain's government was overthrown by the government in Morocco .
 Supporters of the Second Republic and its government resisted, and Spain found itself in the grip of civil war . They expected little opposition, but supporters of the second Republic and the government resisted .
 The Republicans received weapons and volunteers from the Soviet Union and Mexico, and aid from supporters of liberal democracy, communism, and the anarchist movement . The Republicans won the election in 1968 .
 Recruiting posters were an important means of communication during the Spanish Civil War . Recruitment posters were important communication as many people were illiterate . Recruitions posters were used to communicate during the war .
 The fascist Italian and German governments also became involved, supplying troops and weapons . The civil war gave the civil war a dramatic international character .
 On July 19, 1936, General Franco assumed command of the Army of Africa based in Morocco and took it to Spain . General Franco took over the army of Africa from Morocco .
 This army played a key part in gaining Nationalist control of southwestern Spain . This army was used to help Nationalist take control of Spain .
 At the outbreak of the war, the Republican Army was about one-third larger than the Nationalist Army . The Republican Army is about one third larger than its predecessor .
 By the time the Army of Africa arrived in Spain, the figures were close to equal . However, by the time they arrived in the country, they were almost equal .
 Franco was born into a military family . Socialists and communists from all over Europe formed groups of volunteers called International Brigades . Franco was a member of the Francoist movement .
 In 1926 he became the youngest general in Spain, and by 1936 he was chief of staff for the military . In 1926, he was Spain's youngest general .
 Franco dominated Spanish politics after leading the Nationalist movement to victory in the Spanish Civil War . Franco dominated Spain's politics and was the formal head of state .
 He wore the uniform of a captain general, a rank traditionally reserved for the king . The rank of captain general is a rank reserved for king .
 Within three years of his death in 1975, Spain became a fully constitutional monarchy to protect the Popular Front government . Spain was fully constitutional in 1975 after the death of the king .
 Spain became the cause célèbre for left-leaning intellectuals across the Western world . Their ranks included anyone who was opposed to fascism, and Spain became a cause for the left .
 British government warned that Britons who enlisted on either side would be liable to two years in prison . The British government proclaimed itself neutral and urged other states to prevent the dispatch of volunteers .
 Thousands of foreign idealists made their way to Spain, many of them to defend the capital city, Madrid . Despite this deterrent, thousands of foreign . idealists traveled to Spain to defend their country .
 At the outbreak of war, Madrid was controlled by the Popular Front government . At the end of the war, the Spanish capital was still in control of the city .
 Franco was anxious to capture the capital, and bombing raids began on August 28, 1936 . Bombing raids began in 1936, and lasted for three months .
 On September 30, he captured Toledo, which is only 40 miles from Madrid . The Spanish capital is located in Toledo .
 Toledo had been in Republican hands since the beginning, despite the onslaught from thousands of Nationalist soldiers . Toledo has been Republican since the start of the Toledo, Ohio, city .
 Its capture was a huge morale boost for the Nationalists and did much to enhance Franco’s reputation . The capture of the Spanish capital was a major boost for Franco's government .
 By November 1, 25,000 Nationalist troops under General José Varela had reached the western and southern suburbs of Madrid . The Nationalist government was defeated by the end of the war .
 Five days later, Varela’s men were joined by the German Legion Kondor (a unit from the Luftwaffe, see 392) and the siege of Madrid began . The siege began five days later .
 Benito Mussolini began supplying the Nationalists with men and equipment in December 1936 . Mussolini was Italy’s fascist ruler .
 Franco was under pressure from both Hitler and Mussolini to obtain a quick victory by taking Madrid . He blockaded the road that linked the city to the rest of Republican Spain . Franco's troops attacked Guadalajara, 40 miles east of the capital, on March 8, 1937 .
 The Republican Army counterattacked, making use of Soviet tanks, and many lives were lost . Republican troops were killed by Soviet tanks .
 There was serious infighting among Republicans in Barcelona, Spain .
 On May 6, 1937, death squads assassinated a number of prominent anarchists, and rioting followed . Rioting followed after the deaths of several prominent anarchists .
 These events severely damaged the Popular Front and led to the formation of a new government under the leadership of Juan Negrin . The Popular Front was severely damaged by the events and was formed under Negrin's government .
 Negrin was a Communist sympathizer, and this enabled Joseph Stalin to influence the Spanish government . Negrin helped Stalin influence the government of Spain in the early 1930s .
 In April 1938, the Nationalist Army broke through the Republican defenses in the north . Franco moved his troops toward Valencia with the aim of encircling Madrid . Franco's troops eventually moved to Valencia .
 Negrin, eager to show that the Republican government was still viable, insisted on a policy of attack, rather than defense . Negrin insisted on attacking the government rather than defending the nation .
 Franco's volunteers joined in the fight against the Basque Provinces, 2 Asturias, and the industrial areas of northern Spain . However, at the Battle of frontal assault in 5 THOUSAND foreign Ebro (July 251937, Franco's . volunteers joined the fight
 During this offensive, the first large-scale aerial bombing of civilians took place, including the infamous German raid that destroyed their lives during the conflict . Republicans were all but destroyed as an effective fighting force .
 The Basque town of Guernica was destroyed by German air raids in 1937 . The town was the site of a German air raid on the Basque city in the same year .
 Franco believed the war was over and urged the Republicans to surrender . Franco believed that the Republicans had already won the war . Franco wanted the war to be over and called for surrender .
 On January 27, 1939, British prime minister Neville Chamberlain recognized the Nationalist government headed by Franco . Neville Chamberlain's government recognized the government of the Spanish Republic .
 The Nationalist Army entered Madrid virtually unopposed on March 27, 1939 . The Spanish capital was occupied by the Nationalist government .
 A highly professional army formed of Spanish troops, members of the Spanish Foreign Legion (modeled on the French Foreign Legion), and Moroccans from Spanish Morocco, known as Regulares .
 After the Spanish Civil War, Franco took control as the country’s dictator . Franco took over from the Spanish government after the war . After the war, Franco became a dictator .
 Committee drew up plan to enable those who had fought in the International Brigades to return home .
 After months of negotiation, other European powers finally gave their approval to DARIDAD ett the plan . The other European countries also gave their OK to the project . DARIDad ett is the first time the plan has been approved .
 The methods Franco used to restore order included censorship, banning strikes, and ensuring that the Nationalists formed the only legal political party . Franco's methods included censorship and banning strikes .
 Nazi propaganda photos depicted Hitler as the towering leader—führer—of his people . Hitler was a towering leader of his people. He was the Fuehrer .
 Hitler was convinced by his personal myth, seeing himself as a ‘man of destiny” leading the German people to greatness . World War I was the pivotal event in the life of German Hitler .
 Hitler was the son of a minor official frontline soldier for in the Austro-Hungarian Empire . Hitler had no particular interest in the margins of society .
 Four years serving politics before or during World War I, on the Western Front put Hitler in nor had he expressed any particular touch with the shared experience of dislike of Jews . Hitler had served as a politician before and during the war .
 As a “runner” carrying messages to the frontline trenches, he was wounded three times . He was wounded as a ‘runner’ carrying messages . As a "runner," he was injured three times.
 belief in the creation of a self-sufficient ""Greater Germany" incorporating all ethnic Germans within its borders . For example, belief in creation of 'Greater German' incorporating ethnic Germans .
 The term ""socialism"" was associated with ethnic exclusivity rather than equality . The term "socialism" is associated with ethnicity rather than with equality .
 Hitler strongly opposed Marxist socialism . He purged from the party all those who wanted socialism in the sense of workers' power or overthrow of capitalism .
 The supposed evil power of the Jews would be crushed and ""inferior"" races such as the Slavs would be used as slave labor . The privileged German ""Volk"" would unite in solidarity behind the heroic leadership of their Führer .
 Hitler married her in his Berlin bunker on April 29, 1945; they both committed suicide the following day . Hitler was the victim of an international Jewish conspiracy; he was the wife of Hitler .
 Hitler chanced upon an exceptional talent while mixing political extremist circles in Munich . Hitler's talent was discovered by Hitler in the early 1930s and 1940s . Hitler was a member of the Nazi Party in Germany .
 When he addressed political meetings in beerhalls, his speeches stirred the crowd in a way no other agitator could achieve . When he spoke to the crowd, he was able to get the crowd to listen to .
 His hypnotic ability to dominate and sway his listeners' emotions gave him the first intoxicating experience of power . He was the first hypnotic artist to achieve power .
 Hitler had reinvented himself as the messianic leader of a German national revival in the mid-1920s . The failed Munich Putsch was a coup in which Hitler tried to overthrow the government; his subsequent nationally publicized trial was nationally publicized .
 Those who thought they could control him—the military, politicians, businessmen, businessmen— underestimated his power, which they all eventually submitted . "Those who think they can control him," says President Barack Obama .
 Once in control, Hitler took little interest in the day-to-day business of government . Hitler was the only person in charge of the government .
 The Führer himself dabbled in grandiose architectural projects, such as Konigsplatz in Munich, or enjoyed the Alpine views at his Berchtesgaden retreat .
 Hitler was a teetotal vegetarian obsessed with cleanliness . He had no taste for luxurious luxuries . Hitler appeared in the Reichs Chancellery garden in Berlin in 1945 .
 His only intimate relationship was with Eva Braun, and little is known about it . Eva Braun was Eva Braun's lover .
 Hitler turned his obsession to the pursuit of power in foreign and military affairs . Hitler's obsession with power was to secure his dictatorial control of Germany . Hitler was obsessed with foreign affairs .
 He used the same tactics to get his way on the world stage as he had in domestic politics . He used threats of violence with offers of peace, and taking outrageous risks to achieve his aims .
 In September 1939, Hitler invaded Poland and finally tipped Europe into war . Hitler's invasion of Poland finally tipped the world into war in 1939 .
 The startling success of German arms fatally confirmed Hitler's view of himself as an infallible leader . Hitler's views of himself were confirmed by the success of the arms success .
 By the end of 1941 he had gone to war with both the Soviet Union and USA, and taken direct control of the German armed forces . He had gone directly into direct control over the German military .
 When the tide of war turned against Germany, Hitler's mental and physical state deteriorated . Hitler's grasp on reality weakened and his grasp of reality weakened .
 Hitler was prepared to see Germany destroyed to create a grandiose funeral pyre for his ego . Obsessed with his own historical greatness, Hitler was quite prepared to destroy Germany in order to create his own personal pyre . Hitler was obsessed with his historical greatness .
 Eventually, holed up in his Berlin bunker, Hitler realized he had been defeated . Eventually, he realized he'd been defeated.
 April 20, 1889 Born in Braunau, Austria, the son of a customs official . Adolf Hitler was born in April 1889 .
 May 1913 Moves from Vienna to Munich to evade military service in Austria . Later moves to Munich, Germany, to evade Austrian military service .
 August 1914 Joins the German Army as a volunteer at the outbreak of World War I . August 1918 Awarded the Iron Cross, First Class, after four years' service as a dispatch runner on the Western Front . September 1918 awarded Iron Cross for his role in World War One .
 November 9, 1923 Attempts to overthrow the German government in Munich Putsch . November 9 was 1923 attempt to overthrow Germany's government .
 December 1924 Released from prison after serving nine months for treason . December 1924 released from prison . December 24, 1924 . Released from jail after serving 9 months .
 March 1932 Belatedly takes German nationality and contests presidential elections, narrowly losing to Paul von Hindenburg . March 1932 Takes German nationality, narrowly loses to Hindenburg in elections .
 January 30, 1933 Appointed chancellor through a backstairs deal with conservative German politicians and forms government . Appointed as chancellor through backstairs deals with conservative politicians and becomes government .
 March 23, 1933 Exploits crisis caused by a fire at the Reichstag on February 27; pushes through the Enabling Act to gain exceptional powers for four years . Pushes through legislation to gain more than 4,000 new powers in 4 years .
 August 19, 1934 Becomes dictator of Germany after the death of Paul von Hindenburg . August 20, 1934, becomes dictator after death of Hindenburg's predecessor . August 21, 1933, is known as Hitler's first dictator .
 March 7, 1936 Sends German forces into the demilitarized Rhineland in defiance of the Versailles peace treaty . March 7 was the first time German forces had entered the Rhine in violation of the treaty .
 September 1, 1939 Orders invasion of Poland, triggering World War I . September 1: 1939 orders invasion of Polish territory, triggering WWI invasion .
 March 30, 1941 Addresses his generals about the planned invasion of the Soviet Union and calls for ""a war of annihilation”; the invasion is launched on June 22, 1941 .
 December 11, 1941 Declares war on the U.S. after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor . Decades on the United States after Pearl Harbor attack on Japan . Decade on December 11: 1941 Decades 11: "Declaration of War"
 July 20, 1944 Survives assassination attempt at his headquarters at Rastenburg . Survives an assassination attempt by the Nazis . Survived assassination attempt with his life in the Nazi Germany .
 April 30, 1945 Shoots himself in his bunker in Berlin as the city falls to the Soviet Red Army . April 30: 1945 Shooting himself in Berlin bunker as the Red Army attacks Berlin .
 The Munich Pact was agreed between Britain, Germany, Italy, and France in 1938 . It was the first time the four nations had signed a pact .
 It ordered the surrender of German-speaking areas of Czechoslovakia to Germany . The surrender was ordered by the German-controlled government in 1945 .
 Anglo-French appeasement of Hitler's wishes is criticized, but in 1938 neither nation could challenge Germany .
 The need for Lebensraum, or “living space,” informed Hitler's plans for war . Hitler's need for living space, or "living space," informed his plans for the war .
 Anschluss (the union with Austria) was followed by occupation of the Czech provinces, Bohemia and Moravia, in violation of the ANSCHLUSS Munich Pact . Occupation of Czech provinces was violation of Munich Pact violation .
 After defeat in the Battle of Britain, Hitler launched 57 consecutive nightly bombing attacks on London, known as the Blitz . The Blitz was the first of the Blitz bombings to take place in London .
 Fire Guards were volunteer patrols who extinguished fires after German air raids . Fire Guards, known as ‘the Midnight Watch,’ extinguished fires following air raids by the Germans .
 The poster's tone is typical of the propaganda produced by the wartime government to promote the war effort . The poster was created by the British government in 1941 .
 Well-equipped German forces pushed into Scandinavia and the Netherlands, crushing all opposition . Well-armed German forces then pushed into the Netherlands and Scandinavia .
 The air force blanket-bombed roads, railroads, towns, and villages, sending terrified local populations fleeing ahead of the German advance . Within a year, a seemingly invincible German army had conquered vast tracts of Europe .
 The chaos of refugees on the roads disrupted Polish counterattacks, and the German land invasion swept across the country at astonishing speed . The chaos led to the chaos of the roads disrupting counterattacks .
 The response of the British and French to German progress was hesitant . The response to the German progress in the First World War was slow .
 The German armed forces, or Wehrmacht, soon had the Polish capital, Warsaw, surrounded . In the next two weeks, they did little more than survey the situation in Poland .
 Poland capitulated when the Soviet Union invaded from the east . The Soviet Union had made a pact of nonaggression with Hitler . Poland was invaded by the Soviets, who had made an agreement to not invade .
 The Allies built up weapon stocks and dropped leaflets to persuade the German people of the evils of their Nazi leaders . There then followed several months of little military action, known as the ‘Phony War,” in which the Allies built .
 On April 9, 1940, Hitler invaded Denmark and Norway in a preemptive strike against the British, who had threatened to occupy Scandinavia . The invasion was part of a pre-emptive strike .
 Both British and French commanders believed that the Wehrmacht would be held at the Maginot Line . The tactic was used by the German army to invade Poland .
 It involved swift, intense attacks that aimed to destroy the enemy quickly . Meaning “lightning war,” it involved ‘lightning attacks’
 It often included bombing raids along the German border, and by the Belgian forests of the Ardennes, which they considered impassable for tanks . The Ardennes were thought to be impassible for tanks, but were not .
 RAF Fighter Command had a numerical advantage over the German fighter force for most of the Battle ool Britain . However, the Nazis swiftly broke through and the Nazis broke through .
 The Germans built usu 775 advanced to Abbeville, on the north French coast, trapping British and French forces . The British built 1,900 fighter planes, such as this Spitfire .
 From May 27 to June 4, Allied troops were evacuated from Dunkirk . On June 22, 1940, it seemed that German citizens, untouched by war in 1941, Germany and its allies had Germany had all but won .
 Hitler forced France to sign with Romania, Hungary, and Slovakia an armistice in the Turning points in support . The same railroad car where the terms of The Battle of Britain was waged from broad front for the attack .
 The British end of World War I . was a turning point in Hitler S. S. campaign, Operation Barbarossa . People sailed their own fishing boats across the English . Hitler’s popularity in Germany reached .
 The Red Army won't be able to defeat the Nazis in the winter of 1944-1944 . The Soviets were able to win over the Soviet Union in 1945-1946 .
 The Royal Air Force’s early warning with enormous suffering and loss of life systems gave Britain the advantage on both sides . Long battles along the English Channel, but the ensued, some lasting many months .
 Operation Sealion began at Stalingrad . Hitler abandoned his invasion plan, and began to target which resulted in a German defeat . In August 1942 a fierce battle began in which Hitler abandoned the plan .
 Hitler joined the army in his youth and served with z z Perhaps if Hitler had consolidated his 4th Queen's Own Hussars, which gave him gains in Western Europe, Germany . The tide of war had begun to turn .
 Hitler was in parliament in 1899, holding many posts, including E im chose to invade Russia . But he was not a member of the Hitler cabinet, but was a prominent member of society . Hitler died in 1945, but survived the invasion .
 In France, the government collaborated with Hitler, insisting that Britain should go down å j the Nazis, but here, as throughout occupied fighting, they collaborated with the Nazis .
 He was famous for his pugnacious war ""d Europe, resistance movements formed. leadership and brilliant oratory. He is famous for pug-nacious . leadership .
 The alliance between Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and Vichy FRANCE eats tends MR ee aia . Later Japan was known as the Axis .
 Vichy France s Frontiers, 1937 ee EM 5 "" was administered by the French Government . The French government was responsible for the operation .
 Petain sympathized with Nazi German occupation . He sympathised with Nazi Germany .
 He replaced France's motto of “Liberty, 3 Italian territory” with “Work, Family, Axis satellite E p Copenhagen — Fatherland,” and formed a militia that sent © Finnish territory to Finnish territory .
 French organization attacked German ATLANTIC Sle. cKiev 9 NU A Loos . Mii talingrad installations and helped stranded British airmen . Ae Kharkov a French organization, attacked German .
 The last German general still fighting in the Russian city of Stalingrad surrendered to the Soviet Red Army . The Red Army took control of the city in February 1943 .
 At noon a German Luftwaffe reconnaissance aircraft circled over the city . The aircraft circled the city at noon on Monday morning .
 The most decisive battle on the eastern front during World War Il was over . The battle was over in a matter of minutes . It was one of the most decisive battles of the war .
 The industrial city of Stalingrad stood on the west bank of the Volga River in southern Russia . It was one of the largest industrial cities in the Soviet Union .
 It controlled the vital river and rail connections that carried oil supplies to the armament factories of central Russia and to the Soviet Red Army itself . The Soviet Union controlled the key rail and river connections .
 Operation Blue, the German offensive that began on June 28, 1942, aimed to capture the Caucasus oilfields to the southwest and establish a secure position on the Volga . Operation Blue was launched in June 1942 and began in June 1943 .
 The Soviets responded to the German advance by concentrating their forces in Stalingrad, threatening the northern flank of the German army . The Soviets also concentrated their forces on the northern part of the country's northern flank .
 On July 23, Hitler ordered General Paulus and his Sixth Army to capture Stalingrad at all costs . Hitler ordered Paulus to capture the Soviet capital at the end of July 23 .
 The same afternoon, German troops reached the Volga, north of the city . The Volga is a river in the southern part of the country .
 By September 3, Stalingrad was surrounded, with the only means of escape east across the river . The only means to escape was to cross the river to escape across the border .
 Stalin ordered “Not One Step Backward” for this city bore his name and could never be surrendered . Stalin, the Soviet leader, had ordered ‘Not One step Backward,” to this city . The Soviet leader had ordered not one step backward .
 German air and artillery shelling reduced buildings to rubble, but the Soviet troops held fast . German air, artillery shelling destroyed buildings in the Soviet stronghold .
 As the Germans advanced into the city, the Russians fought them house by house . The Russians fought the Germans house by hand in the city .
 The two sides were often so close they fought each other from different stories of the same building . They fought from different floors of the building .
 On November 19, with the Russians now occupying a narrow strip along the riverbank, the Red Army launched Operation Uranus, an audacious attack on German positions from the rear . The Red Army is now occupying an area along the Russian riverbank .
 The battle raged into the New Year and, worn out by constant Soviet attacks, cold, and hunger, the remnants of the German army finally surrendered on February 2 .
 Soviet sniper perches in a bathtub as he takes aim from a ruined building . Fighting for each floor of a ruined Soviet building .
 Snipers were well suited to close combat, picking off German troops one by one . Snipers picked up German troops in the early hours of the Second World War .
 From the start of World War II, governments sought ways to unite people in the war effort . Governments sought ways of uniting people in a united Germany .
 When the United States entered the war in 1941 the Allied cause was bolstered . When the U.S. entered it in 1941, the Allies were bolstered .
 Governments at war mobilized their citizens with propaganda . Posters were a favored means of communicating War aims .
 All sides used propaganda to encourage people in the war effort and boost morale . War propaganda was used to boost morale and encourage people to join the war .
 The Alliance was signed in December 1941 as the United States entered the war . It was signed as the U.S. entered the conflict in 1941 .
 It set up joint British and American military command for all AngloAmerican operations . Joint British and U.S. military command set up for AngloAmerican military operations .
 The two nations entered a period of cooperation, which helped Britain in the war . The two countries helped each other in the fight against each other .
 The Allies captured territory held by the Italians with relative ease early on in the North African Campaign . U.S. forces captured Bardia in 1942 .
 The German navy began to target U.S. merchant ships carrying weapons, raw materials, food, and eventually troops across the Atlantic Ocean to Britain . The ships were carrying weapons and raw materials to the UK .
 German submarines sank three million tons of Allied shipping . Allied shipping was won partly by the development of longer-range aircraft that could reach U-boats .
 Support from the Canadian and U.S. navies played a major role, as did better intelligence . Centimetric radar was developed to find submerged U-boats .
 Initially the British drove the Italians back to Libya, despite Italy's superior numbers of troops and equipment . The British drove them back, despite the Italians' superior numbers and equipment, to Libya .
 To aid its weaker ally, Tobruk against Rommel's forces before over the course of the war . To aid the weaker ally of Rommel, Tobrak fought for the sake of its weak ally .
 Churchill later admitted that the threat to the lifeline of U.S. supplies was the one thing that really terrified him . Without it, Britain might have been starved into submission .
 Australian troops held out under siege at where mobility was crucial for crossing being relieved by Allied troops . The Battle of the Atlantic, as this theater of war became known, was fought in the Pacific .
 Mussolini wanted to extend the Italian empire by invading Egypt in 1940 . Mussolini had wanted to expand the Italian Empire .
 Field Marshal Rommel sent in the Afrika Korps to protect British interests in Africa . British troops from Britain and Commonwealth countries (former British colonies) sent in . Field marshal Rommel .
 The Atlantic Ocean and the deserts of North Africa became backdrops for fierce battles . It was not until October 1942 that the British victory under Total War .
 Securing vital supply lines from the United States enabled Britain and its allies to drive back the German and Italian troops . Securing the U.S. supply lines helped Britain and allies drive back Italian and German troops .
 Coastguards watch the explosion of a depth charge blast a Nazi U-boat out of the water . Coastguards stand on the deck of the United States Cutter Spencer . The U.S. Coast Guard says the explosion was a 'miracle' for the U.K. Coast Guards
 The U-boat's target was the large convoy of merchant and troop ships seen on the horizon . The U.S. U.K. was attacked by a German submarine in the Battle of the Word of War .
 Allied support and the advances in radar technology ensured Britain's Atlantic lifeline to the United States and Canada stayed open .
 The Road to Berlin | that Rommel's advance was checked was checked . The next month, the ""Torch Landings"" the Allies entered Germany from the MAE UMS . By 1945, the Allies held the advantage .
 British and U.S. forces in Morocco and Algeria brought Allied west and Russia invaded from the east . landed in Italy, while Soviet troops swept across Eastern reinforcements with United States tanks and fresh Soviet troops .
 After fierce April 1945 fighting in Tunisia, the Nazis faced attack on all fronts . Axis powers suicide and unconditional were defeated in Africa . Within six months, after fierce fighting in Tunis, the Germans were defeated .
 The Axis surrender in North Africa in Europe was was followed by the successful Allied declared on invasion of Sicily, after which Hitler's May 8, 1945 . Italy's key ally, Italy, secretly surrendered .
 After the liberation of OG EAN France, Germany made one last stand at the Battle of the Bulge in the Shetland I Ardennes, Belgium, where more ;Z Orkney Is. than 80,000 United States troops and a similar number of U.S.
 After the Red Army took Berlin, the end of the war in Europe was officially declared on May 8, 1945 . The Red Army's victory in Berlin was the first German victory in the war .
 The costs of World War I were immense. The city severely bombed yi . The city was severely bombed .
 In è& major battle terms of loss of human life, the statistics are appalling . The statistics are e partisan resistance 2b appalling, says historian .
 1942 ilingrad frontiers estimated at over $2 billion . The financial costs have been —— frontiers frontiers . 1942 Ilingrad . Estimated cost of the frontiers is estimated at more than $1 billion .
 British troops are enter Paris and France signs Paris in August . British troops evacuated from Dunkirk one week after armistice one week later .
 The Blitz troops capture the port of the Allies at the Battle of forces are defeated by the Soviet forces . German Allied landing at Anzio is declared when the surrender as German offensives are declared . On Britain on Britain begins.
 The Red invades Poland, and Britain Battle of Britain begins . Operation Barbarossa the mass murder of Jews begins . Allies invade Italy and the Army advances and France declare war on begins .
 Italian army surrenders through Eastern Germany two days later . RAF invades Russia, ending five days later, five days after . RAF's success causes invasion of Russia . RAF forces Italy to surrender in Russia .
 Hitler to postpone the Nazi-Soviet Pact. indefinitely . i eae UC THE DEFEAT OF GERMANY planned invasion of Britain, indefinitely. ieae UC The DeFEAT of Germany's planned invasion .
 From 1939 to 1941, Nazi Germany blazed across Europe, annihilating any opposition in neighboring territories . From 1939-41, the Nazi Germany ruled Europe from 1939-1941 .
 German forces had conquered vast territories by the winter of 1941 . With troops fighting in North Africa and facing the Soviet Red Army outside Moscow, German forces were in full control .
 The Allies were advancing on the German capital, Berlin, in 1945 . Yet in April 1945, the Allies were swiftly advancing on Berlin .
 Operation Overlord aims to wrest control of Europe from Nazi Germany . Nearly four years of planning, combined American, British, Canadian, and Free French force launched . D-Day was the first World War II invasion of Nazi Germany in 1944 .
 D-Day operation was a crucial turning point in World War I . Operation was to prove a crucial turn point in the war in northern France .
 The largest of the five assault areas was at Colleville-sur-Mer, codenamed Omaha Beach . The largest assault area was at the French city, cod-named Omaha Beach, in France .
 Allied air and naval bombardment had made little impact on the well-prepared German defenses at Omaha . The United States 29th Infantry Division—untested in combat—attacked alongside the United States Ist Infantry Division .
 Horrendous weather had forced General Dwight D Eisenhower to delay the attack for 24 hours .
 The mission launched with little improvement in conditions, but further delay would have set the operation back by several weeks . The mission has been delayed by several days, but is expected to last several more weeks .
 Of 29 amphibious tanks launched at Omaha Beach, 27 sank with their crews still trapped inside them . 27 of the 29 tanks were launched at the site of the sinking of Omaha Beach .
 Many of the soldiers emerging from the landing craft were swept off their feet by heavy surf and drowned as they attempted to wade ashore . Others proved easy targets for German fire, picking off from the beach .
 He captured the intense struggle as they fought their way onto the beach clifftops . Waist-deep in the icy sea with bullets tearing into the water around him .
 By early afternoon, U.S. troops had managed to secure a small strip of beach, 6 miles wide, and around 2 miles deep .
 The Allies landed 150,000 troops by nightfall . Encountering less resistance at beaches codenamed Utah, Gold, Juno, and Sword .
 Six days later they had linked the five beachheads into a continuous front and begun using artificial ""Mulberry harbors"" to land armored vehicles, heavy artillery, and more troops with which to further advance .
 On June 27, after two weeks of intense fighting, American forces captured Cherbourg . On July 9, the British and Canadians overcame two Panzer divisions to take Caen; on July 25, the tanks of the United States 7th Army advanced south through Saint-Lô, breaching the
 This was the vital breakthrough that led to the liberation of Paris on August 25 and the crossing of the Siegfried Line into Germany in early September . This was a vital breakthrough .
 Hitler saw the Jews as an evil, implacable enemy of Germany who should be driven from the Reich . Hither way, Hitler thought the Jews were an evil enemy of the Reich, Hitler said .
 Genocide-the murder of a group of people, for their religion or race, has long been part of human life . Genocide- the murder of an entire group- is long part of the human life. Genocide- is a murder of people for their faith or race. Genocide is a
 The Holocaust is the result of such a policy, but it was not the first genocide of the 20th century . The Holocaust was not a genocide, but a policy to prevent it from happening .
 Anti-Semitism has its roots in the Roman Empire when early Christians attacked Jews, blaming them for the death of Jesus Christ . Anti-Semitic in Europe and Russia has a history of anti-Semitism in the past .
 The Nazis in power Hitler took power in January 1933 and began a slow process of reducing the civil rights and economic position of the country's half-million Jews . The Nazis took power of the Nazis in 1933 .
 They were removed from civil service and from many professions in 1933-4 . Their shops and businesses boycotted and they were banned from entering the country .
 Fewer than half of Germany's Jews remained in Germany by 1939 . Thousands took refuge in exile abroad . Thousands of Jews took refuge abroad .
 In September 1935 the notorious Nuremberg Laws stripped Jews of their German citizenship and prohibited marriage or sexual relations between Jews and non-Jews .
 In 1915, the government of the Turkish Ottoman Empire accused the 1.75 million Armenians under its control of collaborating with the enemy, Russia . In April 1915, Armenians were under the control of the Ottoman Empire .
 Armenians lost their lives when the Turks invaded the Russian Caucasus in 1918 . A further 400,000 Armenians were killed in the Turkish invasion of 1918 .
 The massacres continued until 1922, when the remaining Armenians were driven from Turkey . The massacres were carried out by Armenians in Turkey .
 From 1940, three labor and death camps were built here . More than 1 million Jews died here from 1941 to 1945, when the Soviet Red Army liberated the camps .
 In 1936 a program was set in motion to strip Jews of their assets, and by the outbreak of war, most Jewish property had been taken by the state or bought at reduced prices .
 It was not until November 1938 that the Jews were threatened with widespread violence . The Jews were not threatened with violence until after November 1938 .
 A pogrom, known as the “Night of Broken Glass, led to the destruction of 7,500 businesses and the Poster advertising ""the Eternal Jew" In the film made by Joseph Goebbels, scenes of Polish Jews living in Warsaw were intercut with images of
 The term is most closely associated with the deliberate attempt to annihilate the Jewish race in Europe from 1941 to 1945 . It is probably the most shocking and far-reaching act of the age .
 8,000 Jews were expelled from Berlin and around 25,000 Jewish men sent for a short spell in concentration camps . 25,00 Jewish men were sent to concentration camps where they were subjected to a brutal regime of punishment and labor .
 Hitler's goal was to exclude the Jews from Germany . Initially, Hitler wanted to exclude them from the country .
 By 1939, thousands more Jews came under German control in Austria and areas of Czechoslovakia . It proved difficult to get other countries to accept Jewish immigrants .
 At the Evian Conference 5 _( MILLION Jews were killed, including 3 million Polish Jews . 5 million Jews died at the conference . At the conference 5 million people were killed .
 70 disabled people 70 in Germany were killed in France in July 1938 . Only 2 out of 32 countries present agreed to accept higher quotas of Jews .
 Britain restricted Jewish access to Palestine due to the growing civil war there between the Arab population and Jewish settlers . The Arab-Jewish civil war broke out in the early 1900s .
 The German invasion first of western Poland in September 1939, and then of the USSR in June 1941, radically and tragically transformed Germany’s anti-Semitic policies . Ghettoization and murder led to the death of Jews in Poland .
 Jews were herded into walled or fenced ghettos in poor urban areas, where they had little or no food . With 3. million Jews in Poland and 2. million in the western Ghetto roundup Across Poland and occupied Russia, Jews were forced to live in ghett
 USSR, as well as more than a million in occupied France, the Low Countries, the Balkans, and Scandinavia, were no longer feasible . The Nazi authorities’ reliance on emigration and small-scale attacks to “clear” Jews was no longer possible .
 Jews across Europe were rounded up and sent to the five main death camps in Poland . Thousands more were sent to labor camps, where they worked for Death train Jews . Thousands of Jews were also forced to work in labor camps .
 After death, Jews were stripped of everything, including their hair and the gold in their teeth . After death they were stripped from everything, even their hair .
 The shoes come from one day of gassing at Auschwitz in the German war effort . The shoes were taken from the Auschwitz concentration camp .
 As German troops swept into the USSR, the SS shot, or gassed in mobile vans, as many Jews as they could find . The SS shot and gassed Jews as well as anyone else they found .
 Historians now date a decision on the “Final Solution of the Jewish Question’ to late 1941 . A written order from Hitler has never been found, historians now say .
 Reinhard Heydrich, head of the Gestapo, summoned senior bureaucrats to a villa at Lake Wannsee in Berlin to ensure their support for his plans . The Gestapo was responsible for the deaths of many of the world's top Nazi leaders .
 Jews were now to be transported to camps in Eastern Europe, where they would be worked to death, or killed on the spot . Jews would be sent to camps where they were either worked or killed . Jews were then transported to death camps, or to be killed on spot .
 Death was caused by mass gassing in sealed chambers . The disposal of the bodies took place in huge crematoria staffed by Jews themselves .
 Auschwitz, Belzec, Chelmno, Majdanek, Sobibor, and Treblinka were supplied with trainloads of Jews from occupied and Axis Europe, except for Bulgaria, whose king refused to cooperate . The death camps were supplied by trainloads .
 The Auschwitz camp was photographed by a U.S. reconnaissance plane in August 1944 . Reports filtered out to the Allies, but photo-interpreters were more concerned with a nearby chemical factory .
 The Holocaust ended in 1945, but its legacy is still with us . The Holocaust is still a major cause for concern in the world .
 Jews now have a homeland, but it is not without problems . Largescale massacres of people solely due to their race or beliefs have continued to occur .
 The Law of Return made Israel home not only for its inhabitants, but for all Jews, wherever they might live . Israel is now home to all Jews wherever they may live .
 Anti-Jewish pogroms broke out in Poland in 1947, resulting in the deaths of some Jews who had survived Auschwitz . 2 million Cambodians were killed by their revolutionary government in the “killing fields” of Year Zero in 1975-79 .
 The Jewish national Holocaust memorial at Yad Vashem, Israel, remembers those who died . The memorial focuses on the resistance of Jews to Nazi terror .
 Memorials now exist in many European cities, notably Berlin . National Holocaust Day is commemorated in many countries on January 27, the anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz .
 Historians and politicians have tried to rewrite, or even obliterate, historical events for their own ends . Yet ""Holocaust denial"" has gained ground in recent years, with some historians and politicians trying to rewrite history .
 China was the first target in Japan's plan to create an empire in Asia and the Pacific . It soon began to stage incursions into Chinese territory, and began to invade it .
 In July 1937 a minor incident, involving a missing Japanese soldier, caused Japanese and Chinese forces to open fire on each other at the Marco Polo Bridge near Beijing .
 European colonial interests were affected by growing problems in Europe and resisted involvement . Although colonial interests in Europe were affected, they were absorbed by growing issues .
 U.S. president Franklin D Roosevelt transferred his navy's battleship force to Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, in April 1940, to deter Japanese aggression . Roosevelt transferred the force to Hawaii in April .
 The combined effects of war with China and foreign trade embargoes left Japan desperate for oil and other raw materials available in European colonies in the Southeast Asia and the East Indies .
 The Japanese raid on Pearl Harbor destroyed many United States battleships and killed around 3,000 U.S. personnel . The raid reduced the threat to Japan's southward expansion .
 Having gained an advantage, Japanese leaders put their plans into action . Japanese leaders plan to take advantage of their advantage .
 German victories at the beginning of World War II encouraged Japan to start empire building in earnest . Their aim was to construct an U.S. empire .
 Japan attacked the United States navy base at Pearl Harbor, throwing down the gauntlet to all Western powers seeking to restrict the expansion of the Japanese Empire . It signed the Three-Power Pact with War in the Pacific .
 World War Il had arrived in Asia and the Pacific and was now truly global . Imperial perimeter around Southeast Asia and central Pacific . World War I had arrived at the end of World War II .
 Pearl Harbor was followed by the Japanese invasion of most of their target territories, including Burma, British and Dutch Borneo, Hong Kong, and the Dutch East Indies . The invasion of Burma was the first invasion of the Japanese .
 Between March and June of 1942, the Japanese survived fierce confrontations with Allied forces to conquer Singapore, Guam, and the Philippines . The Japanese established control in Indonesia, Malaya, and Burma .
 Japan made attempts to win over the mass of Asian peoples so that they would support them in the war . Having ousted the old colonial regimes, Japan made efforts to win support for them .
 A degree of independence was granted to a few Burma river patrol Forces . Forces were sent into Burma to protect British colonial interests in the country . Burma river patrols were sent in by British colonial forces .
 British troops patrol villages along a river as they search for Japanese soldiers . In the picture above, British troops are seen looking for soldiers in villages along the river .
 Atrocities were committed against Chinese citizens and in Japan’s notorious prison camps, where medical experiments were conducted on prisoners of war prisoners . Medical experiments were carried out on prisoners during the war .
 The Japanese advance was checked in May 1942 when a naval force heading for southern New Guinea was defeated in the Coral Sea . In May 1942, a Japanese naval force was defeated on its way to New Guinea . The British invasion of the island was the first to stop the Japanese advance .
 A far more significant defeat came at the Battle of Midway in early June . The battle was the first major loss to the U.S. in the Pacific since 1942 .
 Admiral Yamomoto assembled a powerful force of aircraft carriers, battleships, submarines, and destroyers with the intention of surprising the United States fleet at the Midway Islands .
 United States intelligence had cracked the Japanese code and the U.S. Navy was well-prepared for their arrival . The Japanese code was cracked and the United States Navy was ready for the invasion .
 In the ensuing battle, Japan lost its main fleet of aircraft carriers and hundreds of pilots . The battle was over Japan's main aircraft carriers .
 The tide of war in the Pacific turned in favor of the Allied Powers during 1943 . As was the case in Europe, the tide of the war turned in against the Allies .
 A Japanese volunteer kamikaze pilot flies his explosiveladen plane into a United States battleship . This change was in many ways due to the Kamikaze . The change was made in Japan in the wake of the Second World War .
 Once the United States war effort was mobilized, Japan began to struggle to match its enemies, and Allied troops began to recapture occupied territories .
 In early 1945, British troops invaded Burma, under Admiral Lord Louis Mountbatten and Field Marshal Sir William Slim, liberating the country in May . Burma was liberated in May 1945 .
 During 1944 and 1945, U.S. power at sea and in the air began to have a decisive effect . During 1944-1945, the United States had a decisive advantage in Europe .
 A sea blockade of Japan cut off all imports, strangling the Japanese war economy . The blockade was a war embargo that crippled Japan's economy in the early 1930s .
 Another decisive U.S. naval victory at the Battle of Leyte Gulf in October 1944 opened the way for America to regain the Philippines . Another decisive United States naval victory opened the . way for the . Philippines .
 Japan carried out a surprise bombing raid on the American fleet at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, on December 7, 1941 . In February 1945 the United States invaded the island of Iwo Jima, gaining a base for fighter escorts .
 Thousands of American lives were lost, as well as many battleships, as seen engulfed in flames above . Thousands of Americans were killed, as were thousands of other Americans .
 Victory in the Pacific was in sight for the Allies, but still Japan refused to surrender . The Japanese refused to give up .
 On August 6, 1945, the Allies dropped an atomic bomb on the Japanese city of Hiroshima and three days later on the city of Nagasaki . The Allies dropped the bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki on August 6 .
 As news of the devastation sank in, the Soviet Union broke a neutrality pact with Japan by declaring war and invading Japanese-occupied Manchuria . The Soviet Union declared war and invaded Manchurian territory .
 These events persuaded the Japanese to sign an unconditional surrender on September 2, 1945 . The Japanese surrendered to the U.S. on September 1 .
 After the war, communists won power in China, causing nationalists to flee . Nationalists fled the country after the war .
 During World War Il, Chinese political factions had united against the Japanese, but open civil war reignited in 1946 . Civil war in China reignited after World War I .
 Chiang Kai-shek fled China with 600,000 troops and two million refugees . After his defeat, the nationalist leader fled China . The nationalist leader was forced to flee China with 2 million refugees.
 Chiang refused to acknowledge Mao's government and established his alternative government in Taipei on the former Japanese colony of Taiwan . Chiang's government was based on his government in Taiwan .
 Japan was occupied by the Allies until 1952 . U.S. occupied Japan until 1950s .
 In 1947, a new constitution introduced universal suffrage (the right to vote) and banned Japan from having an army . A new constitution also banned the use of an army in Japan .
 In the 1950s, a memorial park was built in the center of Hiroshima in remembrance of the nuclear attack . A memorial park has been built in Hiroshima since the attack .
 General Douglas MacArthur was the Supreme Allied Commander in the Pacific . He was the supreme Allied Commander of the Allied Forces . MacArthur was known for his role in World War II .
 At the end of World War II he became Supreme Allied Commander in Japan . He oversaw the drafting of a new Japanese constitution .
 Japanese radar detected three American aircraft flying south at high altitude . Around 7:15 am, three aircraft were seen flying at high altitudes .
 The planes were thought to be on reconnaissance, the air raid alert was lifted . Because of the planes thought to have been on reconnaissance they were able to carry out the mission .
 At 8:16 am, the unchallenged leading B-29 bomber, named Enola Gay, dropped “Little Boy” over the city of Hiroshima . At 8.16am, Enola gay dropped the bomb over Hiroshima, Japan .
 The decision to bomb Hiroshima, and military uses, and scientists in Nagasaki three days later, was made UK and U.S. grew concerned that by United States president Harry Truman .
 The Germany might use it to make war against Nazi Germany had ended bombs . The war ended bombs. Germany might have used it as a weapon of war .
 On August 2, 1939, Albert in May, but Germany's ally, Japan, refused to surrender . Einstein and the Hungarian physicist refused to take part in the war .
 In 1938, German scientists Otto Hahn kept the peace . Nuclear war might have acted as a . w^ ""x he eis Pl"
 The ability to destroy atoms by bombarding them with to destroy Morla, however, has neutrons . Morla was destroyed by neutrons, but the ability to do so is limited to neutrons.
 The process used, known made our planet an infinitely more as nuclear fission, had obvious dangerous place . Nuclear fission is the process used to make our planet a better place .
 The devastating force of the explosion threw a huge mushroom cloud thousands of feet into the sky . The explosion was the largest explosion in history .
 The searing heat of the bomb was so intense it vaporized people, vaporizing people, and caused a firestorm that destroyed the city . The firestorm destroyed the entire city .
 The East-West divide between communism and capitalism dominated world events for the next 40 years . The East and West dominated the world for 40 years, with the rise of capitalism and communism .
 Historic distrust and ideological differences between the Soviet Union and the U.S. led to tension in the wartime alliance . The alliance was formed during the Second World War .
 Between 1918 and 1920, United States troops hen Allied powers met at partisans . The United States was involved in the war between the Allied powers .
 Soviet Army fought on the side of Yalta and Potsdam to shape President Truman to pledge assistance by strengthening its own power base . of the White postwar Europe .
 Truman argued that the spread of and socialist anti-imperialists . Western imperialists the United States later sent aid and the Baltic states raised anxieties . Truman argued .
 He to the fledgling Soviet about his expansionist ambitions. He set up the Cominform, an organization state, diplomatic . Between 1945-47, the Soviets gained or America’s national security would not be at risk .
 In the U.S. strength to the Soviet Union was the dollars in financial and there was unease about United States. In the United States strength to . The United States was the strongest in financial terms .
 Winston Churchill had communist European states, to request U.S. support in Greece . In 1947 the British military aid into nonKorean War propaganda .
 British and American transport planes flew a total of 2. million tons of food, medicines, and fuel into Berlin in 1948 and 1949 . Berlin Airlift was a two-year mission to help the city of Berlin .
 At several points throughout the Cold War, tensions almost reached boiling point . Direct conflict or ""hot war" between the U.S. and Soviet Union was avoided .
 After World War II, Germany was divided into four zones, each separately administrated by the US, France, Britain, Britain and the Soviet Union .
 The German capital, Berlin, was situated deep in the Soviet zone and was split into four allied sectors . Berlin was located deep in a Soviet zone .
 In 1948 the Western allies planned a separate West German state, uniting the US, French, and British zones . In 1948 West Germany was planned by the West German zone . West Germany is now a West Germany state .
 The Soviets tried to stop this by cutting off land routes into the Western sectors of Berlin . They left only air access to the Western parts of Berlin, leaving only air routes .
 Berlin Airlift brought supplies to besieged Berliners . Airlift was the first of its kind to bring supplies to the besieged city .
 The U.S. funds and organizes Cuban exiles in a bungled attempt to invade Fidel Castro . The German Democratic Republic was created in East Germany and the 1961 The United States failed to invade Cuba .
 14 days war seems imminent until Khrushchev agrees to U.S. President Kennedy's demands . For 14 days, war seemed imminent until President Kennedy agreed to President's request .
 The superpowers' possession of weapons of mass destruction generated much of the fear and paranoia that characterizes the Cold War . The Cold War era was dominated by the fear of the superpowers .
 The U.S. entered the Vietnam War to back the South Vietnamese army against North Vietnamese communists, the Vietcong . Initially the United States was the only nation in possession of nuclear weapons, but once the Soviets tested their own nuclear weapons the arms race began .
 By the time a ceasefire is Cuba at the Bay of signed, 58,000 U.S. lives and many more Pigs and depose the Vietnamese are lost . Nuclear weapons were mobilized in Havana as the United States and the Soviet Union threatened each other .
 Each side rapidly developed the capacity to destroy | the world many times over, but both continued to Ld manufacture weapons at huge expense, competing — to develop missiles that were ever more efficient . Both sides continued to develop weapons at enormous expense . Both continued to manufacture weapons .
 The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty was signed by the United States and the Soviet Union to build an effective system of controls to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons . The treaty was signed in 1970 by the U.S. and Soviet Union .
 The republicans are backed by the United States but the Khmer Rouge triumphs . In August 1949, any future conflict carried the threat of global destruction . Any future conflict in the world was likely to carry the threat .
 In 1953 the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, promoted a policy of ‘peaceful coexistence” with the West . In 1953 Nikita was the leader of the Soviet Union, who had tried to create a thaw in relations .
 Many flash points reignited tensions and suspicions, bringing the world to the brink of catastrophe . However, there were many flash points that rekindled tensions .
 In 1962, crisis was narrowly averted after a tense standoff when Soviet missile installations were discovered in communist Cuba . Crisis was averted in 1962 after discovery of Soviet missile facilities .
 The superpowers continued to stockpile nuclear arms, reasoning that nuclear war could only be prevented if each side had an equal capacity to destroy the other . The nuclear arms were stockpiled in the 1950s and '60s .
 A range of arms agreements were negotiated during the Cold War, but disarmament was not considered a possibility . President Reagan announces the Star Wars program, which gives the U.S. space-based protection against attack from the Soviet Union .
 The IntermediateRange Nuclear Forces Treaty was signed by presidents Reagan and Gorbachev, ending the arms race . The treaty was signed in 1987 and ended the nuclear arms race in Washington, DC .
 Citizens set about dismantling it. reforms the country's failing on nudear disarmament .
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization was founded on April 4, 1949 . Leaders of the United States, Canada, Britain, France, and several other European countries signed the treaty . NATO was founded by the U.S. and Canada .
 NATO was, first and foremost, a military alliance that guaranteed assistance between member states . It also allowed the U.S. to maintain military bases in Europe . NATO was first, foremost, the military alliance .
 In 1955, Greece and Turkey entered NATO but a Soviet request for membership was rejected . In 1955 the Soviet Union requested membership in NATO but it was rejected by the then-Soviet Union .
 Mikhail Gorbachev unintentionally set off a chain of events that would break up the Soviet Union . The reforming political leader set off the chain-set off a series of events in the Soviet republic .
 Two years later, he became president and modernized the Soviet system . He encouraged the creation of a private sector and openness with the West .
 In the Baltic States, Kazakhstan, and other parts of the Soviet Union, nationalists rose up to demand independence from Moscow . In the 1990s, the Baltic states, Kazakhstan and others rose up against Moscow's rule .
 Gorbachev tried to hold the Soviet Union together, imposing sanctions and sending troops into Georgia and Azerbaijan . He imposed sanctions and sent troops into Azerbaijan and Georgia .
 His father was prime minister of the tiny princedom of Porbandar, part of British-ruled northwestern India . His father, also a former prime minister, was Prime Minister of the small kingdom .
 Typical of privileged sectors of Indian society at that time, his life was shaped by old Indian customs, such as an arranged marriage at an early age .
 The young Gandhi was skeptical about his family’s Hindu practices, including the avoidance of meat . He leapt at the chance to study law in Britain, but was skeptical of Hindu practices .
 As a student in London he first encountered the Bhagavad Gita, a sacred Hindu text that was to influence him profoundly . He became a committed vegetarian and vegetarian after reading the text .
 When Gandhi went to South Africa as a 23-year-old lawyer in 1893, he had Handwritten letter . This letter was written in 1914, the year in which Gandhi quit South Africa .
 No clear purpose in life except to make money, at which he proved thoroughly successful . He did not adopt traditional Indian dress until 1913 .
 The experience of the | discrimination, prejudice, and mistreatment suffered by Indians in South Africa’s racially divided society drew him into political activism .
 In his white ""dhoti,"" Gandhi cut a strikingly odd figure at international political conferences . This was nonviolent civil disobedience, conceived by Gandhi as a moral and spiritual effort, seeking to bring about a change in the hearts of the oppressors .
 October 2, 1869 Gandhi is born in Porbandar, RU IL IL . For much of the 1920s and the 1930s Gandhi focused on breaking Gujarat .
 In a very could have led such an effective adherence to the truth and by the short time, Gandhi swept to the protest as the famous ‘Salt March’ The famous Salt March was a symbol of the readiness to suffer, says Gandhi .
 Gandhi launched a campaign of total British tax on salt in 1930 . Gandhi was at forefront of Indian political life, of 1930 .
 When Gandhi returned to live in India Indian National | a India was immense . Adopting to the simple life over leadership of the moral authority in campaign oree M .
 In 1942, reluctantly, the Satyagraha Ashram at Ahmedabad. leader of political protest but also a into a vital nationwide he launched December 1921 Elected leader of the Indian man with a distinctive set of attitudes .
 Spiritual values brutal repression from campaign in shock at mob violence . Influenced by Russian author Leo Gandhi never had a meeting with British authorities . Spiritual values of brutal repression and brutal repression .
 Gandhi is sentenced to six years and serves two . March 1922 Arrested'andare dor NM Tolstoy and English social critic John politician's attitude, The drift of events Gandhi's attitude .
 His goal was saddened his final believing in the virtue of small artisan not the attainment years . His final goal was to be to be a small artisan .
 He had made a vow of of of power but the decided to grant India M | chastity (announced to his wife in spiritual and moral independence after 1330 M eis ae 1906)
 Gandhi negotiates a pact with British India, where he could live according to killed 22 policemen loathed . Gandhi could live in India according to the terms of the pact . Gandhi negotiated the pact with the British India .
 September-December 1931 violence was the violence that the subcontinent was during Gandhi campaigning . Even worse viceroy Lord Irwin to end civil disobedience his principles, but he soon resumed .
 Gandhi responded by calling off his was plunged into. India was entering a war of its own . Gandhi responded to the crisis by calling it off . Gandhi was killed in the war .
 Gandhi resigned from Congress in 1942 after being accused of being Hindu extremists . His conciliatory resigns from Congress. attitude toward Muslims enraged August 9, 1942 Gandhi and Congress Hindu extremists.
 Gandhi is nonviolent political struggle, was influential after his death . Gandhi was influential in the world of Gandhi's nonviolent struggle . Gandhi died in 1942 at the age of 25 .
 For Gandhi, satyagraha was more than simply a way of achieving political objectives through civil disobedience . Gandhi's satiagraha is more than a way to achieve political objectives than simply to achieve civil disobedience, Gandhi says .
 He saw it as a path to spiritual improvement | through truth, love, and suffering . Held in the Aga Khan Palace near Poona . Held a solitary da ma es to halt 8 massacres .
 Indians became disenchanted with British rule in the late 19th century . GANDHI's death came from 'NONVIOLENCE IN PEACE AND WAR', 1948 .
 By the 1920s there was a mass anticolonial movement demanding home rule for India . The movement was led by the British Empire in India .
 In 1909 the Government of India Act allowed a very small number of Indians to sit on legislative councils, but their responsibilities were minimal . The Act was passed in 1909 .
 The Indian National Congress was founded in 1885 by Western-educated Indians campaigning for Indian rights .
 Although the Congress represented all Indians, its members were mainly Hindu . Members of the Congress were mainly from India .
 Muslims broke away from the INC to form the Muslim League in 1906 . In 1906 some Muslims broke out of the party to form a Muslim League . Muslims were members of the Muslim Brotherhood .
 Gandhi encouraged the boycotting of British goods, the nonpayment of taxes, and passive or nonviolent resistance . In a long campaign of civil disobedience, known as satyagraha, Gandhi encouraged boycotting British goods . Gandhi encouraged people to take part in a long civil disobedience campaign known as
 Not all Indians used peaceful means to resist British rule of India . Violence was used to resist the British rule .
 It created an Indian parliament to which Indian ministers could be elected to hold positions of responsibility in departments such as health, education, and agriculture .
 The British kept only the most crucial departments—revenue, defense, and foreign affairs . Another act in 1935 allowed more Indians to vote .
 At the end of World War II, in 1945, the British agreed to hand over full power to the Germans .
 As independence drew closer, Muhammad Ali Jinnah started to demand a separate Muslim state . Jinnah was the leader of the Muslim League, who demanded a separate state of Pakistan .
 Muslims and Hindus caught on the wrong side of the border were forced to flee their homes . Many millions of Muslims and Hindu Muslims have been forced to leave their homes in Pakistan .
 Muslims protested all over India to voice their demand for a separate homeland . Muslims protested in India on the day Muslims protested against the idea of a Muslim homeland .
 The protest in Calcutta escalated into violent fighting between religious groups, and thousands of people died . Thousands of people were killed in the clashes between religious and political groups .
 Lord Mountbatten, the last viceroy of India, saw that the only way for the British to withdraw was to partition India and to transfer power to two governments . The British withdrew from India in 1947 .
 Among the major Indian leaders, only Gandhi refused to agree to partition .
 He urged Mountbatten to offer Jinnah the premiership of a united India rather than a separate Constitutional Assembly instead of a separate Constituency .
 During the ceremony, Lord Mountbatten read a message from George VI pledging the support of the British Commonwealth (nations that were formerly part of the . British Empire) to Pakistan .
 Ethnic and religious rivalries caused the partition of India . India accuses Pakistan of partitioning itself into Pakistan .
 Territorial disputes arising from the partition have led to 1947-49 India and Pakistan go to war when Pakistan supports a Muslim insurgency in the independent province 1958-60 Disputes arise between Pakistan and India over the rights to water in the Pakistani 1971 Civil war breaks out between West a series of
 Riots erupt and thousands of people are killed in the Indian-held parts of Jammu and Kashmir . Thousands of people die in the clashes between Indian troops and Kashmiris .
 Jinnah became Pakistan's first governor-general . India invades Lahore in retaliation . Pakistan recognises Bangladesh as an independent country .
 Congress president Jawaharlal Nehru, however, would not agree to this plan, nor would his most powerful Congress deputy, Vallabhbhai . The next day, the independent state of India emerged with Nehru as its Patel Patel .
 Sikhs fled from Britain's Parliament their homes on one passed the Indian side of the borders Independence Act, -— Í to what they believed was refuge demarcation of the ^ D am on the other side . They traveled on and Pakistan and killed 4,000 people of the
 These were located two months, about thousands of miles a million people apart, in the mainly slaughtered Muslim east and in fierce religious northwest of the riots .
 The Sikh region, respectively. population, who India was formed were caught on from the remaining area, with the Pakistani side of the new border, . exception of the northern province of Kashmir, which was free casualties .
 The Indian prime minister, Nehru, launched a dove of peace at his 65th birthday celebrations in 1954 . Nehru released the dove at the age of 65 at his birthday celebrations .
 Territorial and ethnic issues continue to cause conflict in the Indian subcontinent . Territorial issues still cause conflict between India and India .
 India and Pakistan have contested possession of the Muslim-majority state of Kashmir since 1947 . Hindu ruler, Maharajah Hari Singh, gave the province to India in 1947 .
 Since 1989 there has been an independence movement in the Indian-administered part of Kashmir . Since 1989, Kashmir has been fighting for an independence from India .
 India blamed pro-Kashmiri militants for the attacks on their parliament in 2001 and on Mumbai hotels in 2008 . The attacks were carried out in Kashmir in 2001 .
 No provision was made for Sikhs when India was partitioned between Muslims and Hindus . Sikhs were not allowed to be Sikhs in the Muslim-Hindo-Muslim partition .
 India and Pakistan conducted nuclear tests in 1998, causing concern in the international community . Pakistan and India tested nuclear weapons in 1998 .
 UN Security Council criticized the two countries and urged them to stop all nuclear weapons programs . The two countries have been accused of using nuclear weapons in the past .
 Tensions were reduced in February 1999 after Pakistan and India signed the Lahore Declaration . They pledged to intensify efforts to resolve all the issues between the two countries .
 Threat of nuclear conflict still remains between the two countries . However, the threat of nuclear war still remains .
 Indian independence from British rule is followed by the partition of the subcontinent into India and Pakistan . The two countries are now known as Pakistan and India .
 The decline of Europe's empires gathered momentum after World War I as domination of poorer nations by colonial powers came to be considered unacceptable .
 The transition from empire led to the creation of self-governing nation states in much of the world, but this created many new conflicts . n 1945, the old justification for empire came into question .
 Many colonies had remained deeply impoverished and underdeveloped to suit the economic needs of the empire . Many colonies remained deeply underdeveloped and not developed for economic reasons .
 By the early 20th century the spread of nationalist ideas led to the growth of independence movements in the colonies . However, European powers were now forced to admit that this could no longer be the case .
 In the Middle East, mandates granted by the League of Nations gave Britain and France administrative powers over the region .
 Colonial territories tended to be underindustrialized, and in many the standard of living was very low . Colonial territories tend to be less industrialized .
 They supplied raw materials to power European industry, but the development of their own national economies was not seen as a priority . Developing their own economies was seen as not a priority in the 1930s .
 Increasingly, citizens demanded the right to self-govern . The rise of nationalism was a major factor in the rise of nationalism .
 The imperial powers began to make some concessions toward power-sharing but remained determined to hold on to economic control of the natural resources of their colonies . Some countries began to prepare for withdrawal from imperial territories .
 The transition to independent status of some former colonies was complicated by the superpowers . The U.S. and the Soviet Union competed for influence over the people's choice of government .
 In the colonies, there was conflict between social, political, and ethnic factions over who should govern . The colonies were ruled out of control by the British Empire .
 European powers caused resentment by trying to hold on to their interests in resources, such as oil and gemstones, even after independence granted .
 Transition to independence often marked by civil wars and intervention from foreign powers . As a result, transitions to independence have been marked by foreign intervention . Transitions to independence were often marked with civil wars, intervention from abroad .
 The Dutch were unwilling to surrender their interests in Indonesian oil and rubber . The Dutch refused to surrender interests in Indonesia . The Indonesian government refused to give up their interests .
 They invaded in 1945 to reestablish control, but conceded Indonesian independence in 1949 . They continued to occupy Western New Guinea, although they still occupied it .
 During World War II the Germanbacked Vichy regime in French Indochina, which incorporated Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia, also collaborated with Japan . The Germanbacked regime in the region also collaborated in WWII .
 Hong Kong was a British territory since its victory in the Opium Wars of 1842 . It is finally handed back to China on July 1, 1997 .
 From an early age, Nasser was interested in the fight for Egyptian independence . Nasser wanted to fight for independence from Egypt .
 During World War Il, he was involved in plans for a military coup to oust British forces from Egypt . He was involved with plans to overthrow British forces in Egypt .
 Nasser's victory in the Suez Crisis of 1956 established him as a figurehead for Arab nationalism . Nasser became a figure figurehead in Arab nationalism after Suez crisis victory in 1956 .
 Ho Chi Minh took advantage of the Japanese surrender to declare an Independent Democratic Vietnamese Republic . Ho Chi Minh declared the Independent Democratic Vietnam Republic .
 French troops invaded the new republic in 1946 and by 1946 had taken control of the south of the country . Minh’s army held the north while French troops occupied the north of Vietnam .
 The French Indochina War lasted from 1946-54, when massive French losses at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu finally precipitated a settlement .
 In the British colony of Malaya, an initially peaceful transition to selfgovernment developed into conflict in 1948 . In the UK colony, Malaya was ruled by the British government .
 Hostility toward Britain's intention to maintain business interests in Malay rubber and tin combined with political and ethnic divisions in the population to create civil unrest . Hostility to Britain's business interests led to civil unrest in Malaysia .
 An armed insurrection by the communist minority resulted in the death of three European plantation managers in June . Ships sunk by Egyptian forces block the entrance to the Suez Canal .
 On the extreme right of the picture, a British naval salvage vessel attempts to clear the channel . On the left of the channel, the British vessel is attempting to clear it .
 British troops defeated the Chinese guerrillas in 1952 and withdrew from Malaya in 1957 . The Federation of Malaya had been established in the 1950s .
 The most significant crisis of British and French withdrawal from empire came in 1956 . President Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal in order to nationalize the canal .
 The canal, which links the Mediterranean and Red Sea through Egyptian territory, had been under British and French control since its construction in 1869 .
 The route was a key route for the transport of raw materials to Europe . It represented a key trade route for raw materials and was used to transport them .
 The crisis ended in a victory for Arab nationalism and signaled the decline of the old powers of Europe . Arab nationalism was a major factor in the rise of Arab nationalism .
 France's determination to maintain control of Algeria in northern Africa led to guerrilla fighting between the Algerian Front de Libération Nationale and French security forces from 1954 .
 By 1960, the violence had escalated and the independence issue was bitterly dividing the French nation . The violence was a major source of tension between France and Algeria .
 The struggle left deep scars on both French and Algerian national consciousness . The struggle for Algerian independence in Algeria has left a lasting legacy in France .
 The dismantling of colonies in Africa spawned many territorial wars between African Nations . African Nations are divided on territory in Africa .
 As imperial powers withdrew, many nations also descended into civil war . Civil war was a major source of conflict in the early years of the 20th century .
 When the Belgian government granted independence to the Congo in 1960, violence erupted . Different Congolese factions struggled to gain control of the nation’s remarkable natural wealth .
 The Congo’s nominally democratic government, installed at independence, failed in 1965 when Lieutenant General Mobutu seized power in a military coup . The Congo was overthrown in 1965 by the army .
 Through the 1960s and 70s, transitions to independence became generally peaceful . Transition to independence was generally peaceful and independence was established across most of the world .
 Independent government in the Third World has not equalized the distribution of global wealth and power . However, independent government in Third World hasn't equalized global wealth, power . Independent government is not equal enough to equalize global wealth .
 Growing opposition in France to French suppression of the Nationalist Movement in Algeria exploded into riots on the streets of Paris in 1961 . French protesters clashed with the French Army and the notorious CRS riot squad .
 In many cases, democracies established post-empire failed to survive, and military or one-party rule was established . After the fall of the Ottoman Empire, many countries were ruled by one party or military .
 In some countries power was seized in military coups, such as that led by Idi Amin in Uganda in 1971 . Military coups were also seized in some countries .
 Ethnic violence and political repression were rife under military regimes . Ethnic violence was rife under the military regimes, including those of the past .
 With few exceptions, democracies established post-empire have failed in much of Africa . With a few exceptions to the independent Republic of Ghana, democracy has failed in Africa .
 Elected national parliaments have often been unable to establish unity in countries that are divided along tribal lines .
 By 1897 they were demanding their own state, and in 1917 the British agreed to the foundation of a Jewish state in Palestine . By 1897, they had demanded their own . In 1917 they were able to establish the state of Palestine .
 Zionism became an organized political movement in 1897 when its founder, Theodor Herzl, convened the First Zionist Congress . Zionism was organized in 1897 by Herzl .
 The congress called ' ee for a Jewish state' in Palestine . Early Zionists in Palestine were called 'early Zionists'
 France gained the mandate for Syria and Lebanon, and Britain was granted for Iraq and Palestine . Britain also granted the mandate to Iraq, Palestine and Syria .
 The 1917 Balfour Declaration was a policy drawn up by the British government that accepted the need for a Jewish homeland in Palestine . MANDATE An Ottoman or German l territory that was handed to another country to run after World War I . The declaration was drawn up in the Balf
 In 1948 the modern Jewish state of Israel was established in the region, causing fury among Palestinian Arabs and in the wider Arab world . In 1948, Israel became the first Arab state to establish a Jewish state .
 British rule in Palestine began in 1919 when the British Mandate (see BEFORE) was granted . It has proved one of the most contentious political acts of modern times .
 The majority Arab population strongly contested the Jewish settlers’ claim on their country . Some Arabs resorted to aggressive attacks against Jews, their homes, and their businesses .
 Jews, feeling that the British authorities were giving them insufficient protection, began to form local defense groups, known collectively as the Hagannah, to protect their communities . The Hagannah was formed to protect the Jewish community from persecution .
 During the 1930s the Hagannah turned into a paramilitary organization, developing military training programs and sourcing arms from Europe . The Hagannah became a paramilitary group .
 Yemeni girl stayed at the Shaar reception center in Haifa when she first arrived in the Jewish state . Like many of the Jews who emigrated to Israel in the 1950s, she stayed in the center .
 Guerrilla violence between Arab groups and the Hagannah became increasingly difficult for the British to police, so in 1939 they called together Arab Damascus and Jewish delegations to e the St. St. Hagannah .
 In it the British made concessions to the Arabs on a wide range of issues, the most important was a restriction on the free settlement in Palestine of Jewish refugees . The British made a number of concessions in the agreement .
 This seemed like a death sentence for those Jews trying to flee Nazi Europe to Palestine . This seemed to be a death penalty for those fleeing Nazi Europe .
 Supporters of the Arab and Jewish sides held international conferences during 1946, but the year ended without any workable solutions to the problem .
 Caught between Arab and Jewish demands, a cash-strapped British government declared its mandate in Palestine “unworkable” in February 1947 . The matter was referred to the United Nations .
 In June 1948 crowds gathered on the Tel Aviv beachfront to see the wreckage of the burntout Altalena . The UN proposed a partition plan, which allocated about 44 percent of the area for an area .
 Ben-Gurion refused to let it land in respect of a truce with the Arabs, and ordered warning shots to be fired . The incident occurred during a truce between Israel and the Arabs .
 One hit the vessel and it burned. stated in the McDonald Arab state and 56 percent for a Jewish state, with Jerusalem under international administration. stated statehood .
 The Jews agreed with their decision but the Arabs did not, arguing that the plan ignored the rights of the majority of people living in Palestine . The Jews and the Arabs agreed with the decision .
 David Ben-Gurion was born in Poland in 1948 . He was the son of a prominent Israeli politician .
 He moved to Palestine in 1906 and became a prominent member of the Zionist movement . He led the struggle to establish a state of Israel, leading the struggle for Israel .
 Until his retirement in 1970, he played a major role in Israeli life, developing the state's policies and institutions, and guiding Israel through years of conflict . He played a key role in Israel's development of the state .
 On May 14, 1948 the Jewish state of Israel was established . Despite this, Britain withdrew and Israel was declared a Jewish state in 1948 .
 Israel was recognized by the US, the Soviet Union, and other UN members, but not neighboring Arab countries . Arab countries refused to accept Israel as a state, which was later recognized by Israel .
 One of the first tasks for Israel’s new leader, David Ben-Gurion, was to create the Israeli Defense Force from the Hagannah and other Jewish paramilitary organizations . The force was created in the early 1950s .
 Thousands of Jews were evacuated from Jerusalem by British troops in 1948 . A further threat was the Palestine Liberation Evacuation of Jerusalem .
 PLO was formed in 1964 when various Arab guerrilla groups and political factions joined together . PLO's stated aim was the destruction of Israel through armed struggle .
 PLO sponsored innumerable guerrilla raids on Israeli civilian and military targets . PLO had a worldwide reputation as a terrorist group . The PLO was founded in 1978 .
 In the 1980s, Yasser Arafat, chairman of the PLO since 1969, took on the role of statesman . Arafat used diplomacy to achieve the group's ends. Arafat has been a PLO chairman since 1969 .
 Some Palestinian extremists believed Arafat gave too many concessions to the Israelis during diplomatic talks . Arafat was accused of making concessions to Israel in the wake of the Oslo summit .
 This visa allowed the German Jewish holder to emigrate to the British Protectorate of Palestine . Dated January 1939, this visa was issued in 1939 .
 Restrictions were placed on the numbers of Jews allowed to settle in the region . By November of the same year restrictions had been placed on Jewish settlement in Israel .
 Israel, Britain, and France joined forces to invade Egypt . Israel believed the Egyptian-held Gaza Strip was a base for guerrilla activity .
 In response to the massing of Arab forces on its borders, Israel launched a preemptive strike against Egypt, Jordan, and Syria in June 1967 . Six-day war lasted six months . Israel and Egypt were involved in the Six-Day conflict .
 In 1975 Egypt and Syria launched a surprise attack on Israel on Yom Kippur, the Jewish Day of Atonement . They knew the Israeli military would be participating in religious celebrations on the day .
 The Arab forces made significant advances before Israel rallied and pushed back beyond the 1967 ceasefire lines . Israel rallied to push the invaders back beyond Israel's 1967 ceasefire line .
 In 1978 President Sadat of Egypt, Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel, and President Jimmy Carter of the United States signed the Camp David Accords . In 1978 Anwar Sadat and President Carter of Egypt and Israel signed Camp David .
 The accords established a ""Framework for Peace"" in the Middle East, leading to the Israel/Egypt Peace Treaty in 1979 . Israel/ Egypt Peace Treaty was signed by Egypt in 1978 .
 In an attempt to curtail cross-border attacks by the PLO based in Lebanon, Israel invaded in 1978 and in 1982; they became an occupying force there until 2000 . Israel invaded Lebanon in 1978, 1982 and became a occupying force in Lebanon until 2000.
 In response to the killing of three Israeli soldiers and the capture of two others by Hezbollah, Hezbollah, a Lebanese Islamic paramilitary group, in 2006 . Israel reinvaded in 2006 in response to killing of 3 Israeli soldiers .
 The Intifada (Palestinian uprising against Israeli rule) persuaded Israel to join talks . Israel joined talks with the Palestinian government in the wake of the Palestinian uprising . Israel has never been involved in peace talks with Israel .
 The Oslo Accords agreed that Israel would withdraw from parts of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, allowing an interim Palestinian government in those areas . Israel withdrew from those areas in the wake of the peace deal .
 Albert Einstein had a largely uninspiring school career, although he displayed a natural talent for mathematics and a love of learning . Einstein's work is the source of all true art and science .
 Einstein found a job at a patent office in Bern, Switzerland, in 1903 . Einstein graduated from a technical university with a teaching certificate . He was born in Switzerland and went on to work in Switzerland .
 Einstein submitted his doctoral thesis and published four scientific papers . Einstein was still working at the University of New York when he submitted his thesis .
 Three of these were to be profoundly important in the history of science . Three of them were important discoveries in the world's history .
 The first of Einstein's 1905 papers concerned the phenomenon known as the photoelectric effect, in which electrons are ejected from atoms of metal when light shines onto them .
 Einstein received a magnetic compass from his father around the time of this photograph . Einstein's sister Maja was also in the picture .
 He later said that he had found inspiration wondering why compass needles turn .
 Instead of the ejection rate gradually building with the intensity of light shining onto the metal surface, the effect suddenly ‘switches on’ when the frequency of light rises past a certain threshold .
 In physics and math he scored a maximum 6.5, never supposed it to be literally true . This certificate tells a different story . In physics, math, he scored only a maximum of 6.6 .
 Einstein’s paper was the beginning of quantum theory, a field of physics that provides insight into the behavior of light, atoms, and subatomic particles .
 Einstein remained at the heart of its development for the rest of his life . Einstein's work was the work of the Nobel Prize winning physicist .
 Einstein's second landmark paper of 1905, entitled On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies, outlined his Special Theory of Relativity . Einstein's theory of relativity was first published in 1905 .
 Speed of light is always the same, however fast an observer is moving relative to a light source . The speed of light always is the same as the speed of an observer relative to light sources .
 Einstein's last publication of 1905 was a bold extension of Special Relativity . Einstein's final publication was the Bulletin Bulletin Bulletin of the Year .
 Galileo Galilei states that natural laws are the same whether one is in motion or not . Physical laws should behave in the same way in all isolated frames of reference unless they are being affected by external forces .
 All motion is relative—there is no universal, fixed reference point . This is because all motion is based on relative, and there are no universal reference points .
 Einstein's Special Theory of Relativity recondiles this principle with the fact that light always travels at the same speed relative to an observer no matter how fast they travel relative to its source . Einstein's Theory of relativity says light travels at same speed as its source, regardless of how fast
 Einstein explained how time and distance measurements become distorted at high relative speeds . Einstein explained in order to do this, Einstein explains how relative speed is distorted .
 The bizarre results of special relativity are used routinely by experimental physicists . Special relativity is used in experimental physics .
 In 1915, Einstein extended Special Relativity to create his General Theory of Relativity . Einstein's theory of relativity was created in 1915 .
 This theory explains gravity as a distortion of space-time, the fourdimensional ""fabric"" of the universe . This theory is based on Einstein's theory of gravity .
 The two theories of relativity have been tested countless times and never yet failed . Einstein's theory of relativity has never failed, but it has never ever failed .
 One effect of general relativity is a phenomenon called gravitational lensing, in which light from distant stars and galaxies is deflected and warped as it passes close to galaxies .
 ALBERT EINSTEIN proved that mass and energy, too, are relative quantities, just as time and space are . Albert EINstein proved that time and energy is relative quantities .
 He showed that mass and energy are two aspects of the same thing, massenergy . Furthermore, he showed that energy is also a form of mass energy .
 It was in this paper that he derived his most famous equation, relating mass and energy , via the square of the speed of liebetcs Emc. Emc .
 This famous equation is also the source of the devastating energy of nuclear weapons . The equation is known as the "nuclear equation" and "the equation of hell"
 In 1907 Hermann Minkowski, one of Einstein’s teachers, showed that time is equivalent to the three dimensions of space, and is intertwined with them . Einstein's teacher Einstein's theory of relativity .
 He visualized “space-time” as a four-dimensional “fabric” of the universe . He visualizes ‘space time’ as a ‘four-dimensional’ ‘fabric of the world’
 Einstein set about generalizing his Special Theory of Relativity to include gravity . Einstein's theory of relativity was eventually generalized into the Theory of Gravity . Einstein is credited with developing the theory of gravity .
 Time slows down in intense gravitational fields . One result of this is that light bends as it passes close to very massive objects such as the Sun .
 Einstein published his ideas in 1915, as the General Theory of Relativity . Einstein was already proclaiming the need for nuclear disarmament . By 1946, Einstein had declared the need to disarmament.
 A total solar eclipse in 1919 provided a chance to test Einstein’s new theory . The eclipse was the first time Einstein had been able to observe the phenomenon .
 A team of physicists photographed the area of the sky surrounding the Sun during the eclipse . The eclipse was the first of its kind in the history of the Sun .
 Stars in the dark sky around the obscured Sun appeared slightly out of place as it passed close to the Sun . This is a result of their light bending as it passes close to it .
 Einstein's theory of gravity matched Einstein's idea of gravity exactly . The shift was inexplicable using the traditional ‘Newtonian’ (see 269), but it matched Einstein’s theory .
 He won the 1921 Nobel Prize for Physics . He stayed at the forefront of discovery during a period when physicists were beginning to unravel the universe's mysteries .
 He was celebrated beyond the academic life of science, becoming a cultural icon . He was one of the few scientists known by nearly everyone, and one of only a few scientists .
 Einstein's fame was a result of people seeking his opinions on a wide range of topics . Einstein's opinions were sought out by people who wanted to know more about him .
 He was acquainted with many world leaders, wrote widely in newspapers, books, and magazines . He became involved with many political causes .
 In his later years, he lobbied against racism in the U.S. and against nuclear weapons . He also lobbied against the use of nuclear weapons and against racism .
 Einstein was in favor of establishing a Jewish homeland in the Middle East . A German-born Jew, Einstein had Zionist aspirations . Einstein was a pioneer of Zionism, and was a Zionist .
 Einstein's theories are only truly understood by physicists . Einstein's work radically changed our understanding of the world . Einstein was one of the most enduring characters of the 20th century .
 Albert Einstein was born March 14, 1879 in the small town of Ulm, Germany . Einstein is the son of Albert Einstein, who was born in Ulm .
 He also publishes a paper in which he suggests ""stimulated emission"" could be possible . This is the principle behind the laser, which was not invented until the 1950s .
 Einstein's divorce is finalized, and he is married for the second time, to his cousin Elsa Lówenthal . Einstein is married to Elsa Löwenthal, his cousin .
 Einstein takes up a position at the Princeton Institute for Advanced Study . Einstein will be the first person to study Einstein's work at the institute .
 It was a time of wealth, peace, and unity, though not without its downsides . It was the time of prosperity, peace and unity in the United States .
 During World War Il many marginalized sectors were thrust into central roles, only to be sidelined again when the war ended . Before World War I, marginalized sectors had been sidelined .
 Women played a crucial role in the U.S. victory in World War I . Women helped contribute to the United States victory in the war .
 They served in the auxiliary army and navy services, and also the air force, flying new aircraft from factories to military bases or repairing those damaged in conflict .
 Many women moved from low-paid administrative or catering jobs into better-paid munitions or engineering work . But they were rarely paid as much as men earned .
 Most women in industry lost their jobs when men returned from the war in 1945 . Most of the women in the industry lost jobs when they returned from war .
 Segregation remained legal in the United States until well after World War II, despite the U.S. having fought against the Nazis, who held an explicitly racist ideology . Segregation was legal until after the war, and segregation was still legal .
 President Truman desegregated the armed services in 1948, prohibited segregation on interstate travel, and outlawed discrimination by employers and unions . President Truman also desegested the armed forces in 1948 .
 The American dream and the open road came together in stylish | automobiles like the soft-top Pontiac Chieftain . The American Dream and the world's first car came together .
 Gas was cheap, and young people had diners, shopping malls, and drive-in movies at their disposal . Young people were able to drive in drive-ins, diners and malls .
 Cars such as the Pontiac and the Cadillac became status symbols of the new wealth and freedom that Americans enjoyed during the 1950s . Americans emerged from World War II as the world's most powerful nation .
 The only one of the Allies not to be occupied or bombed during the Great Depression of the 1930s . Britain and the USSR supplied its own military needs as well as some of those of Britain and USSR .
 The buoyant economy created a new middle class that made up 60 percent of families, who spent their money on consumer goods . 60 percent spent money on goods, including consumer goods, according to CNN.com .
 83 percent of American homes had a television by 1958, and two-car families doubled from 1951 to 1958 . Some 83 percent had a TV by 1958 .
 The U.S. consumed one-third of the world’s goods and services, and made two-thirds of manufactured goods . The United States had 6 percent of the population (150 million in 1950)
 Compared to the starch-rich and relatively expensive diet of their forebears in 1900, food was affordable and varied . Food was more varied and more affordable than the starch rich and expensive diet in 1900 .
 The average American in the 1950s had a choice of green vegetables, frozen goods, fresh meat, and fast food . The average U.S. citizen in 1950s was able to choose between green vegetables and frozen goods .
 After World War I, Americans viewed consumption as a patriotic activity that helped economic recovery . Consumption was viewed as patriotic activity to aid economic recovery after war .
 The most sought-after items included refrigerators, cars, televisions, washing machines, toasters, and vacuum cleaners . Women could expect to live to 71 instead of 51, men to 65 rather than 48 .
 One urgent need for this new class was decent housing . The flight to the suburbs was the first flight to suburbs .
 The postwar economy provided food and clothes, but good housing was still in short supply . The post-war era provided food, clothes, and good housing, but still needed .
 Bill Levitt won a contract in 1941 to build 1,600 row houses for shipyard workers in Norfolk, Virginia . Levitt built the row houses in the 1940s for shipyards workers in the area . He won the contract to build the houses .
 Frustrated by union rules and having to organize numerous skilled workers, he divided the building process into 27 separate steps . He trained 27 teams of workers to carry out each one of the 27 steps .
 With increased disposable income, young couples could spend money on recreation, drinking after work, or eating out regularly at the local diner . In 1958, U.S. ECONOMIST GALBRAITH, on the social changes in American society .
 His first development of 2,000 two-bedroom houses for war veterans on Long Island was in New York . Such facilities were, however, still segregated in many southern states .
 Each house cost $6,900, with no down payment for veterans and a mortgage guaranteed by a federal housing bill . Each house was built with a mortgage guarantee by the government .
 Levittown, as it became known, grew in four years to 17,447 houses and a population of 82,000 people . Levitttown, which is now known as Levittstown, grew four years from its start to its peak .
 The houses were Aa Š all identical, but their inhabitants soon personalized them, adding porches and patios and building extra rooms . The houses are all identical but the inhabitants soon customized them .
 13 million new homes were built from 1948 to 1958 . Almost all of them were built in new suburbs . Some 13 million homes built between 1948 and 1958 .
 Many U.S. cities are social doughnuts, with a rich commercial and business center surrounded by a poor, largely African-American-inhabited inner ring of social housing, surrounded by largely white suburbs . This turned many American cities into social doughnut .
 The idea oi the ‘teenager’ emerged as young people developed their own culture . The idea of the 'teenager' emerged in the 1980s and 1990s . The 'teenagers' are often referred to as 'troubled teenagers'
 Country and western was popular among the white working class, while African-Americans had blues, gospel, and, in the late 1940s, rhythm and blues .
 Bill Haley in 1954 and Elvis Presley in 1956 gave young people their own music . The new hybrid music blended African-American rhythm and blues and white country and western .
 Rock 'n' roll was the music of rebellion and teenage angst, echoed in the movies of James Dean and Marlon Brando . James Dean was the star of the films, starring alongside Brando in the 1960s and '70s .
 Jazz, Beat poets, novelists like Jack Kerouac, abstract expressionists Jackson Pollock and Mark Rothko defined American culture as much as rock ’n’t roll or movies . Folk and protest songs of Woody Guthrie and, later, Bob Dylan, defined American
 It raised fears of a ‘red menace’ against American society in the Cold War . The Cold War was a Cold War era when the U.S. faced a threat of a 'red menace'
 The mass production of housing resulted in streets with row after row of identical houses . Suburbia is the result of the mass production in the 1960s .
 The 1950s was a conservative decade, based on white, middle-class family values where men went to work and wives stayed at home . Only 36 percent of women worked in 1955, and only 36 percent were women .
 Segregation in jobs, housing, education, and democratic rights was rife, most notably in Southern states . Segregation was rife in the Southern states, including the Southern South .
 His anticommunist witch-hunt struck a chord as the Cold War with Russia intensified . But when he attacked the army in 1954 he was censured by the Senate . He was also censured in 1954 for attacking the army .
 After the artistic excesses of Charlie Parker and bop music in the 1940s, 1950s jazz cooled down to find a new audience . Miles Davis and college circuit favorite, pianist Dave Brubeck, were among those to play in the 1950s .
 What appeared to be a cohesive, affluent society was revealed as divisive and fractured along lines of race and class . The findings were revealed in a series of interviews with CNN's John Sutter .
 The idea of the American dream is still powerful for many Hispanic immigrants . The American dream still strong for many of them .
 President John F Kennedy and his wife Jacqueline visited Dallas, Texas, to drum up support for the 1964 U.S. presidential election . On Friday November 22, JFK and Jacqueline Kennedy were in Dallas, Dallas, to promote the 1964 election .
 As the motorcade drove through Dealey Plaza, at least three gunshots rang out, killing the president instantly . The president was killed instantly in the shooting .
 The American people had lost a president they loved, and they had been robbed of their future . President Barack Obama was robbed of his future, Obama said .
 Three days after John F Kennedy’s assassination, the world stopped again, united in grief .
 The funeral of the 35th president of the United States was watched by a million people lining the procession route . Millions more watched by millions on television .
 During his brief time in office, the charismatic young president had come to epitomize the hopes of his nation . The charismatic young leader epitomized his nation—belief in a better future .
 Lee Harvey Oswald, a lone gunman, was arrested shortly after the shooting and charged with murder . Oswald is accused of killing President Lincoln Lincoln in Lincoln's second term .
 Two days later he was shot dead while in police custody by Jack Ruby, a gangster who later gave contradictory reasons for the killing . He never came to trial; Jack Ruby later shot him in the head .
 President Kennedy's successor, Vice President Lyndon Johnson, established an official investigation into the assassination headed by Earl Warren . Earl Warren, Chief Justice of the United States, was the subject of the investigation .
 Oswald's son salutes moments after his father’s casket was carried down the steps of St. Paul's Cathedral . After a 10-month investigation, the commission concluded that Oswald had acted alone, as had Ruby .
 John F Kennedy Jr. saluted his father at St. Matthew's Cathedral . John F. Kennedy Jr.'s third birthday it was that day .
 His uncle Bobby Kennedy, who stands behind him, was himself assassinated just five years later . Bobby Kennedy said there was no conspiracy to kill the president. Bobby Kennedy was assassinated five years after he was assassinated .
 Many people have refused to accept these conclusions, but no firm evidence has ever come to light to suggest otherwise . 'No firm evidence' has ever been found to support these conclusions .
 After the assassination, the body of the president was flown back to Washington . The president's body was flown home to Washington after the assassination .
 It first lay in repose in the East Room of the White House and lay in state in the Capitol Rotunda . It was taken to lie in state on Sunday afternoon in the capital .
 250,000 people lined up in near-freezing temperatures to pay their respects . Over the following 18 hours, people line up to pay tribute to the fallen .
 On Monday the funeral procession returned to the White House and then moved on to St. John McCain's home in Washington .
 Heads of state and representatives from 92 countries attended the service . The service was held in New York City, New York .
 It was at the height of the Cold War , yet even the USSR sent a representative .
 The Archbishop of Boston led the mass, at which Kennedy's writings and speeches were read . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Populist movements, some authoritarian, others revolutionary, swept new regimes to power . Populism movements swept across the globe in the 1920s and 1930s .
 In some countries, governments were imposed on the population by the military . In some cases, the military imposed governments .
 The transition from colonial rule to selfgovernment in Latin America {318-19 was generally smooth in terms of economic stability . The transition between colonial rule and selfgovernment was generally a smooth .
 In the early years of the 20th century, many Latin American countries had flourishing economies, based on the export of crops and minerals to North America and Europe . 8 per cent of land in Brazil the population in 1910 was owned by one percent of the population .
 Mexico's popular uprising of 1910 preceded and influenced the revolutions in Russia and Eastern Europe . The revolution in 1910 was Mexico's first major uprising in Mexico's history .
 Porfirio Diaz's military regime was overthrown in 1911, but widespread conflict continued as Mexican soldiers, workers, and peasants joined in a struggle for civil rights and agricultural reform .
 Violence briefly calmed by the Constitutional Congress of Mexico in 1917, violence flared again in the 1920s . Violence flared again by the end of the century, but was briefly calmed in 1917 .
 €384-85, created shortages in imported manufactured goods in Latin America's export market . 1929 crash triggered by the Great Depression created shortages of imported goods . Great Depression of 1929 created shortages and shortages of goods .
 The political response was to create economies that could provide for their own populations without reliance on foreign markets . This is the political response to the economic crisis in the Middle East .
 Growth in Latin America's urban workforce led to a rise in political activism and calls for social and political change . In trends similar to those of 19th-century Europe, growth in urban workforce has led to political activism .
 The fall of Diaz's regime in Mexico set a precedent that popular uprising could succeed . n 1930, economic problems led a the Brazilian military to install Getulio Vargas as provisional president .
 Although it operated as a dictatorship, his government permitted liberal measures such as social and welfare reforms . His government operated as an absolute dictatorship with absolute power .
 He was democratically reelected in 1951, but committed suicide in 1954, after the army demanded his resignation . He committed suicide after being forced to resign from office .
 In Argentina, a populist government came to power in 1946 led by Juan Perón . Perón's ""Third Way" was the name of the Perón government .
 He transformed manufacturing in Argentina, launching an iron and steel industry, and ship and car production . He launched the country's iron, steel and ship industries .
 Radical change came as women were given the vote, and corporations were nationalized . Radical change was in place in the 1930s and '60s .
 Comparisons have been made with fascist regimes, and although he never pursued mass violence, he did crush any opposition to his rule .
 Cuba breaks with the United States . The military regime of Fulgencio Batista was overthrown after a struggle with revolutionaries .
 A guerrilla war ensued, in which small groups of armed rebels carried out repeated attacks to wear down the enemy, before the rebels seized power in 1959 . The guerrilla war ended in 1959 with the rebels taking control of the country .
 The United States continues to impose an economic embargo on Cuba, but Fidel Castro's regime still survives . The U.S. continues to try to keep the embargo in place, but it's not working .
 Salvador Allende was elected president of Chile in 1970 . He was the first president of the country to hold office in office . Allende's government was overthrown in 1970s after a decade of radicalism .
 Allende established diplomatic relations with communist regimes in Cuba, China, North Korea, and North Vietnam . Concerns were raised in the United States when Allende set up diplomatic ties with communist countries .
 He attempted to restructure Chile’s unstable economy, but was soon threatened by a variety of political opponents . Chile has a history of political instability .
 The U.S. backed General Augusto Pinochet’s military coup against Allende in 1973 . The United States backed the military coup in 1973 to oust Allende's government . Allende was overthrown by Pinochet's military coup .
 When attackers entered the presidential palace, Allende was found dead from a gunshot wound . Allende's death was the first of its kind .
 Fidel Castro pictured with commanders of his rebel army at a secret camp in Cuba . Photograph taken around 1957 shows the bearded revolutionary leader with commanders .
 Castro's guerrilla tactics won the conflict in Cuba . The rebels were poorly armed, but Castro's guerillas won the war . Castro was the only person to defeat the rebels in the war.
 Juan Perón and Eva Perón attended economic planning meeting in Buenos Aires . Perón's wife Eva attended the meeting with her husband .
 Eva Perón was influential in her husband's government . She was not elected to be elected, but influential in his government . Perón died in 1953 at the age of 50 .
 Eva's death in 1952 resulted in scenes of mass mourning in Argentina . Eva died in 1952 . Eva had a cult status in Argentina, and her death was marked by mass mourning .
 As a young man, he traveled extensively in Latin America, he became convinced that only revolution would solve the problems of poverty and social inequality that marked the continent . He became convinced only revolution could solve social inequality .
 A visit to President Guzman's populist regime in Guatemala in 1953 confirmed Che's enthusiasm for radical political solutions . Che joined Fidel Castro's rebel army in 1956 and joined the rebel army .
 In 1965, Che left Cuba with the intention of sparking revolutions in other countries . Che had planned to spark revolutions in Cuba . Che died in 1966 at the age of 65 .
 He was captured by the CIA in Bolivia in 1967, executed by the Bolivian army . The CIA captured him and executed him in Bolivia .
 After authoritarian regimes in the 1960s and 1970s, many Latin American nations became more democratic . After authoritarian, often military-backed regimes, many nations have become more democratic. After authoritarian governments in the 60s and 70s, Latin America has seen a change .
 In the 19705, the revolutionary and socialist ideals of previous decades were swept aside . The revolution in 19705 was swept aside by the Soviet Union in Moscow .
 Left-wing presidents such as Venezuela's Hugo Chávez 438» and Bolivia's Evo Morales have increasingly spoken out against U.S. policy in Latin America .
 In 1905, Sun Zhongshshan founded the Revolutionary Alliance with the aim of driving out the Manchus and establishing a republican government in place of monarchical rule .
 Nationalist soldiers seized Wuchang on October 10, 1911, and within weeks south China's provinces had broken away from the empire . Nationalist troops seized the city in October 1911 .
 When the Manchus asked the commander of the Northern Army, Yuan Shikai, for support, he encouraged the emperor to abdicate, and in March 1912 he became president of the republic . In March 1912, he became President of the Republic .
 In January 1916 he accepted an invitation to become emperor, but shortly afterward he gave up the position and died . He accepted a proposal to be emperor in January 1916, but died shortly afterwards .
 There Sun Zhongshshshan, with help from the Soviet Union, reorganized the party . Sun Zhongsshan was helped to re-establish the party in China .
 From 1916, China had no effective central government and was controlled by regional warlords . China's central government was largely dominated by warlords in the early 1900s .
 Zhang Xun, the “pigtailed general,” briefly restored Puyi, the Manchu emperor . Feng Yuxiang barred his troops from gambling: . Yan Xishan, the "Model Governor” of Shanxi, supported educational reform . Zhang X
 The incident gave its name to the radical May Fourth Movement, which attacked Confucianism . The movement was founded by the May Fourth Party, a radical group of Chinese intellectuals .
 After the fall of the Manchu dynasty in 1911, China experienced a long period of political turmoil . China's Long March was China's longest march since independence of independence .
 The Nationalists reunified the country, but were frustrated by the 1937 Japanese invasion . The Nationalist Party was defeated by the Japanese invasion of the country .
 The Communists came to power in 1949, and over the next 25 years attempted a revolutionary transformation of society . The Communist Party attempted to transform society in Cuba .
 Nationalist leader Jiang Jieshi ordered hundreds of Communists in Shanghai to be killed in 1927 . The alliance collapsed in April 1927, when Jiang ordered hundreds in Shanghai Communist Party members killed . The Nationalist government was overthrown by the Communist Party of Shanghai .
 Mao Zedong led a revolt called the Autumn Harvest Uprising, and after defeat by the Nationalists, retreated to the southern province of Jiangxi . After defeat in China, he retreated to Jiangxi, China's capital, Jiangxi.
 Mao formulated a new revolutionary n 1923, the Chinese strategy combining the formation of the Red Army with land reform, and a promise to emancipate China’s women . It reformed the currency, and established modern banks . Mao formulated the new revolutionary .
 New schools and colleges were opened, and railroads and roads were improved . New schools were opened .
 In October 1934, the Communists abandoned their Jiangxi base, broke through a Nationalist blockade, and began the “Long March’s” to shake off their enemies . Over the next decade, The Long March took place in Jiangxi .
 Japanese encroachment on Chinese territory had begun in 1931 with the seizure of Manchuria . War with Japan began in 1931 and ended in 1941 .
 The Nationalist government relocated 1,000 miles up the Yangzi River, while the Communists operated behind Japanese lines . The Communists operated in China under Japanese control .
 Sino-Japanese hostilities became absorbed in the wider conflict of World War II . Japan was ultimately defeated by the Allies in the war .
 The Communists were gaining rural support with revolutionary land reform in favor of the peasants . While the Nationalist government was being seriously damaged by galloping inflation .
 Manchuria fell to the Communists, Mao's "" and when, in January 1949, around 300,000 Nationalists surrendered, around300,000 surrendered . Mao's troops marched triumphantly into Beijing in 1949 .
 On October 1, 1949 the communist People’s Republic of China was established .
 Jiang Jieshi and two million of his supporters fled to the island of Taiwan, where they established the rival Republic of China . Two million fled to Taiwan to establish the Republic of Taiwan .
 The People's Republic then occupied all territory claimed by China, including Tibet . Tibet was then occupied by the People’s Republic .
 Mao negotiated the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Alliance and Mutual Assistance . In 1950, China intervened on the side of North Korea in the Korean War .
 Mao moved to Beijing from Hunan province at the time of the May Fourth Movement . Mao was the son of a rich peasant . He first encountered communist ideas when he was in China .
 Mao's attempts to implement his radical ideas led to disastrous famines . Mao was head of the country from 1949 until his death in 1976 . Mao died in 1976 at the age of 65 .
 Farming was collectivized, so peasants handed over their land to agricultural producers’ cooperatives . The land was given to cooperatives in the 1930s and '60s .
 Mao Zedong introduced the 'Great Leap Forward' policy in 1958 . The policy was known as the Great Leap Forward . It was the first Chinese government to introduce a radical policy in China .
 Industrial and agricultural cooperatives were amalgamated into communes . Industrial targets were raised and industrial targets were also raised .
 At first it seemed as if spectacular increases of output had been achieved, but later evidence showed that these policies had caused disastrous famines and the death of millions of people . Millions of people died in the aftermath of the Great Depression . The policies were later found to have been disastrous .
 In 1966, the Cultural Revolution was launched, with the aim of cleansing the country of ""bourgeois"" influences . The Cultural Revolution is the country's first attempt to clean up its "bourgeoise" influences .
 Children were recruited as Red Guards and, to rekindle the spirit of revolution, were encouraged to report their schoolteachers and relatives if they failed to display sufficient communist fervor . Children were also encouraged to tell their school teachers and relatives .
 Mao's wife Jiang Qing, party chief Zhang Chungqiao, critic Yao Wenyuan, and Wang Hongwen, a factory worker, are expected to succeed Mao after his death . Mao was Mao's first wife, Jiang Qing; Wang was expected to be Mao's successor .
 They were arrested, and found guilty of plotting to seize power . Instead of seizing power, they were arrested and jailed for plotting to take over the country .
 Premier Li Peng instructed the army to act after pro-democracy students demonstrated in Tiananmen Square, Beijing . Li Peng was Premier of China during the demonstrations .
 The Nationalist government struggles to control the economy as Mao’s forces use guerrilla tactics . Mao's forces are using guerrilla tactics to take over the economy . The government is struggling to control its own economy .
 Mao's ruthless policies had a dramatic effect on China’s economy and society . Mao was a clever military strategist and propagandist . He was one of China's most powerful military leaders .
 Mao restores control by disbanding the Red Guard units and creating new Revolutionary Committees . Mao also creates Revolutionary Committees in order to regain control of the Communist Party . Mao was assassinated in 1968 .
 In central Potsdamer Platz, men used pneumatic drills to break up cobblestones and set up concrete pillars . The area is central to the central city of Berlin . It is the first major square in the city's history .
 These disturbing scenes were the first signs of a physical division of Berlin . Berlin is divided by a city that has been divided for decades .
 In February 1945, the leaders of the US, USSR, and Britain met in Yalta (now in Ukraine) to plan Europe’s future after the defeat of Nazi Germany . The leaders met in February 1945 to discuss Europe's future .
 Germany and its capital, Berlin, was partitioned into four zones of occupation . Germany was divided between three countries and France . Germany and the rest of the world was divided in four zones .
 Berlin lay deep inside the Soviet zone, but access to the western zones was guaranteed along specified land and air links . Access to the three western zones of Germany was also guaranteed . Berlin was part of the Soviet Union, but the city was not part of it .
 The election of an anticommunist mayor for Berlin in early 1948 annoyed the Soviets . The planned creation of a federal state with a common currency in the western zones of Germany annoyed the Russians .
 On June 24, 1948, they blocked traffic from entering the city from the west . Traffic was blocked from the city's west .
 The British and Americans responded with a massive airlift of supplies to sustain West Berlin until an agreement with the Soviets was reached in May 1949 .
 Berlin remained the uneasy epicenter of the Cold War . For the next 12 years, Berlin remained a Cold War epicenter . Berlin was the center of the conflict .
 West and East Germany were created in 1949 . The western half became linked with West Germany, while the eastern half became the capital of communist East Germany .
 Economic disparities between west and east led thousands of East Germans and Berliners to cross the open frontier between east and west in search of a better life . In 1960, almost 200,000 in 1960 alone crossed the border to west to find a way out of East .
 Crossing points between East and West Berlin sealed off with barbed wire and concrete posts . Crossing points were sealed off by concrete posts and barbed wires .
 In places, this barrier ran down the middle of streets to keep from touching West Berlin’s soil . In places of West Berlin, the barrier ran across the streets .
 Russian tanks waited outside the city, while the U.S. sent 1,500 troops to reassure West Berlin . Russian tanks were waiting outside of West Berlin, while American troops were deployed .
 Over the next 19 years, the wall was strengthened with reinforced concrete blocks 12 ft high and set back from the original fence to create a heavily armed ‘no-man’s land’ in between . The wall was built in the 1980s and is now protected by heavily
 The wall became the symbol of a divided world, but ultimately symbolized the futility of such confrontation . "The wall became a symbol of the divided world," the author says .
 Photo taken in 1962 shows a young woman standing precariously at the top of the western side of the wall to speak to her mother in East Berlin .
 The United States experienced economic growth, as did Germany, France, and Italy . The U.S. experienced growth as did the other major economies in Europe .
 In Britain, food rationing, which had been in place since 1940, ended in 1954 . Food rationing ended in Britain in 1954 after a decade of restrictions .
 Employment rose throughout Europe, and with it came the beginnings of a consumer boom . Employment rose across Europe, with it coming with the beginning of an economic boom . The rise of employment in Europe has led to a boom in consumer spending .
 In 1957 the British prime minister Harold Macmillan said, “Most of our people have never had it so good,” a sentiment that echoed around the developed world . In 1957, Harold MacMillan said that most of Britain's people had never had so good .
 People bought luxuries and labor-saving devices, developments in communication began to change the way people lived, and television took off as a mass medium . TV took off in the 1950s and '60s, with the rise of television television becoming a mass form of entertainment .
 It was music for a new generation, teenagers, and it shocked older, more conservative people . It was a music for the new generation— teenagers -- and shocked older people .
 The greatest and most controversial star of the new genre was Elvis Presley . Presley was the subject of a series of controversial songs .
 The 1960s witnessed the rise of new forms of entertainment and a new political and social agenda . The Sixties was the height of the world's first decade of pop culture .
 The changing attitudes to youth, gender, class, place, and race challenged the established order . Soldiers returned home and started families they had put on hold for four years .
 In the U.S. alone, some 70 million “baby-boomers” became teenagers and young adults during the 1960s . The baby boom boomers were born in the United States in the early 1960s.
 As the decade opened, it was a time of youthful optimism when anything seemed possible . The decade opened with the promise of a new era of hope .
 New music such as rock 'n' roll empowered the younger generation, and adults were often left dumbfounded by what they considered the strange behavior of the youth .
 In an age of increased middleclass affluence, the population had greater employment opportunities and a new buying power . Swinging sixties was an era of increased affluence .
 Music and fashion became massmarket industries and were quick to cater to the demands of the youth market . In response to this, music and fashion industries became mass market industries .
 The growing popularity of television has helped spread popular culture around the globe . Trend trends could take off rapidly in the future, experts say .
 Programs such as Top of the Pops in the UK and the Ed Sullivan Show in the U.S. made the 1960s swing to the beat of pop music .
 Their first album, Please Please Me, became famous around the globe within a year . The band's first album 'Please Please Me' became famous .
 Music groups provided the inspiration for fashion, from neat mod styles and blue jeans, to Elvis jumpsuits and the ethnic clothing of singers such as Joan The Beatles . The Beatles’ 8th album, Sgt. Sgt. John Lennon’s Sgt. Pepper, was released in March
 Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band was released in 1967 . The album is often voted the most influential album of all time . It was released by the Beatles at the end of that year .
 This fashion revolution burst onto the retail scene, led by designers like Mary Quant . Mary Quant. Mary Quant was a pioneer of the fashion revolution .
 Both dressed in T-shirts and jeans; boys grew long hair . Girls copied the model Twiggy by cutting their hair in a short “gamine’ style .
 Boutiques sprang up to sell the new fashions, which were colorful, cheap, and informal . Boutiques sprung up in the 1930s, selling colorful, low-cost clothing .
 There were many who felt that some laws were outdated and belonged to a bygone era . There were also many who thought that some of the laws belonged to an outdated era .
 Support for the death penalty was at an all-time low in the United States in 1966 . In 1966 the UK abolished the UK's death penalty, and in the U.S. support for the execution of a person convicted of murder was at a low .
 In 1967 new laws were passed that allowed adult homosexuals to behave as they wished in private . Gay rights came to the fore, and in the UK in 1967, gay rights were allowed to flourish .
 Abortion became legal in the UK, and legal in some U.S. states . It is now legal in many states, including the United States .
 Some insisted it would make society more permissive, or willing to accept what had once been considered ‘deviant’ behavior . Others said it would lead to more acceptance of what was once considered “deviant behavior .
 Others believed that these changes were the sign of a more tolerant society, willing to accept all people equally . Others believe that the changes are the sign that a tolerant society is more tolerant .
 In 1963 Betty Friedan published The Feminine Mystique, reigniting the movement for women’s rights . Friedan's work reignited the fight for women's rights in 1963 .
 Friedan and journalist Gloria Steinem challenged remaining areas of sexual inequality . Steinem gave birth to a wave of radical feminism known as the Women’s Liberation movement . Friedan: "Women's Liberation movement" was founded by Steinem .
 Three music festivals were held on the Isle of Wight, situated off the south coast of England, at the end of the 1960s .
 In 1970 it became the largest-ever music festival, with over 600,000 people in attendance . In 1970, the festival was the largest ever music festival in history .
 Before the development of ‘the Pill,’ women all over the world used a variety of different birth control methods, which were often ineffective and sometimes dangerous . “The Pill’s Pill” was developed in 1973 .
 American nurse Margaret Sanger was a lifelong advocate of birth control . She underwrote the research necessary to create the first human birth control pill .
 Between 1962 and 1969, the number of users worldwide rose from approximately 50,000 to one million . Between 1962-1969, there were around one million users worldwide .
 Women challenged conventional ideas of women as housewives and homemakers . TT ay | women went out to work challenging conventional notions of women being housewives .
 The emergence of the contraceptive pill (see left) liberated women, offering them a reliable method of birth control for the first time . Above all, the emergence of this contraceptive pill liberated women .
 1976 was the height of the hippie movement . Known as the ‘Summer of Love,’ 1976 was known as the Summer of Love . The series is a weekly television program .
 Hippies embraced rock music, mystic religions, and sexual freedom . Many experimented with drugs such as marijuana and LSD . LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) was claimed to open the mind to previously uncharted areas .
 In June 1967, Monterey, California, held the first open-air CN mass pop festival, which È was attended by over 200,000 people .
 The 1960s is seen as the apex of all that the 1960s stood for . Its potent combination of youth culture and pop music is said to have been the best of all .
 The New Wave | A Bout de Souffle is one of the bestknown films of French New Wave cinema . The optimism of the decade soon started to unravel, influenced by the assassinations in the United States of Senator Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. in 1968 .
 The United States saw race riots in the inner cities, and the civil rights movement shifted from a nonviolent position when elements of it were taken over by radical extremists . The U.S. moved from nonviolent position to a nonviolent position when it became more violent .
 In France, a student revolt of May 1968 in Paris linked up with a general strike of 10 million workers . The general strike called for the overthrow of Charles de Gaulle's government . In 1968, the student revolt in Paris led to the end of the government .
 At Woodstock, 450,000 people attended the three-day festival, but at Altamont, a black fan was stabbed to death by a gang of white Hells Angels . A black fan died in the stabbing attack . The incident occurred in the early 1970s .
 In Britain there was a downturn in economic fortunes and unemployment was on the increase . In Britain, unemployment was also on the rise in the 1990s .
 The commercialism of pop music was soon challenged in the 1970s by Punk music . Punk music was a form of protest against commercialism in the world .
 MTV was launched in the 1980s, and pop artists became global stars . In the 1990s, MTV launched, and artists from all over the world became stars .
 The American public's support for its armed services dates back to World War, when people bought billions of dollars of Liberty Loans to finance the war effort . The U.S. public's backing for its military services dates from World War .
 Truman Doctrine guided U.S. foreign policy throughout Vietnam War . Known as the Truman Doctrine, this guided United States foreign policy during Vietnam War.
 Ho Chi Minh created the Viet Minh in 1941 to fight Japanese occupation . In 1941 he created the Vietnamese government to fight the Japanese occupation of Vietnam . Vietnam is one of the world's most populous countries .
 The Vietnam War was the longest and bloodiest of the many conflicts of the Cold War . The Geneva Accords of 1954 divided Vietnam temporarily into a communist north and a pro-American south .
 The American army was technologically superior, but was defeated by the far more effective tactics of the Vietnamese nationalist and communist army . Vietnam's elections never took although many were nationalists—took did not bring peace place .
 In 1955, U.S. president Dwight D up arms to fight Diem's government, to the country . U.N. President Dwight D was in the country to fight the government of Vietnam .
 The U.S. wished Eisenhower helped the anticommunist led by the National Liberation Front, to prevent the spread of communism Ngo Dinh Diem to take power . The United States believed the election was corrupt and sent North Vietnam coast in the Gulf of Tonkin .
 The ship that one country after another would hundreds of military advisors to support Eisenhower's support for South was fired on by two torpedo boats fall to communist regimes (the so-called new government)
 Vietnam increased under his successor, challenging its presence in North “domino effect"") and was prepared North Vietnam did not accept the John F Kennedy . North Vietnam increased its presence under the Kennedy .
 South Vietnam had received $500 sinking one boat . It fired back, to use military action to prevent this . partition of their country .
 The Geneva Accords had stipulated attacks on South Vietnam . On August 7, the Geneva . Accords stipulated that South Vietnam should not be attacked .
 United States bombing raids only served to alienate those it claimed to support . Viet Cong fighters lacked sophisticated weaponry and equipment of the U.S. military .
 U.S. protests against the war were supported not just by traditional pacifists but also by a much larger constituency of peace campaigners . Peace campaigners included civil rights campaigner Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
 War divided U.S. society as no event had done that century . War divided United States society . No event in history had done so much more than that .
 The first United States marines arrived in South Vietnam in March 1965 . The first U.S. troops arrived in Vietnam in May 1965 .
 By July that year, more than 50,000 were in the country, as well as increasing numbers of U.S. airmen and sailors .
 320,000 South Koreans, 47,000 Australians, and contingents from the Philippines, Thailand, and New Zealand fought alongside U.S. troops . In addition, 320,00 South Koreans fought alongside American troops .
 The Viet Cong and North Vietnamese troops received military aid and financial support from communist China and USSR, although no ground troops were committed .
 They did have the advantage of fighting on home soil, often with the active support of the local people . However, they did have to fight for the sake of their own country .
 The American plan in Vietnam was to attack North Vietnam from the air to stop it from aiding the Viet Cong . North Vietnam was the target of the U.S. invasion of Vietnam .
 Operation "Rolling Thunder"" targeted bridges, roads, factories, fuel depots, and military installations, but failed to achieve its objectives . Operation “Rolled Thunder’s” targeted bridges and roads, . factories, . and military . installations, and . military installations
 North Vietnam kept supplies flowing to the south along the Ho Chi Minh Trail, a 12,500-mile network of tracks and paved roads through the jungles of North Vietnam and neighboring Laos and Cambodia . North Vietnam had a formidable air defense system .
 The trail was well defended by ant-aircraft batteries and hidden from observation by the jungle through which it passed . The trail is now hidden from view by a jungle .
 The U.S. tried to deny the Viet Cong jungle cover by spraying Agent Orange . Agent Orange was a chemical deployed to defoliate the jungle .
 It also used napalm, an incendiary liquid that burned everything it touched . The U.S. government also used the incendiary liquid napalm .
 The effect of the Vietnam War was felt for many years afterward, but Vietnam is now a peaceful and prosperous nation . Vietnam is a peaceful nation .
 One million Vietnamese troops on both sides lost their lives in the war . 4 million Vietnamese civilians and 58,000 U.S. troops were killed in the conflict . Vietnam's war was the first major conflict in the Vietnam War .
 More than 153,000 U.S. troops were seriously wounded in Vietnam . The total number of Vietnamese casualties is unknown . More than 150,000 American troops were wounded in the war .
 The Paris Peace Accord held until renewed fighting broke out in January 1975 . The Paris peace accord was signed by the French government .
 A final communist offensive captured Saigon on April 30 and reunified the country in 1976 . The Socialist Republic of Vietnam was formed in 1976 as the Socialist Republic .
 Thousands who feared for their lives under the new government fled Vietnam in boats in boats . Many drowned before they could reach safety in neighboring countries . Thousands of people fled the country in boats, many drowning before they reached safety .
 Veterans' associations in the United States are a vocal force in modern U.S. politics . Veterans associations are a powerful force in American politics . The Veterans' Association is a major political force in the country .
 In 1986 the Vietnamese government relaxed its previous hard-line communist economic policies in favor of a more liberal policy of doi moi . The Vietnamese government began to welcome foreign investment in 1986 .
 War damage was immense due to heavy U.S. bombing and the country continues to rely on overseas aid for reconstruction . The US-backed South Vietnamese government from the people. further alienated the US government from them .
 Vietnam War was opposed by increasing numbers of Americans who did not see why their troops were fighting a war with no just cause . U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam was a major factor in withdrawal .
 The first major antiwar demonstrations took place in 1965, and grew in strength as more and more young men were drafted, or forced into military service .
 Television brought the reality of the war into American homes on a daily basis . The war in Afghanistan was the focus of American television news .
 The last five years railroads, airfields, oil refineries and airfields were used to defend South Vietnam . Kennedy authorized Kennedy’s successor, Lyndon B Johnson, “to take all necessary steps, including the use of armed forces” to defend Vietnam .
 Without a formal declaration of war, the U.S. committed itself to military conflict in Vietnam . of the war were bloody and painful for both sides. of the Vietnam War .
 The United States started peace talks in Paris in August 1969 in order to find an orderly way out of the conflict . U.S. peace talks were started in Paris to find a way to end the conflict in 1969 .
 Talks continued until a peace accord was signed on January 27, 1973 . The talks continued until the end of 1973 .
 U.S. troops left South Vietnam to the Vietnamese 60 days later . United States troops left Vietnam to Vietnam 60 days after .
 King was recently married and newly established as a Baptist pastor in Montgomery, Alabama, when the Montgomery Bus Boycott occurred . King was just a few months old when the bus boycott occurred . The Montgomery bus boycott propelled him onto the national stage .
 King came to believe that by suffering violence without responding in kind, campaigners might build up an A gift for eloquence . King's personal courage, eloquence as a public speaker, and dedication to nonviolence made a vital contribution to the civil rights movement .
 All four of the King children grew up to follow in their parents' footsteps, becoming civil rights activists . The King children only reluctantly agreed to lead the boycott in December 1955 .
 When the boycott was shown on national TV, King's speeches and great dignity had an immediate impact . The Montgomery Bus Boycott took place in 1957 .
 It was during his time as pastor of Dexter Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery, Alabama, from 1954 to 1960, that King became an acknowledged leader of the civil rights movement . King was prepared to pursue civil disobedience, breaking laws he considered unjust .
 His predecessor as pastor, Vernon Johns, had also been a tireless campaigner against racial discrimination .
 Christian Leadership Conference was formed to build on the confrontation with racist authorities and the police . Christian leadership conference was formed in response to the confrontation between police and racist authorities .
 He did not then, or later, control the civil rights movement, which was a popular mass protest to which many individuals and groups made their diverse contributions . He didn't control the movement, but he did not .
 King's charismatic example both inspired activists to engage in civil disobedience and attracted the support of white liberals for the movement . King’s charismatic example was both inspiring activists and attracting white liberals to the movement.
 In the first half of the 1960s, King’s influence was at its peak . King's influence in the UK was at his peak .
 He linked local direct action against segregation to pressure at a national level for civil rights legislation . He linked black voter registration in the southern states of the U.S. to pressure for national legislation .
 Many traditional black community leaders felt King was too radical . King backed the campaign of sit-ins at segregated lunch counters and other public facilities in 1960 .
 President John F Kennedy and his brother, Robert F Kennedy, repeatedly urged him to moderate his position . President John . F Kennedy's brother Robert F. Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . President Kennedy was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 In 1963 King raised the campaign to a high pitch of intensity, encouraging confrontation between protesters and police in Birmingham, Alabama . In 1963 he encouraged a “March on Washington” by around 250,000 demonstrators . The March on Washington was one of King’s signature events in
 The Civil Rights Act made many forms of discrimination illegal in 1964 . The Voting Rights Act the following year were the culmination of King’s campaigning efforts . King campaigned for equality in the South .
 Awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, he stood at the height of his world fame . He was awarded the Peace Prize in 1994 .
 King’s integrationist views had always been rejected by black separatists . King wanted all races to have equal rights in a desegregated society, King said .
 Many young African-Americans also began to turn away from nonviolence, asserting the right to use force in self-defense . Many young black youths also turned to nonviolence .
 Young activists launched the aggressive slogan “Black Power,” while King appeared hesitant and indecisive . King appeared indecisive and hesitant in the speech .
 His attempt to establish contact with African-Americans in the ghettos of Chicago in 1966 was only partially successful . His visit to the city was only partly successful .
 King had planned to run for U.S. president in 1968 with anti-Vietnam War campaigner Dr. Dr. King . His outspoken opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War ‘SPOCK’
 Benjamin Spock offended many AfricanAmericans, who were proud of their sons’ service in an integrated army . Benjamin Spock. offended many of his sons' parents .
 His shift away from rights and race to poverty was seen as controversially “socialist” in an American context . His shift from rights to poverty is seen as controversial in a U.S. context .
 The hatred provoked by King’s views had always made him a target . King was assassinated in Memphis, Memphis .
 King salutes the crowd in front of the Lincoln Memorial during the ""March on Washington"" on August 28, 1965 . King saluted the crowd .
 This was the occasion for King's "I have a dream...” speech . It was arguably his most inspired and inspiring flight of oratory . King's speech was arguably the most inspiring speech of his life .
 Federal Bureau of Investigation alleged that King was a communist and was trying to blackmail him . J Edgar Hoover, head of FBI, alleged that evidence of his alleged sexual promiscuity was being used to blackmail King .
 On April 4, 1968 King was shot dead on a balcony of a motel in Memphis, Tennessee .
 A petty e criminal, James Earl Ray, was convicted | of the killing, though his guilt has been contested . A petty criminal was convicted of the murder .
 Rosa Parks was an active campaigner against sexism and racism from the 1950s . Born Rosa McCauley, Rosa Parks fought against racism and sexism in the South . Rosa Parks died in 1964 at the age of 92 .
 Her refusal to give up her seat to a white man on a segregated bus ignited the civil rights movement . Her arrest in Montgomery, Alabama, on December 1, 1955, ignited the Montgomery Bus Boycott .
 Rosa Parks grew famous, but she was forced out of her job in a department store . Rosa Parks left Alabama for Detroit, Michigan, after being forced to leave her job . Parks was forced to move to Detroit in order to get a job .
 In 1996, Parks was named the ""Mother of the Modern Day Civil Rights Movement" by the United States Congress . Parks was a pioneer of the civil rights movement in the South .
 September 1954 Becomes pastor of Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama . September 1954 He becomes pastor at Dexter Ave. Baptist Church in Montgomery .
 As head of the Montgomery Improvement Association, King becomes spokesman for the year-long Montgomery Bus Boycott protesting against segregation . King was the leader of the NAACP in Montgomery, Alabama, in 1955 .
 January 11, 1957 King is elected head of the civil rights organization that will become the Southern Christian Leadership Conference . King is the leader of the SCLC, which will become a Christian denomination .
 October 1960 King is imprisoned for participating in a sit-in protest in Atlanta, Georgia . Presidential candidate John F Kennedy contrives his release . King was released from prison in 1960 .
 April 16, 1963, King writes his ""Letter from Birmingham Jail,"" affirming the need to defy unjust laws . King was imprisoned during civil rights protests in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1963 .
 King delivers his “I have a dream..."" speech from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial . August 28, 1963 During the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, King delivered the speech .
 Witnesses the signing of the Civil Rights Act, outlawing discrimination, on July 2, 1964 . Witnessing the signing was the first African-American civil rights act .
 At the age of 55, King becomes the youngest male recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize . King was 55 when he received the award at the time .
 January 22, 1966 Moves into a tenement in a black ghetto in Chicago to draw attention to the issue of black urban poverty in Chicago .
 The idea that everyone should have equal rights arose in the 18th century . The idea of equal rights was first proposed in the 1800s .
 The French Revolutionary Assembly issued the Declaration of the Rights of Man in 1789 . In 1789, the French revolutionary Assembly issued a declaration of the rights of man . The Declaration was signed by the French Revolution .
 It stated that “all men are created equal"" and defined various democratic principles, such as equality before the law and freedom from arbitrary arrest . It also defined various principles such as freedom of arrest and freedom of liberty .
 In 1791 the United States Bill of Rights guaranteed rights, such as freedom of speech, but it did not apply to blacks or American Indians . The Bill was passed in 1791, but the rights of blacks and American Indians were not granted .
 Social reformers and philosophers were important in the growth of human rights . Individual social reformers were also important in human rights growth .
 The political thinker Tom Paine helped to draft the United States Constitution and wrote 7he Rights of Man in support of the French Revolution . Paine was a political thinker who helped draft the US Constitution .
 English philosopher John Stuart Mill defended the freedom of the individual against state control . Mill defended state control against the idea of state-run government .
 She was active in the League of Women Voters and the Women's Trade Union League . She was also a member of the women's trade union League .
 She hoped it would be a “Magna Carta of all men everywhere,"" the word ""men"" applying to both sexes . The word "men" applies to both genders .
 Demand for civil and human rights has been a major feature of political and social movements worldwide since the early 20th century . The demand for human and civil rights has led to the creation of civil and political movements .
 Rights are built on the idea that all people should enjoy minimum standards in many areas of life, including the right to liberty, freedom of expression and conscience . Rights include the right of women to vote and equal rights for ethnic minorities .
 U.N. Conventions (agreements among member countries) have followed, including the elimination of racial discrimination and outlawing torture . Other Conventions have followed . The rights of the child (19897.7.
 Civil rights are written into the laws or constitution of a country to protect its citizens . By contrast, civil rights are in the laws of the country . Civil rights in the United States are written in the constitution to protect citizens .
 Most democracies, including the U.S. and Canada, have civil rights written into their constitutions . This does not necessarily mean that in practice all people are treated equally .
 In 1936, the Soviet Union proclaimed a new constitution outlining civil rights, but they only existed on paper and were never implemented . The Soviet Union did not implement the constitution .
 A fundamental civil right is the right to full citizenship, but women and ethnic minorities have often had to fight hard to obtain it . The right to vote is the most basic civil right in the world, but it has often been difficult to obtain .
 In July 1909, Majorie Wallace Dunlop became the first suffragette to go on hunger strike . In the early Hunger strike medal of honor was awarded to the suffragettes .
 In retaliation, the British government introduced the brutal process of force-feeding . The process was introduced in response to the government's refusal to feed the baby .
 Selling The Suffragette: Women had to overcome many barriers to claim their right to vote . Women's rights to vote was a huge struggle for women to overcome . Selling the Suffragettes: Women's struggle to overcome barriers to achieve their rights .
 Opponents of women's right to vote used any methods to attack the suffragettes . In 1912 the Women’s Social and Against the vote were attacked by opponents of the vote .
 Posters lampooned them as harridans, who should be forcibly shackled and gagged . Posters said they should be forced to shackled, gagged and forcibly restrained .
 IRA GLASSER, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR of the American CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION, 1978-2001 . 20th century, in both Britain and the U.S., demand for the vote for women became a major issue .
 In Britain the campaign began in 1867 when Parliament proposed to extend suffrage to a wider range of men but still exclude women . In Britain, the campaign was started in the hope of women being allowed to vote in the UK .
 For the next 50 years a growing tide of protests, demonstrations, and petitions made this one of the most divisive issues in modern British politics .
 In 1903, Emmeline Pankhurst formed the militant Women’s Social and Political Union . The union was formed by the militant women's group .
 Frustrated by the failure to achieve the vote by peaceful means, suffragettes, as these women became known, took direct action, including invading the Houses of Parliament . Suffragettes became known as the women who fought for the vote .
 The campaign finally achieved success in 1918 when women age 30 and over obtained the vote . Women over 30 years old were able to vote for the first time .
 Equal voting rights with men with men were granted in 1928 . Equal voting with men was granted in 1920 . Equal rights with women were granted to men in 1928.
 In the end, in both countries, women got the vote as a direct acknowledgment of their crucial role in securing victory in World War I . Voting alone did not confer equal citizenship .
 From about 1970 a second women’s rights movement fought for and succeeded in changing the law to ensure equality at work and elsewhere . Discrimination in other areas continued, and from about 1970 the law was changed .
 This campaign showed that changes in the law mean little unless economic inequalities are also addressed . This campaign was based on the fact that economic inequalities must be addressed in the UK .
 Women worldwide still experience discrimination, as do other minorities . Even if they have the vote, women worldwide still face discrimination . Women worldwide experience discrimination .
 Martin Luther King Jr. fought for the end of segregation in many areas such as education and transportation . Dr. King fought for full civil rights, including full equality .
 Years of civil disobedience resulted in a series of important legal changes that ended segregation in many areas and removed literacy tests preventing black Americans from voting .
 In South Africa, a bitter struggle began against apartheid after 1948 . A bitter struggle against apartheid began in South Africa in 1948 .
 When apartheid ended after 1991 and South Africa held its first fully democratic elections in 1994, thousands of black voters lined up to exercise their new right to vote . Human rights remain a key issue, with many at risk or being eroded worldwide .
 Civil liberties, such as the right to privacy, may be suspended during wartime . Civil liberties such as privacy may also be suspended in wartime .
 Some people think these laws threaten hard-won civil rights . Others think they are justified to prevent terrorism . Some people say they're not concerned with civil rights; others think they're justified .
 Since the 1960s, many minority groups have struggled to put an end to discrimination . Since the 1950s, minorities have been fighting to end discrimination against them .
 During the 1990s, Britain and the U.S. introduced disability acts . Disability acts were introduced in the UK and the United States .
 Gay rights activists have struggled for years to achieve full citizenship . Gay rights activist has been in prison for years .
 Other European countries, such as France, Germany, Portugal, and Britain, slowly followed suit . Germany, France and Portugal have also followed suit, with France following suit .
 The year that New Zealand became the first country to grant women equal voting rights . The year is also the year that women were granted the right to vote in New Zealand .
 The first state to grant women the vote was Wyoming in 1869; nationally, women Political Union launched its own newspaper, The Suffragette . Wyoming was the first state in which women were granted the right to vote .
 Hundreds of long-skirted women sold the paper in public, challenging social convention and risking public hostility . importance of a basic civil right many now take for granted .
 National Guard troops watch with bayonets raised as African-American sanitation workers march peacefully in Memphis, Tennessee in April 1968 . Marching for rights in Memphis in 1968 .
 This contrasts with a similar demonstration the day before, when a black teenager was killed by the police .
 In 1782 Ireland received an independent parliament, but after revolts in 1798 this was abolished . In 1798, Ireland was abolished by the British-backed government .
 Anger erupted in April 1916 in a rebellion known as the Easter Rising . The Easter Rising was the first uprising in the Irish Republic in 1916 .
 Militant Irish Republicans seized several key locations in Dublin and issued the Proclamation of the Republic, declaring Ireland to be an independent state . The Republic of Ireland was declared by the Irish Republican Party .
 After six days of fighting, the British suppressed the uprising and executed its leaders . The leaders' execution generated sympathy for the Republican cause and awakened nationalist sentiment . The uprising was suppressed and executed .
 In 1921 Michael Collins was sent to London to negotiate a treaty with the British . Collins was a Republican leader in Ireland . Collins is the current leader of the Irish Free State .
 In the north, nationalists, in favor of a united Ireland, were seen as a threat . In the largely Protestant north, nationalist nationalists were considered a threat to the north .
 Protestant Unionists were given preferential treatment in jobs and housing . This led to preferential treatment of Protestants in jobs, housing .
 Despite brief campaigns by the paramilitary Irish Republican Army in the 19205, the province was stable . The province remained stable in the 1930s .
 In 1966 Unionists formed the Ulster Volunteer Force in response to the Republican threat and violence escalated . However, in 1966 the violence escalated and the violence increased . In 1966 the Ulster Volunteers Force was formed in response .
 Civil rights protesters vent their frustrations at British soldiers dressed in riot gear, across a barricade in Derry on Bloody Sunday . Derry was a major city of Northern Ireland during the British Civil War .
 Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association announced a march was to take place in the city of Derry on October 5, 1968 to demand an end to discrimination against Irish Catholics . Rubber bullets were replaced with live ammunition leaving 13 dead .
 A Protestant organization, the Apprentice Boys of Derry, announced they would also march at that time . The Apprentice Boys also announced that they would march in Derry .
 NICRA was barred from marching by the British Government but decided to proceed . NICRA has been banned from marching in the UK by the UK Government .
 The Royal Ulster Constabulary , armed with truncheons, charged at the marchers . The marchers were attacked by the police in Belfast .
 Division of a society into religious factions divides society . Strong identification with the values within each faction leads to exclusion of those with different values .
 Provisional IRA was determined to use force to reunite Ireland . It launched an armed attack against British rule against the Republic of Ireland .
 Provisional IRA became closely involved in civilian demonstrations and riots against the British . IRA became part of the Provisional British government in Northern Ireland .
 Operation “Demetrius’s” in Northern Ireland was implemented on August 9, 1971 . The British Government responded by implementing Operation ‘Demetrium’ on Northern Ireland . Operation Demetrius was a British response to the threat posed by the IRA . Operation
 This Sunday became known as Bloody Sunday and Bloody it was bloody it was... amok that day and shot without thinking... unadulterated murder . This Sunday introduced “This Sunday’s Bloody Sunday”
 The army ran internment, which allowed the British army and RUC to arrest and imprison without trial those accused of being members of illegal paramilitary groups . MAJOR HUBERT O'NEILL, CORONER, AUGUST 21, 1973 .
 On January 30, 1972, NICRA organized a march in the city of Derry against internment policy . 10,000-20,000 people took part in the march .
 They were prevented from entering the city by the British army . Most moved to “Free Derry Corner"" to attend a rally .
 The Horse and Groom pub was packed with young soldiers, many back from duty in Northern Ireland . The pub was full of young soldiers from Northern Ireland, many of whom were on the frontline .
 Four men, known as the ""Guildford Four" were later arrested and wrongly convicted of the act . Four men were later found guilty of the crime .
 The Republican mural commemorates the Easter Rising; the Unionist mural on the right shows the paramilitary group, the Ulster Freedom Fighters . The Unionist and Republican murals mark the border between the two sides .
 Both murals were in Northern Ireland's capital, Belfast, Belfast .
 Reports of an IRA sniper were allegedly passed to the British command and the order to switch from rubber bullets to live rounds was given . The order was given to switch between rubber bullets and live rounds .
 Republican prisoners began a bitter struggle for status as political prisoners . Within 30 minutes soldiers shot dead 13 unarmed men and injured a further 14 .
 In 1981, ten inmates refused food and died of starvation in the prison hospital . This culminated in the hunger strikes of 1981, which killed ten inmates . The hunger strikes were the result of a hunger strike in 1981 .
 London imposed direct rule from London and established the Northern Ireland Office to govern the province . This alarmed London, leading to political initiatives by successive governments, all hoping to find a peaceful solution .
 Provisional IRA took its fight to force the British out of Northern Ireland to the mainland . The Provisional IRA was formed in Belfast and Belfast .
 IRA planted bombs in two pubs popular with army personnel in the town of Guildford, killing 5 and injuring 65 . The bombs killed 5 and injured 65 in October 1974 . The pubs were popular with the British Army, popular with soldiers, were bombed in 1974 .
 On November 21, 1974 the IRA bombed two more pubs, this time in central Birmingham, killing 21 and injuring 182 . 21 died and 182 were injured in the bombings, including 21 people who were killed .
 The events of ""Bloody Sunday,"" as it came to be known, caused shock and revulsion worldwide . In response to the events, the British Government introduced the Prevention Armed campaign .
 In Ireland the killings increased support for the IRA, especially among disaffected young people . In Ireland, the killings led to the deaths of some of the IRA's supporters .
 In March 1972, British Prime Minister Edward Heath suspended the Northern Ireland of Terrorism Act, which allowed suspects to be held without charge for up to seven days . Heath decided to suspend the act in March 1972 .
 After bombing campaigns on mainland Britain, both political leaders and paramilitary groups moved toward peace . Most suspects were sent to the Maze prison, at Long Kesh, in County Antrim .
 Parliament was formed in 1920 and sat at Stormont in east Belfast . Stormont was the first parliament to sit in the north-east of Belfast .
 In the 1980s the IRA formed small groups in mainland Britain . IRA formed groups in small groups of small groups .
 These acts were designed to put political and economic pressure on the British government . The acts were intended to put pressure on British government in the 1980s .
 Changes in leadership in Britain, Dublin, and in Ulster Unionism led to the ""Good Friday Agreement"" in 1998 .
 It recognized Northern Ireland's right to exist, while acknowledging the nationalist desire for a united Ireland . It recognized the right to live in Northern Ireland, while recognizing the nationalist movement for a union .
 Voters elected a new Northern Ireland Assembly to form a parliament at Stormont . Stormont will be the first parliament to be held in Northern Ireland . Northern Ireland is the only country to have a parliament in the country .
 The NIA was suspended when the Provisional IRA delayed the decommission of its weapons . The Provisional IRA delayed decommissioning its weapons in the 1980s .
 On July 28, 2005 the IRA ceased its armed campaign, but dissident Republicans who rejected the peace settlement continued attacks at a much lower level . The IRA's armed campaign against the Republican Party ended in 2005 .
 In March 2007, the leaders of Sinn Féin and the Ulster Unionists agreed to share power at Stormont . The two parties had previously refused to work together in Northern Ireland . The unionists were the first party to agree to a deal in 2007 .
 Latin American countries veered between nationalist, authoritarian, revolutionary, and civilian regimes . Dictatorship and democracy in Latin America has been a key part of the 20th century .
 From 1976, Argentina was ruled by a succession of military figures, including General Leopardo Galtieri . He was among a number of Latin American leaders given training at the School of the Americas, a United States army facility in Panama .
 Both the Pinochet and Galtieri regimes were characterized by the suppression of opposition . Thousands of dissidents were tortured or disappeared without a trace . The Pinochet regime was characterized by suppression of the opposition .
 Latin America has been shaped by the interests and intervention of foreign powers . The Somoza dynasty ruled in Nicaragua from 1936, faced growing opposition in the early 1970s from the International Socialist Party .
 Economic depression in Europe and North America in the 1930s had a catastrophic effect on Latin American economies . Most of Latin America's economies were dependent on exports of raw materials . Latin America was hit hard by the Depression in 1930s .
 The plight of the poor in many countries led to a growth of revolutionary movements . In many countries, the poor led to the growth of the revolutionary movement . In some countries, people have taken to the streets to protest against poverty .
 During the economic crisis of the 1950s, many governments in Latin | America nationalized resources previously controlled by foreign | interests, and began industrialization programs . The country's economic crisis was the result of a nationalization of resources .
 Rivalry between the Soviet ' Union and United States after World a War intensified to Latin America . The Cold War saw the Soviet Union and U.S. become the most powerful nations in the world .
 The U.S. supported the Pinochet coup in Chile, and the overthrow of left-wing regimes . The Soviet Union backed communist Cuba .
 The Soviet Union supported Cuba through an American economic embargo . The U.S. gave funding and military support to keep their chosen regimes in power .
 Sandinista rebels were supported by the Catholic Church and much of the Nicaraguan population . Sandinistas rebels were backed by much of Nicaragua's population .
 In 1979, Anastasio Somoza was overthrown by popular revolution, and a junta of National Reconstruction dominated by the FSLN took over the country .
 In 1970s El Salvador, the elitist government of Arturo Molina was resented by a population living in abject poverty . El Salvador's government of the 1970s was the most repressive in the country's history .
 Violence between right-wing paramilitary units known as ‘death squads’ and left-wing revolutionary groups escalated into civil war in 1979 . Violence began in 1979 as a result of the conflict between the left and the right .
 Fearing a communist takeover, the U.S. funded the El Salvadoran military . The United States funded the military in El Salvador . El Salvadorans were overthrown by the Salvadoran government .
 Fighting and human rights abuses continued throughout the 1980s until mounting foreign debt, and Argentina slid into recession . Argentina was forced into recession in 2008 .
 In the 1980s, General Pinochet’s regime in Chile introduced some liberalizing measures as the state moved toward a free-market economy . In the 1990s, Pinochet's regime introduced some measures to liberalize the country's economy .
 Disident is an individual who disagrees, protests, or acts against established opinion, policy, or government . Disident means someone who disagrees with established opinion or government policy .
 Greater freedoms of speech led inevitably to calls for democracy, which was restored in 1989 . The country was restored to democracy in 1991 .
 Chile experienced impressive growth in the 1990s and is one of the more robust postdictatorship economies . Chile's economy grew in the 1980s and 1990s .
 12 years or violence ended with the El Salvador Peace Accords in 1992 . El Salvador peace accord ended violence in 1992 after 12 years of violence . General AUGUSTO PINOCHET was the Salvadoran general .
 President Carlos Menem introduced wide-ranging reforms in the 1990s, privatizing state assets and imposing a fixed exchange rate . After a period of spiraling inflation, inflation eased in the late 1990s .
 The oil-rich state of Venezuela had regained democratic rule in 1958, but the gap between rich and poor caused discontent . The oil rich state had regained control of the country's capital in 1958 .
 Hugo Chávez was elected in 1998, vowing to bring greater equality . In 1998, he was elected President of the Socialist Socialist Party .
 He launched ‘Plan Bolivar 2000,’ which introduced social and welfare reforms . He introduced social reforms and halted the privatization of state assets . He also introduced a series of reforms in the 1990s .
 Oil profits have helped ensure success for Chávez and growth in the economy . Oil profits are key to the success of the Venezuelan government .
 Latin America is often referred to as “America’s backyard,” Latin America has often seen U.S. interference . Frequently referred to the region as ‘America's backyard’
 In 1983 the United States invaded Grenada after reports that an airport there was secretly intended for Soviet use . Even after the end of the Cold War United States troops invaded Panama in 1989, and removed General Noriega's government due in part to alleged drug trafficking .
 Some Latin American nations have tried to avoid U.S. economic domination . Latin American countries have been trying to avoid the United States economic domination.
 In 2007, the “Bank of the South’s” was formed by Hugo Chavez to finance regional infrastructure projects and social programs . The bank was formed in 2007 to finance infrastructure projects .
 In the 21st century, Latin America is increasing its economic ambitions . Many Latin American leaders are calling for greater regional integration .
 The United States Census shows that migration patterns have shifted radically since World War I . Most immigrants were European during that period . The U.S. Census shows the shift in migration patterns since WWII .
 The majority of the US's legal migrants are from Latin America . Many more enter illegally .
 A large proportion of US's estimated 12 million illegal immigrants crossed at the Mexican border . The border is a major source of illegal immigration in the US .
 In 2006, there were still democratic elections in 12 countries of Latin America . The return of a socialist prime minister in Chile was seen as a major factor in stability .
 Chileans take to the streets with pictures of those who went missing during Pinochet's military rule . More than 5,000 were arrested and murdered by the authorities during the military's rule .
 Hugo Chávez was elected president of Venezuela in 1998 . He introduced the ""Bolivarian Revolution,"" a brand of democratic socialism, prioritizing social reform . He is the current leader of Venezuela .
 He was briefly removed from office in 2002 by the Venezuelan army, but was returned to power by a popular uprising . An admirer of Fidel Castro, he was briefly ousted from office by the army in 2002 .
 His radical foreign policy criticizes the US, and calls for improved trade and international aid . He also criticizes U.S. President Barack Obama's policies .
 In 1948 the state of Israel was created from land belonging to the Arab state of Palestine . Israel is now Israel's most populous Arab state .
 Arab nations denied Israel's legitimacy and began a series of military reprisals to regain the land . The oil-rich Arab nations began to attack Israel in the early 1950s .
 The Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries was founded in 1968 . OAPEC was founded by Arab nations in the Arab Spring . The Organisation of Arab nations is the world's largest oil exporter group .
 Iran, Iraq, and Saudi Arabia were all seeking to assert their rights in a market dominated by foreignowned multinational oil companies . Its member states, which include Iran and Iraq, were all developing nations .
 OAPEC became increasingly powerful as oil reserves in other parts of the world dwindled . OOPEC became more powerful in the 1980s and '90s .
 In the Six-Day War that ensued, Israel defeated Egypt, Syria, and Jordan, and occupied land later known as the Occupied Territories . In the six-day war, Israel won the land later occupied .
 The territorial losses and humiliation of the Six-Day War intensified Arab resentment . Arab resentment toward Israel and the Western governments that supported them grew .
 Rising industrial and domestic consumption of fuel created a growing dependence on imports of foreign oil for the industrialized Western powers in the 1970s . Fj m The Oil Crisis .
 Most of the world’s oil reserves were concentrated in the Middle East . Egypt and Syria, backed by Iraq, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia, invaded Israel on Yom Kippur in 1973 .
 Three-week Yom Kippur War represents a watershed in Middle Eastern history . The three-week war was the first of its kind in the Middle East .
 The Yom Kippur War also saw OAPEC flex its political muscle for the first time . The war also saw the region's political muscle flexing its political muscles . The YOMKippur war was also the first of its kind .
 OAPEC leaders King Faisel of Saudi Arabia and Egyptian President Anwar Sadat of 1973-74 . Ten days into the war, the war was over . American motorists receive just their allocated ration of 10 gallons of gasoline per car during the crisis .
 The OAPEC oil embargo caused fuel shortages and a massive rise in fuel prices in the US, Europe, and Japan . The embargo was imposed on shipments of crude oil to all Western nations that were providing supplies or aid to Israel .
 The embargo targeted Israel's key ally, the US, but did not apply to all European nations . The embargo was imposed on Israel's main ally, Israel, but not all European countries .
 The Netherlands sent arms to Israel and allowed the United States to use Dutch airfields for supply runs . The U.S. faced a complete embargo on Israel .
 Supplies to the UK and France, which had embargoed arms and supplies to both Arabs and Israelis, were not cut off . Arms and supplies were not stopped by the UK or France .
 The economic impact of restricting the flow of crude oil to the world market caused 2 Yom Kippur war . The Israeli army attacked Syrian positions in the Golan Heights on October 12, 1973 .
 Six days earlier, the Syrians had invaded Israel, but they were quickly driven back beyond their own border . Oil prices to triple after they were driven back from the Syrian border .
 Even if countries were not embargoed from receiving oil, many could not afford to buy it in anything like the same quantities . Even though countries could not receive it, many were not able to afford to get it .
 The politics of oil in oil usage in the early 1970s . Without fuel to power production, MU is ma """" ""UT D paii m MELLI g ay m T Pid Sip IR a zu Lf repeat as) THE OIL CRISIS PERCENT
 Iran-Iraq War: Oil production, domestic energy production, industrial output slowed dramatically, oil j —— mes: — Qs any political instability in the 'e S ê became all too clear that the economic boom experienced by Western nations in the postwar years had been entirely dependent on
 When the embargo hit the US, inflation rose to over 10 percent, interest rates rocketed, and an enormous trade deficit developed . Inflation rose to more than 10 percent .
 Schools and businesses adopted policies of regular closures to save on heating oil . Homes and businesses were called on to turn down their heating thermostats . Homeowners were also told to reduce their thermostat .
 Unemployment rates, a growing issue since the start of the 1970s, continued to rise as industries were forced to lay off workers . Unemployment rates have been rising since the 1980s .
 The price of gas for domestic consumption quadrupled during the embargo period . Up to 20 percent of U.S. gas stations were without fuel during the crisis .
 In an economy where 85 percent of the workforce drove to their place of work, people began to line up for hours at a time to refuel their cars .
 At President Nixon’s request, gas was rationed to a maximum of 10 gallons per customer . President Nixon's request to rationed gas was approved by the U.S. Senate .
 Price rises m crude oil had a huge impact in Europe, especially in the UK . UK imported over 80 percent of its oil from the Middle East . UK imports 80 percent from the region .
 Edward Heath’s Conservative government was already struggling with rising inflation and trade union unrest . Before the crisis struck, the government was struggling with inflation and unions .
 In May 1973, 1.million workers went on strike to protest against introduction of pay restraints . 1.1 million workers protested against the introduction of the pay restraints in May 1973 .
 As the year progressed, relations between workers and government steadily worsened . Relations between government and workers have worsened .
 In November 1973, a ban on overtime by electricity and coal workers exacerbated the British fuel shortage . The ban was imposed in November 1973 by British authorities .
 An enterprising hotel owner circumvents the nationwide vehicle ban on Sundays by reverting to horse power . During the oil crisis, an enterprising German hotel owner reverses the ban on Sunday .
 Three months into the oil crisis, it will be a cold holiday season for Americans . The article suggests that Americans will suffer a cold winter .
 When coal miners went on all-out strike in early 1974, the government introduced a compulsory three-day week to save on energy consumption and the wage bill .
 The crisis ended with a settlement for the National Union of Mine Workers, which cost the country over $250 million . The settlement increased the national wage bill by 30 percent .
 With full-time coal production reestablished, Britain returned to a 5-day working week in March 1974 . Restrictions on the use of electricity were retained for several months .
 A range of conservation measures were introduced by governments to cope with the oil crisis . The oil crisis was a major oil crisis in the early 1970s .
 In the US, the consumption of oil dropped by 20 percent . The public made efforts to conserve both oil and money by switching to more affordable forms of energy, such as coal or solar and wind power .
 The United States also extended Daylight Saving Time and, like Germany, developed a policy of ^car-free"" Sundays .
 In Britain, the public became used to living and working by candlelight during a long winter of phased energy-conserving power cuts .
 Other restrictions included ending television broadcasts by 10:30 pm, turning off streetlights at midnight, canceling soccer matches played under floodlights .
 Civic Christmas lights were allowed to remain switched on by special government dispensation . Civic lights allowed to be switched on in special dispensation from the government .
 OAPEC's embargo inflicted serious damage on the global economy . The leaders of many of the industrialized nations were determined to reduce their reliance on Middle Eastern oil .
 Many began to fund research into alternative energy sources such as wind, tidal, and solar energy . Many began funding research into wind and tidal energy .
 In the US, President Nixon approved the building of the Trans-Alaskan oil pipeline, designed to supply 2,000,000 barrels of oil a day to the American market .
 Big automobile manufacturers began to consider smaller, more economic alternatives to the large ‘gas-guzzling’ cars of the 1950s and 1960s . Big car manufacturers began looking at smaller alternatives to large, more economically viable cars .
 Japan has pursued reforms in its energy policy to avoid a similar future crisis . It has also developed its nuclear energy capacity and pioneering some of the world's most successful energy-efficient policies .
 Unlike other industrialized nations, Japan revived quickly after the crisis . Japan's economy has been hit hard by an economic crisis in the 1990s .
 This turnaround in economic fortune is generally credited to the Japanese government's investment in electronics that are not dependent on oil . The government has invested in such industries as electronics that do not rely on oil oil .
 Since 1973, the U.S. has pursued policies to protect itself from a repeat of the oil crisis . The United States has been trying to avoid a repeat . The U.N. has taken steps to protect its own oil reserves .
 The oil embargo radically changed the OAPEC nations’ power and standing in world politics . The embargo was the first time the embargo was imposed in the Middle East . The Arab oil embargo changed the region's standing in politics .
 Western nations forced to give Arab objections to the existence of Israel a fair hearing . Western nations were forced to listen to Arab objections in order to give them a hearing .
 From his inauguration in 1977, Jimmy Carter pursued a peaceful resolution to Arab-Israeli conflict . U.S. president Jimmy Carter was president of the United States from 1977 to 1977 .
 In March 1979, the signing of a bilateral peace treaty between Israel and Egypt was a first step along this difficult diplomatic road . The signing of the peace treaty in March 1979 was the first step in a difficult diplomatic journey .
 The National Energy Act of 1978 continued to exercise controls over industrial energy use . It promoted greater use of renewable energy and introduced higher tax rates for fuel-inefficient vehicles .
 This led to the development of efficient hybrid cars that can run partly on electric motors . The technology has led to development of hybrid vehicles that run partly powered by electric motors.
 The U.S. intervention in the Middle East was not confined to peacemaking . The United States intervened in the Mideast in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The instability in Iraq after the 2003 invasion led to questions about America's long-term influence over the region’s oll.
 Al Imam Mohammad Quasim Nanotwi established the Deoband Madrassa (religious school) in British-ruled India in 1866 . The school was established by the Imam's brother, Mohammad Mohammad Nanotvi . Al Imam was the founder of the Islamic Movement
 The school taught Shariah law and aimed to purify Islam of ""un-Islamic" practices, particularly the influences of British colonial culture . The school was founded in 1903 and is now based in London .
 Founded by Hasan al23 Banna in Egypt in 1928, the Muslim Brotherhood agitated for the introduction of Shariah law . Founded in 1928 in Egypt .
 The Brothers Jihadia was founded by the Brothers of the Ummah, or larger Muslim community . It was intended to help the "struggle in the way of God" against them . The Brothers’ leader bemoaned the sickness of the Muslim community, and gave the Brothers
 The growth of Arab nationalism in the aftermath of World War I was accompanied by the rise of “Islamism” in some Arab nations . Some Arab nations have seen a rise in Islamism in some countries .
 Islamist movement aimed to overthrow secular, pro-Western governments in the Middle East . M resented post-World War I settlements, which gave Britain and France mandates to administer their nations .
 Leaders of Middle Eastern countries chosen for their willingness to collaborate with foreign powers . Many were corrupt and many were corrupt, and many of them were corrupt .
 Britain did provide constitutions and elected assemblies . Its advisers ensured that British interests were served in any governmental decisions .
 In World War I, Persia was divided between Russia and Britain, but the Russians withdrew after the Bolshevik revolution of 1917 . Britain had sole rights to exploit Persian oil after Russia withdrew from Persia .
 In the early 1920s, the British identified Reza Khan as a leader who could maintain the Anglo-Persian status quo . The British identified him as a senior figure in the Persian military, as a military leader .
 Khan led an armed campaign to crush political opposition, declaring himself Shah of Persia in 1925 . Khan was backed by the British and declared himself ruler of Persia after a war with the British .
 Shah was a fierce believer in Westernization . He modernized the infrastructure of the country, which was renamed Iran in 1935 .
 Mohammed Reza Shah abandoned Islamic education in favor of a more secular lifestyle . The majority of his people lived in abject poverty, living in poverty .
 Cold War tensions and the need for Iranian oil led Western powers to ignore the Shah's misrule . Western powers ignored the Shah despite his misrule in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Wahhab is a form of Islam named after Muhammed Ibn Abdul Wahhab . He reintroduced Shariah law to the Arabian Peninsula . Wahhab was the founder of Islam .
 Shariah imposes religious rules on every aspect of life, including politics, sexuality, and social issues . Shariah imposed strict rules on social issues such as sexuality, politics, and sexuality .
 Wahhabism became the formal doctrine of Saudi Arabia in 1800 . It discarded much of Shariah law, discouraged Iranians from obeying the call to prayer or making pilgrimages .
 While the upper classes became more secular and Western in their outlook, the masses remained impoverished and deeply religious . The masses were forced to pay heavy taxes to fund the Shah's reforms .
 Reza Shah offered support to the Nazis in World War II, hoping that Germany would help Iran to rid itself of British influence . Reza had hoped to help Iran rid itself from British influence in the war .
 The corrupt and brutal regime of Mohammed Reza Shah produced waves of demonstration during 1978 . The Shah’s Nazi sympathies threatened Allied access to Iranian oil, so when Germany invaded Russia in Protest against the Shah, the Shah was forced to withdraw .
 Protesters thronged the streets clutching pictures of the exiled religious cleric Ayatollah Khomeini . Protesters were also seen clutching photos of the former religious cleric .
 In December, the Shah abandoned his attempts to hold on to power and fled Iran, leaving the way open for Khomeini to return to Iran . The Shah left Iran in December, allowing the way for Khomomeini's return to power .
 In the postwar years, students spearheaded a backlash against secularism and corruption . Students spearheaded a push for secularism in postwar years .
 In 1951, political unrest forced the Shah to loosen his grip on power and appoint Mohammed Mossadeq as Prime Minister . In 1951 the Shah was forced to loosen the grip of power and take over from him .
 Mossadeq soon nationalized the assets of the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company . The company was nationalized by Mossadek in 1979 .
 Fears of growing Soviet influence in the Middle East led Britain and the U.S. to block sales of Iranian oil in the 1950s .
 In 1953, Western intelligence services supported a military coup, which restored absolute power to Mohammed Reza Shah . The coup took place in Iran's capital Tehran .
 The Shah led a lavish life on oil revenues, which grew from $285 million in 1960 to $18,523 million by the mid-1970s . While his security police ran a terror campaign against dissenters, many of the rural poor were suffering from malnutrition .
 In Iran's mosques, the teachings of an exiled ayatollah (high-ranking Muslim cleric) were gaining ground . The Islamic revolution began in Iran in 1979 .
 Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini had been exiled in 1964 for calling the Shah a “puppet” of the West . He was exiled from Iran in 1964 after calling the West a ‘puppet' of the Shah .
 His teachings called for an end to the Shah's reign, insisting that only clerics should rule, since they are the true representatives of God . His teachings call for the Shah to end his reign, calling for clerics to rule .
 Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini arrives in Tehran after 14 years in exile . Khomenei's return to Iran is greeted with an ecstatic reception . Khomeinis had been in exile for 14 years .
 Student militants burn a United States flag on the roof of the U.S. embassy in Tehran . The embassy staff were held hostage by protesters during the 1979 hostage crisis .
 Pro-Khomeini demonstrations were brutally suppressed, but unrest still spread from city to city . Cleric, nationalists, nationalists and moderates united in a struggle for change . Pro-Homeini demonstrations brutally suppressed .
 Although martial law was imposed, many troops refused to shoot at protesters . Many of the protesters were killed and injured by the government .
 In December, the U.S. tried to persuade the Shah to liberalize his regime, but revolution was now inevitable . The Shah was overthrown by the Shah's regime in December .
 After initial fighting between political factions, a popular referendum voted for the creation of an Islamic republic . After initially fighting, the vote was overwhelmingly supported by the majority of voters .
 A new constitution named Khomeini as Iran's supreme leader, clergy were appointed to run state institutions, and Shariah law was introduced . Shariah Law was introduced in Iran in 1979 .
 Jimmy Carter allowed the Shah to enter the U.S. for cancer treatment in 1979 . Jimmy Carter was president of Iran in 1979 when the Shah was held hostage . The Shah was taken hostage by the United States in Iran .
 Since the Iranian Revolution, the world has seen tensions between Muslim groups, as well as continued hostility in some Islamic factions toward Western regimes .
 Khomeini's traditionalism is not the only view of Islam, says the Iranian leader . He says he is proud of his views of Islam .
 Islam has a number of different interpretations and several distinct denominations, or groups . Like Christianity, Islam has several different interpretations of Islam . Islam is divided into several groups and denominations .
 Sunni Muslims form the largest group, comprising about 85 percent of the world's Muslims; Shia form approximately 15 percent . Sunni Muslims are Sunni Muslims, the second largest group of Muslims in the world .
 All denominations have a slightly different understanding of the Qur'an, the central religious text of Islam . All denominations of Islam have slightly different interpretations of the Quran .
 After the death of Ayatollah Khomeini in 1988 largely came to nothing, hopes for a moderation in the Islamic regime rose with the election of Mohammed Khatami as president in 1997 .
 In 2005 he was replaced by the ultraconservative nationalist Mahmoud Ahmadinejad . His attempts at reform were hampered by political conservatives, hard-line clerics, and the state security apparatus .
 Iran has been accused of meddling in Syria to support the Islamist Hezbollah militia . Iran has also favored Shia factions in post-Saddam Iraq . Iran is accused of supporting Hezbollah militia in Syria .
 It has also pursued the development of a nuclear program despite fierce opposition from other countries . Other countries fear this is aimed at producing nuclear weapons .
 Iran invaded the United States embassy in Tehran, taking 63 Americans hostage . 63 Americans were taken hostage by the Iranians in the 1980s . The U.S. returned to Iran to face trial, invaded the embassy in Iran .
 The crisis finally concluded with the signing of the Algiers Accord in January 1981 . The crisis was the first of its kind and lasted for three decades .
 By the time Khomeini died in June 1989, Iran was a well-established Islamic state . Iran was an Islamic state by the time it died in 1989 .
 Party leader and Marxist scholar, Noor Mohammed Tureki, becomes President of Afghanistan . Party leader became President after several days of internal power struggles . Marxist scholar and Marxist thinker Noor Turek became President .
 CIA funneled extensive aid to the Mujahideen via Pakistan via Pakistan, including hundreds of thousands of AK-47s . The CIA, the U.S. foreign intelligence agency, funneled the aid .
 Afghanistan lies at the heart of Asia, nestled between Iran in the west and Pakistan in the south and east . Afghanistan is a landlocked country that has been locked in for years .
 Made in the USSR, they were cheap, cheap, Tureki was the leader of the former . Made in Russia, they are cheap, and they were made in Japan .
 Between 1933-73, Afghanistan was stable under Afghanistan, the Khalq and the in Kabul . establish a communist government in between 1933 and 1973 .
 Tureki tried to was to continue for the next half1978 when the communist People’s Democratic pressed ahead with a rapid program assassinate his prime minister, Hafizulla century . He was murdered in killed and jailed many Parchamis and September 1979 .
 Amin had Tureki arrested, and politicians in anticommunist Muslim Great Saur Revolution . secularism, equal rights for women, took control of the government . Amin had Amin arrested .
 He and land redistribution; but within later announced that Tureki was dead . He later later announced he had died .
 Communist insurrection was breaking out l l l from machine gun nests like this one above the TAKEOVER all over the country . Fighting back COMMUNIST months insurrection was beginning .
 In the 1950s and such a state control of state control, MILLION Afghans died in 1960s, four U.S. presidents faced agriculture . Four United States presidents have faced agriculture. In the 50s and 60s and 70s, such as state control .
 In 1978, a treaty the significant task of defending was signed allowing the MILLION Afghans became American interests in the Middle East use of Soviet troops if and South Asia, particularly in the vast reservoirs of oil and natural gas in and the were killed or wounded .
 Prime Minister Sardar DAOUD KHAN requested by Afghanistan refugees in nearby countries . With the onset of PRIME MINISTER SARDAR DAOUd KHAN, Afghanistan requested by Afghan refugees in neighboring countries .
 Soviet armed forces invaded neighboring Afghanistan in December 1979 . They were supremely confident of seizing immediate control of neighboring Afghanistan .
 Russian troops found themselves bogged down in a ten-year war that proved to be a disaster for both countries . However, the Russian troops were able to pull out of the war in 2003 .
 The war hastened the breakup of the Soviet Union, and plunged Afghanistan into a state of lawlessness . This was the beginning of a curious relationship between the U.S. and Islam .
 With the PDPA in power, U.S. president Jimmy Carter and national security advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski authorized the covert funding and training of antigovernment forces .
 In May 1988, Afghanistan, Pakistan, the USSR, and the United States signed agreements to end foreign intervention in Afghanistan . The USSR began withdrawing its forces from Afghanistan in May 1988 .
 H A T Ne w. w. volunteers, the Mujahideen (Persian for ^warriors""), who opposed the Marxists . H AT Ne w . volunteers .
 The Soviets stormed into the capital city of Kabul on December 24, 1979 . Citing the 1978 Treaty of Friendship, allowing Soviet military intervention if requested, the Soviets stormed in .
 The 110,000-150,000 Soviet troops arriving in Afghanistan (assisted by 100,000 pro-communist Afghan troops) met with Mujahideen resistance .
 Despite Russia's superior weapons, the rebels frequently eluded them in the hostile mountainous terrain . Russia's weapons were superior to rebels, but they often eluded the rebels .
 The conflict settled into a stalemate, with Soviet and Soviet forces controlling urban areas . The international response ranged from government forces controlling the urban areas, to rebels operating freely in the mountains .
 As the war progressed, the rebels improved their tactics and began using imported and captured weapons .
 Their leaders favored sabotage, such as blowing up government office buildings . The group's leaders favored sabotaging government buildings .
 On September 4, 1985, insurgents shot down a domestic plane as it took off from Kandahar airport, killing 52 people . 52 people were killed in the attack .
 In February 1988, under international pressure, Soviet President Gorbachev announced the withdrawal of troops . The withdrawal was completed a year later, under increasing international pressure .
 The war left Afghanistan with severe political, economic, and ecological problems . The war has also left the country with severe economic and political problems .
 Many had died or fled the country, and economic production was curtailed . Economic production was also curtailed, and many had been killed or fled from the country .
 The guerrilla forces that had triumphed were unable to unite, and Afghanistan was divided between regional warlords . Afghanistan was then divided between warlords, with the Taliban still in control of Afghanistan .
 These divisions set the stage for the rise of the Taliban later in the decade . The Taliban was established in Afghanistan in the 1980s .
 Following Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan in 1989, the United States and its allies did little to rebuild the country, leaving a dangerous leadership vacuum . The U.S. and allies left Afghanistan with little to do with rebuilding .
 Mujahideen factions gained power, but ethnic fighting broke out, giving rise to warlords . Ethnic fighting led to the rise of warlords in the United States .
 The Taliban, led by Mullah Omar, was a political and religious force, which was initially supported by US-backed Pakistan . The Taliban was a religious and political force supported by Pakistan .
 After taking control of most of Afghanistan, the Taliban imposed a strict interpretation of Islamic Sharia Law . The Taliban imposed an Islamic state of Sharia Law in Afghanistan .
 In December 2001, major leaders from the Afghan opposition groups agreed to form a democratic government . Hamid Karzai was elected president in 2004 . The Afghan war began in December 2001 .
 The Taliban regrouped on the border with Pakistan and has mounted severe attacks on NATO forces based in Afghanistan since 2006 . The Taliban has, since 2006, mounted attacks against NATO forces in Afghanistan .
 President Karzai’s re-election in 2009, disputed by his political opponents, has done little to bring stability . Karzai re-elected to power in 2009 .
 By 2010, the Taliban had yet to be defeated, the United States and other NATO forces planned to withdraw . The Taliban had not been defeated, though the U.S. planned to pull out of Afghanistan .
 The Soviet Union was economically stagnant and corrupt during the 1960s and 1970s . It was also economically stagnant during that period .
 In 1964, Leonid Brezhnev succeeded Nikita Khrushchev as leader of the USSR . He stayed in office until 1982 . He was the first Soviet leader to hold office in the country .
 Under his leadership, the economy stagnated, and slow growth was experienced in some sectors . The country's economic growth has been slow in recent years .
 There were perennial shortages of manufactured goods and food, and reduced consumer options caused frustration among the people . The country's economy has been hit by a wave of low-quality manufacturing and food shortages .
 Although all Soviet citizens were officially equal, the system was corruptible . Bribes secured better jobs or housing . Senior communist party officials had access to privileges unattainable by ordinary people .
 Lenin did not question Lenin's view that communism could only be achieved through disciplined, central organization . He aimed to address failings elsewhere in the Soviet system .
 Gorbachev also recognized that state repression of those who criticized the CPSU had created problems in Soviet society . The CPSU was a state of state repression in the Soviet Union .
 He pledged a new openness—glasnost— in political affairs in Russia . exiled intellectuals were allowed to return and political debate was encouraged .
 At first, glasnost and perestroika were met with general excitement . But there was resistance from those who resented reforms aimed at reducing their power .
 By the end of 1986, Gorbachev's talk of progress began to sound like an empty promise . The economic situation in the Soviet Union began to worsen .
 Most production remained under control of the state, where restructuring failed to stimulate growth . He introduced limited rights for private enterprise, but most production remained in state hands of the government .
 Glasnost had enabled all Soviet citizens to express their dissatisfaction with both the CPSU and the Soviet system . Soviet citizens were able to speak out against both CPSU or the system .
 In 1988, Gorbachev began to face internal resistance as nationalist movements in Kazakhstan, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and the Baltic States demanded independence from the centralized Soviet government .
 Gorbachev's decision to allow criticism of the communist system resulted in demands for an end to repressive one-party government . In 1989, hoping that the Soviet people would accept a new “humane communism,” he allowed Down with Lenin . In the 1990s, Gorb
 Mikhail Gorbachev was born in Stavropol in southwestern Russia . He was the first president of Soviet Union in the 1980s and '90s . He is now the leader of Russia .
 He became leader of the Soviet Union in 1985 . He became active in politics at an early age .
 He attempted to solve Soviet economic and political problems through programs of domestic reform . The Soviet Union was plagued by internal problems in the country .
 After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, he made several attempts to retu the political stag in Russia . He made several failec attempts to re-establish himself in the country .
 Boris Yeltsin faced demands for greater concessions from a newly elected people’s deputy . However, he soon faced demands that he had greater concessions .
 Yeltsin had become popular in the Soviet Union because of his open criticism of Gorbachev and perestroika . Yeltsins was popular in Russia because he was critical of the former leader's policies .
 In 1990, he was elected President of the Russian Federation, the largest Soviet republic . He was elected in 1990, when he was the first Russian president .
 He used this position to attack Gorbachev and the CPSU, insisting that the party should no longer dominate government . He used it to attack the party's dominance in government .
 After the USSR's collapse, the vast nation split into 15 separate states, the largest was the Russian Federation . Throughout 1990, Gorbachev struggled to hold the Soviet Union together, sending troops into The former USSR in 1991 .
 On August 19, 1991, a committee of CPSU hardliners staged a coup, arresting Gorbachev and his advisors . The coup took place in the wake of a coup against the Soviet Union in August 1991 .
 They declared a state of emergency and announced their intention to reestablish old-style Soviet rule . They declared an emergency and said they wanted to re-establish Soviet-style rule .
 Yeltsin rushed to the White House (the Russian Parliament building) and called on the people to come and protect their parliament . The Russian parliament building was attacked by the Soviet Union in 1992 . Yeltsins called on people to help protect the Russian parliament .
 Yeltsin was the true hero of the hour and Gorbachev’s prestige was irreversibly damaged . Gorbachachev was reinstated as president after four days, but Yeltsins was the real hero .
 Following the collapse of communism, Boris Yeltsin introduced a market economy in the Russian Federation . Yeltsins introduced a system of state capitalism in the 1990s .
 Russia plunged into recession with greater material hardships than had been suffered under communism or perestroika . Russia's economic downturn was the worst since the collapse of Soviet-era communism .
 Yeltsin survived in office, eventually resigning in 1999, a deeply unpopular figure . In 1993 the Congress of People's Deputies attempted to impeach Yeltsins, but he survived . In 1999 he resigned as unpopular figure, resigning from office .
 After 1991, the Russian Federation faced independence demands from its southern province of Chechnya . The Russian Federation was forced to accept Chechnyan independence demands .
 In 1994, Yeltsin sent troops into Grozny, the Chechen capital, to crush the rebels . Yeltsins sent troops in 1994, sending troops to crush rebels . Chechen rebels died in Chechnya in 1994 .
 After Russian withdrawal, unrest continued and a second war began in 1999 . Second war began after Russian withdrawal from the country .
 Inhabitants of Eastern Europe were prohibited from crossing into the West . Most people knew little about the way of life on the other side of the continent .
 As the Cold War intensified, the Soviet Union acted to increase its control of political policy in satellite Eastern Bloc states .
 After World War I, new national boundaries were created and countries divided . The victorious Allies determined the future shape of Europe . New national boundaries and countries were created after World War Il .
 Stalin ensured that the Soviet Union incorporated eastern Poland and the Baltic States . Stalin also ensured that eastern Poland was incorporated into the Baltic states . The Soviet Union annexed eastern Poland, the Baltic and eastern Poland .
 By 1949, communist regimes had been established in Albania, Romania, Hungary, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and East Germany . Communism was established in many of the world's communist countries .
 Although nominally independent, these nations were dominated by the Soviet Union . These nations were known as 'independent' and 'nominally independent' during the Cold War .
 These satellite states were required to mirror Soviet political structures and to join the Soviet military alliance, the Warsaw Pact . Collectively known as the Eastern Bloc, these satellite states became part of the Soviet Bloc .
 The Soviet Union did not tolerate rebellion or divergence from its party line . SOVIET IMPERIALISM is the name of the country's most powerful Communist Party .
 In 1955, Soviet troops suppressed riots and a general strike in East Germany . In 1956, a Hungarian uprising was crushed with massive military force . In Hungary, discontent with the communist government led to nationwide revolt .
 In 1968, during a period known as the ""Prague Spring,"" Czechoslovakia introduced liberalizing measures . In 1968 the country's liberalization measures were introduced .
 Forces from Warsaw Pact invaded and reestablished communist party discipline . Forces from the Warsaw Pact reestablished party discipline. Party discipline was reestablished .
 In 1986 Gorbachev stunned the world with a call to eliminate all nuclear weapons by the year 2000 . In 1983, Ronald Reagan's decision to fund a space-based missile defense system, known as Star Wars, suggested a continuing escalation of the arms race .
 This move led to the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty in 1987 . It was a first step toward dismantling the superpowers' massive nuclear arsenals . The treaty was a precursor to dismantling nuclear weapons .
 With the threat of Soviet interference removed, communist governments found it difficult to keep control . Communist governments struggled to cope with the loss of the Soviet Union .
 Romanian revolution was Eastern Europe's most violent transition to democracy . People shelter behind army tanks in Bucharest during the violent transition .
 More than 1,000 Romanians were killed in clashes between demonstrators and security forces . More than a million protesters were killed last year .
 A revolutionary holds a Romanian flag, the communist symbol torn from its center, and looks down on Palace Square in Bucharest, days before the overthrow of Ceausescu's regime in 1989 .
 A wave of popular protest developed within the Eastern Bloc countries, calling for an end to communist rule . The wave of anti-communist protest developed in the 1980s and '90s .
 By 1989, East Germany faced with a rapidly depleting workforce . Thousands of citizens decamped to West Germany via Hungary and Czechoslovakia . East Germany was forced to rely heavily on the resources of its workforce .
 In November the government agreed to open its borders with West Germany, and a new Hungary . Citizens wave pro-democracy banners as the Republic of Hungary is proclaimed on October 23, 1989 .
 Politicians on both sides agreed to the reunification of Germany in 1990 . Politicians from both sides agree to the unification of Germany .
 In Poland, popular desire for change led to the emergence of the Solidarity Trade Union Movement in the early 1980s . Solidarity was formed by Poland's trade union movement in the 1970s .
 The Berlin Wall was the most famous physical manifestation of the Iron Curtain . It was the largest physical manifestation in the history of the Berlin Wall .
 East German government built the wall in 1961 to prevent skilled workers from crossing into West Berlin to work . The wall was described as an ""anti-Fascist Protective Rampart” For the next 30 years movement of citizens between West and East was highly restricted .
 In the 1970s and 19805, graffiti artists covered the western side of the wall with paintings and slogans protesting at the division of Berlin . In the 1980s and 1990s, graffiti artist covered the west side of Berlin's wall .
 On November 9, 1989, when the abandonment of border controls was announced, tens of thousands of Berliners converged on the wall .
 Over the following days, the city's inhabitants began to dismantle the wall with their own hands . The wall is now being dismantled by residents .
 The communist government attempted to repress Solidarity, but, by 1989, was forced to accept more open elections . By 1989, the communist government had to accept a more open election . Solidarity was a major success for Solidarity .
 Solidarity was elected as Poland's largest governing party by a huge majority . Its founder, Lech Walesa, served as president from 1990 to 1995 . Solidarity is Poland's biggest governing party .
 1989 also saw the ""Velvet Revolution" in Czechoslovakia, when mass protests secured the overthrow of the communist government .
 Alexander Dubcek, hero of the Prague Spring, brought back from political isolation to serve in a new federal parliament . Dubcec was brought back to the Czech Republic to serve as a member of the new parliament .
 Hungary and Bulgaria also made peaceful transitions to democracy in the early 1990s . Hungary, Bulgaria and Hungary made peaceful transition to democratic rule in early 90s .
 The Hungarian communist government tried offering reforms while maintaining a one-party system . Popular pressure led to the declaration of the Third Hungarian Republic and promise of multi-party elections .
 The transition to democracy triggered nationalist conflicts and economic hardship . The transition was marked by the Iron Curtain .
 Consultations are held between NATO and nonmembers, including Russia and Ukraine . Consultations on international security are held with nonmembers of NATO . NATO and Russia have been involved in the Ukraine crisis .
 Thousands took to the streets of Kiev, Ukraine, to protest the disputed election in 2004 . The Orange Revolution was the result of a disputed presidential election .
 This forced a revote that brought pro-EU leader Viktor Yushchenko to power . But five years later the Orange coalition had collapsed and he was defeated in presidential elections by his former opponent .
 Romania's communist leader, Nicolae Ceausescu, ran a particularly repressive and ruthless regime . Violent overthrow led to the overthrow of the communist leader's regime .
 His overthrow in 1989 is the one instance of violent revolution during this period . His overthrow is one of the most violent overthrow in the history of the revolution .
 He was succeeded by Ion Iliescu, a former member of the communist regime . Iliesu is succeeded by former Romanian President Nicol Nicol Nicolau Ręs successor .
 Iliescu has been a dominant political figure in Romania since the revolution . He helped develop a brand of democratic socialism that retains some policies from the communist era .
 The last Eastern Bloc state to adopt parliamentary democracy was Albania, m 1992 . Albania was the last to adopt a form of democracy in the 1990s .
 Charges or corruption and economic mismanagement followed, but by 2007, the country seemed to be progressing toward full democracy . Charges and mismanagement led to charges of corruption and political mismanagement in the country .
 Vaclav Havel was born into a wealthy and cultured family . Havel's ""bourgeois" roots meant he was not entitled to a university education .
 In the 1960s Havel’s first plays were produced on stage, but his work became increasingly subversive . Havel was imprisoned for dissent .
 Vaclav Havel was elected president of Czechoslovakia after the Velvet Revolution . Havel became president of the Czech Republic in 1989 .
 President George W. Bush was convinced that a politician should follow his individual conscience . His decisions as president were often controversial .
 Havel resigned in 1992, but was reelected in 1993 and remained in office until 2003 . Havel was elected to the Czech Republic in 1993 .
 The world witnessed some of the worst atrocities committed since World War II . NATO faced its gravest challenge concerning a sovereign nation . Bosnia was transformed into a killing field .
 Former Austro-Hungarian territories of Croatia, Slovenia, Slovenia and Bosnia-Herzegovina . Serbia and Montenegro were once independent kingdoms of Serbia, Montenegro, and Croatia .
 Yugoslavia was invaded by Nazi Germany in World War II . Tito was the country's sole World War I leader . Yugoslavia was occupied by Yugoslavia in 1945 .
 The Germans faced fierce resistance from Yugoslav communist partisans, a resistance force under Josip Tito . But the Germans faced heavy resistance from communist partisans . Tito was the leader of the Yugoslav Communist Party, which fought back .
 Tito's partisans emerged at the end of the war as masters of the country . Thanks to their ruthless tactics, and a flow of Russian, British, and American aid, they were able to win the war .
 Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia, Montenegro, Macedonia, and Bosnia-Herzegovina are among the countries on the list . The list includes Slovenia, Croatia and Montenegro .
 Tito ruled Yugoslavia as a one-party dictatorship until his death in 1980 . Tito was one of Yugoslavia's longest-serving dictatorships .
 For the rest of the 1980s, Yugoslavia was ruled by a committee composed of the presidents of the six republics and two regions . Yugoslavia ruled by the presidents and presidents of all six republic republics .
 The country slipped into economic crisis, and national and ethnic rivalries between the republics intensified . The republics are now in a state of war, and the country is in the middle of a crisis .
 In 1990 the republics held multi-party elections, which further inflamed ethnic tensions . The republics also held elections in 1990, which also inflamed the tensions .
 Yugoslavia was scene of many bloody battles and human rights violations in 1991-1995 . Yugoslavia's independence was followed by the peace accord signed in 1995 . Yugoslavia was site of numerous bloody battles, human rights abuses .
 July 1991 Milosevic's Serbian forces invade Croatia; the city of Vukovar is bombarded and reduced to rubble . July 1991 is the anniversary of the Croatian invasion of Croatia .
 In 1990, Slovenia and Croatia elected nationalist governments and national groups demanded independence throughout Yugoslavia . The first multi-party elections held in Yugoslavia after the end of the communist era were held in 1990 .
 In 1989, Milosevic began a crackdown on the politically assertive Albanian Muslim majority in Kosovo . In Kosovo, a semi-independent region in southern Serbia, is a Muslim-majority region in the country .
 Slovenia declared its independence from Yugoslavia in 1991 . Serb-dominated Yugoslav army intervened to prevent it from seceding . Slovenian republic or Slovenia declared independence in 1991 after Yugoslavia split .
 The Yugoslav army was badly prepared and had to withdraw, but when the Croatian republic also claimed independence, the Yugoslav army under Milosevic launched a full-scale offensive . The Croatian republic claimed independence in 1992 .
 The city of Vukovar in eastern Croatia was destroyed, and Serbs began mass executions of Croat men . Serbs started mass executions after the city was destroyed . The Serbians were responsible for the destruction of the city, which was destroyed by the destruction .
 Shocking photographs emerge of emaciated Muslims held in April 1992 Bosnia Bosnian Serb prison camps . Bosnia and Herzegovina declare independence in 1993 .
 Bosnian Serbs begin four-year-long siege of Sarajevo in 1992 . Serb forces begin siege of Bosnia and Bosnian capital in 1992. Serbians begin to open warfare on Bosnia and Herzegovina in March 1992 .
 UN Security Council declares six “Safe Areas’ for Bosnian Muslims . April-May 1993 UN Security council declares six "Safe Areas" for Muslims in Bosnia . Bosnian Muslim Muslims were living in six safe areas .
 The United States officially recognized Slovenia and Croatia’s independence, but did not intervene in the conflict . The U.S. officially recognized Slovenian and Croatia's independence in the 1990s .
 In late 1992, the United Nations brokered a ceasefire between the Serbs and the Croats . The U.N. brokered the ceasefire in late 1992 . The Serb-Croat war broke out in 1992 .
 Bosnia was the most ethnically diverse of the six Yugoslav republics . 43 percent of the population was Bosnian Muslim, 31 percent Serbian, and 17 percent Croatian .
 Bosnian Muslims and Croats favored independence, but Bosnian Serbs wanted to remain a part of the wider Yugoslavia . Bosnian Muslim and Croat Muslims favored independence . Serbs preferred to remain part of Yugoslavia .
 Bosnia declared itself independent from Yugoslavia in 1992 . In 1992, following a referendum boycotted by the Bosnian Serbs, Bosnia declared its own independence .
 Milosevic’s Serbian forces responded by attacking the non-Serb population of Bosnia . Bosnian Serbs laid siege to the capital Sarajevo in the 1990s . Serb forces responded to the attack by attacking non- Serbs .
 Many Bosnian Muslims were imprisoned in harsh Serbrun prison camps and Muslim women raped . Muslim women were raped in the camps . Serbruns were notorious for imprisoning Muslims .
 The Bosnian Muslim civilians of Sarajevo struggled for survival under siege from Bosnian Serbs . The international media began to use the term ‘ethnic cleansing’ to describe the systematic expulsion and killing of ethnic and religious groups .
 The threat from snipers was constant and venturing into the streets was perilous . It was the first time snipers had been allowed to roam the streets .
 A ceasefire was declared in late 1995, although the siege was not officially lifted until February 1996 . The siege was officially lifted in February 1996, despite a ceasefire being declared .
 NATO jets shoot down four Serb aircraft for violating UN no-fly zone in 1994 . February 1994 NATO jet shot down Serb planes for violating no- fly zone . NATO jets also shoot down aircraft from Serb airbase in Serbia in 1994.
 December 1995 Bosnia, Serbia, and Croatia sign the Dayton Peace Accord to end the war in Bosnia . Bosnia and Serbia signed the peace accord to end Bosnia's war in 1995 .
 Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic were indicted for war crimes in 1995 . Radovan was the leader of the Serbija Serbijij, which was in charge of the Bosnian war . Ratko and Radovan were both charged with war crimes .
 UN troops in Bosnia were prohibited from using military force in Bosnia . The international community imposed economic sanctions on Serbia, but UN troops were not allowed to use military force . UN forces were in Bosnia in the 1990s .
 Throughout 1993, Serbs continued to commit atrocities, confident that the UN would not take military action . Serbs committed atrocities throughout the years, but UN did not take action .
 Over a million people were driven from their homes by Serb forces under Radovan Karadzic, president of the Bosnian Serb Republic, in the 1992-Bosnian war .
 In 1994, a marketplace in Sarajevo was struck by a Serb mortar shell, killing 68 people . 68 people were killed by the shelling of a market in 1994 . UN intervention was the first UN intervention in Bosnia and Montenegro .
 Scenes of the carnage were relayed around the globe, intensifying calls for intervention . Scenes of carnage around the world were relayed by the world .
 The United States issued an ultimatum through the North Atlantic Treaty Organization demanding that the Serbs withdraw their arms from Sarajevo . The U.S. issued the request through the NATO Treaty Organization .
 Serb forces also took hundreds of UN troops hostage and used them as human shields, chained to military targets . Serb troops also used to be used as human human shields against military targets .
 In August 1995, NATO war planes began a fierce air campaign against Serb troops throughout Bosnia . NATO peacekeeping troops clamber through an abandoned house in Kosovo .
 Forces were sent in following the 1999 war between the Serbian government and Kosovan Albanians fighting for independence from Serbia . Slobodan Milosevic finally agreed to peace talks with the Albanians .
 Fighting between ethnic Albanian minorities and the Macedonian and Serbian governments continued . Ethnic Albanians are ethnic Albanians living in Macedonia, Serbia and Albania .
 Kosovo declared its independence in 2006 . Serb forces withdrew from Kosovo . Kosovo was declared independent in 2006 after the war .
 1995 Dayton Peace Accord provided only a brief respite from troubles in the area . Dayton peace accord was only a temporary respite . Dayton Accord was signed in 1995 .
 The Dayton Peace Accord ruled that Bosnia would be split into the Bosnian Serb Republic and the Muslim-Croat Federation . Bosnia was then divided between the two regions . The agreement was ratified by the Dayton Peace Accords .
 Karadzic was captured in 2008 to face trial at the Hague, but Mladic remains at large . Mladice was captured by the Bosnian Serbic regime in 1998 .
 Slobodan Milosevic lost the Serbian presidential election in 2000 . The former Serbian president has been accused of crimes against him .
 He refused to accept the result, but was forced out of office by strikes and massive protests . He was forced to resign after a series of strikes and protests .
 He was handed over to a UN war crimes tribunal in the Hague, in the Netherlands, and put on trial for crimes against humanity and genocide . He is accused of killing more than 100,000 people in Afghanistan .
 He spent five years in prison and died of a heart attack shortly before the trial was concluded . He spent the last five years of his life in prison .
 In February 2003, what remained of Yugoslavia was replaced with a loose federation called Serbia and Montenegro . The federation was formed from Yugoslavia in February 2003 .
 The charter gives the UN Security Council the power to take collective action in maintaining international peace and security . The charter gave the UN the power of taking collective action .
 Although soldiers deployed by the UN share a uniform, they remain members of their respective armed forces . The UN soldiers are deployed by their respective countries and are deployed in their countries .
 In the aftermath of World War I, European governments struggled to provide basic necessities for their populations .
 Allied nations demanded reparation payments from Germany, in the form of coal and other natural resources . Initially, Allied nations wanted reparation from Germany in return for coal, other resources . The war broke out in 1941, with the collapse of the Second World War .
 German machinery plants and factories were dismantled and transported to Britain, France, and the Soviet Union . The factories were transported to France, France and the USSR .
 France wanted to ensure that Germany could never rearm again and took administrative control of key industrial regions . France also wanted to stop Germany rearming and took over key industrial areas .
 U.S. secretary of state General George Marshall introduced a plan to address ""the dislocation of the entire fabric of the European economy" by proposing massive, long-term financial aid .
 The ban on German industrial reconstruction was partially withdrawn . Concerned that Communist revolutions in Eastern Europe would soon spread to West Germany and beyond .
 The U.S. poured billions of dollars into rebuilding Western Europe . Over the next five years, the United States poured billions into rebuilding the continent .
 Twelve gold stars on the blue background of the European flag represent Europe as a whole and the equality of all nations within the union . The European flag is a symbol of unity and equality .
 In the decades following 1945, Europeans became inspired by a new vision of a united continent, where combined economic and political purpose would make wars between their nations unthinkable . Europeans began to demand reform in domestic government policies; welfare provision, such as free healthcare .
 Calls for a different approach to foreign relations led to some radical changes in political thinking, particularly in Germany and France . Widespread calls for a change in foreign policy led to a radical change in the political landscape .
 Konrad Adenauer skillfully pursued policies of reconciliation with Germany's European neighbors . Adenauer was the chancellor of West Germany during the 1970s and '80s .
 In 1950, he sanctioned French political strategist Jean Monnet's proposal to integrate the French and German coal and steel industries . He ensured that neither country could rearm without the support of the other . In 1950 he sanctioned the French plan to integrate their coal, steel industries with Germany .
 Monnet's strategy, known as the ""Schuman Plan,"" led to the founding of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951 . The community pooled coal and steel resources of France, Germany, Italy, Belgium, Luxembourg, Luxembourg and the Netherlands .
 Economic cooperation between these six nations was extended in 1957 with the formation of the European Economic Community . The Common Market was formed in 1957 .
 The BEC allowed free movement of goods, services, and labor between member states . BEC also developed mutually beneficial joint agricultural, welfare, and foreign trade policies .
 Britain rejected the opportunity to become an EEC founder member . Britain and the EEC rejected the chance to become a member of the EU .
 In 1961, Prime Minister Harold Macmillan began negotiations to join the six nations . However, economic growth soon outstripped that of the UK's economic growth .
 Throughout the 1960s, Britain and the EEC argued over terms of British membership . The EEC members of the UK and the European Union fought over membership terms .
 By the end of the decade, Margaret Thatcher was calling for reductions in EEC controls and a return to a freemarket economy . The newly elected British prime minister called for the return of the EEC to free market access .
 European Union Continental Europe took a different view, seeking to strengthen rather than relax economic cooperation . Continental Europe wants to strengthen its economic cooperation with the U.S.
 In 1986, French President Francois Mitterrand and German Chancellor Helmut Kohl created the “Single European Act,” establishing a single European market . The act established the European single market .
 In 1992, the “Maastricht Treaty’ renamed the EEC the European Union and its powers were increased . In 1992 the "MaastRicht Treaty" increased the powers of the EU to the EU .
 By 2007 the EU had 27 member states, representing VOTING in the COUNCIL of the EU . Government ministers from each EU member state vote on legislation, budget, and economic policy .
 The bigger the country’s population, the more votes it has, although there is some weighting to favor less populous countries . The vote is based on the population of a country with the most votes .
 The EU has built on policies of reconciliation and nations have worked together to achieve unprecedented peace and unity in Europe . Beyond economic success, the EU's policies have built on .
 Margaret Thatcher served as prime minister of Britain from 1979 until 1990 . Helmut Klimt was the German Chancellor of Germany .
 Thatcher was elected on the promise of tough measures to improve Britain's economic performance . Her administration followed a disastrous period of recession in Britain . Thatcher's government followed a decade of economic downturns .
 Her attitude to the European Union was famously confrontational, but she signed up for the Single European Act of 1986 . The single European Act established the single European market and closer European political cooperation .
 Many disliked her for her role in selling off state assets and weakening trade unions . She is remembered by many for bringing radical social and economic change .
 States that have joined since 1981 have been in the United States since 1981 . This map shows key industries in Cork, Ireland, Cork and New Jersey . The map shows Cork's Cork industry .
 New member States with developing economies hope to emulate the economic growth of the established nations . Supported by the umbrella of economic unity, newer member States hope to achieve economic growth .
 European industry is successful in areas from agriculture and tourism to finance and fashion . European industry includes finance, finance, fashion and finance .
 He served a 27-year prison sentence for his part in anti-apartheid activities . He served 27 years in prison for his role in the anti-heid movement .
 Released from prison in 1990, he became South Africa's first black president in 1994 . He was released from prison after serving a life sentence for human trafficking .
 Mandela has unrivaled global status as a pioneer for peace and democracy . Mandela has been a leader for peace, democracy and peace in the world . Mandela was assassinated in 1992 in the wake of the Second World War .
 South Africa’s ruling powers maintained a divided population for much of 20th century . South Africa's ruling powers maintain a divided . population for decades . Mandela: South Africa needs to be united .
 Between 1910 and 1948, the South African Government pursued measures to deprive blacks and “coloreds” of the right to vote or to own land . The South African government pursued measures that deprived blacks and "coloreds" of the vote or ownership of land .
 Acts such as the Native Urban Areas Act of 1923 resulted in ‘surplus’ blacks being removed from cities, creating many ""whites-only"" areas .
 The extreme inequalities created in South African society under apartheid raised voices of protest not only among blacks, “coloreds” and sections of South Africa's white population, but also internationally .
 This massacre in the township of Sharpeville triggered a shift to more militant tactics among activists . The massacre triggered a change in tactics, activists say .
 In 1961 Nelson Mandela became leader of the military wing of the African National Congress ] political party, beginning a campaign of sabotage targeting government installations . In 1961, Nelson Mandela began a campaign to sabotage government facilities .
 Mandela and other members of the ANC were arrested in 1962 and subsequently sentenced to life imprisonment . Mandela and others were arrested and imprisoned for life in 1962 . Mandela was released from prison in 1994 .
 Mandela spoke of freedom, democracy, and equality for all South Africans . Mandela spoke at his trial of his crimes at Mandela's murder trial .
 His long imprisonment became a subject of growing international condemnation . The former president's long imprisonment was subject to growing international criticism .
 These areas were impoverished rural areas with no real capacity to function as separate states . The majority of these areas were poor rural rural areas .
 4 per cent of the country was divided into 10 homelands . The relocation of blacks to the homelsands was part of a plan to relocate blacks .
 Apartheid was a brutal system that imposed the will of a minority on the majority of the South African population . Apartheid and Beyond are a look at South Africa's history of apartheid .
 South Africans of all races cooperated in a process known as “Truth and Reconciliation’s” It was a legal system that completely segregated the political, social, and cultural lives of white and black South Africans . When it ended in the 1990s, there followed
 Early apartheid measures included “blood laws,” such as the Immorality Act and Population Registration Act . The laws banned intermarriage and sexual relations between races between races .
 Public transportation and amenities were divided into separate areas for whites and blacks . The education system and employment ensured that blacks had no prospects other than menial low-paid work .
 A policy of segregation and discrimination against the nonwhite population of South Africa . The apartheid state had a policy of discrimination against nonwhite people .
 All dissent was suppressed by a police force and military who habitually committed atrocities, including torture . All dissent and dissent were suppressed by the police force, military who committed atrocities . The country was ruled by the Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 In 1986 the international community imposed economic sanctions on South Africa in an attempt to force an end to apartheid . Even with the majority of whites now opposed to the system, the government still failed to respond with significant reform .
 It took a new administration to open the way for change in the U.S.
 President F.W. de Klerk was elected in 1989 and lifted bans on the ANC and other opposition groups . He lifted the ban on ANC and the ANC in 1989 .
 Mandela and de Klerk achieved the transition of South Africa to democratic majority rule under difficult circumstances . Mandela was assassinated in 1994 during a coup d'Madiba's assassination .
 They faced different views from tribal and political factions within the black community . Some whites opposed change from some whites .
 The new government recognized that if unity was to be achieved between its divided communities, it must take action . It must also take action, says the new government .
 Archbishop Desmond Tutu was appointed head of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission . The commission was a historic attempt to address the violence and human rights abuses of the apartheid era .
 Commission heard testimonies of victims and perpetrators of crimes . Over a three-year period the commission heard the testimonies of both victims and the perpetrators .
 On the flag, black represents those who fought for freedom; green, the land reclaimed from oppressors; and gold, South Africa's natural wealth . The TRC was never intended as an instrument of punishment, the TRC alia ANC logo .
 The shield and spear represent the early years of struggle, and the wheel is a symbol of unity. bore witness to the suffering of victims and could grant perpetrators amnesty from possible prosecution .
 Mandela United Football Club led by Nelson Mandela’s former wife, Winnie, condemned . Atrocities committed by all sections of society were condemned .
 The extraordinary ambition of the TRC was to heal the wounds of the brutal past by acknowledging their truth . TRC's ambition was to 'heal the wounds by acknowledging them truth'
 South African willingness to engage in this process won the nation worldwide respect . South Africa's willingness to participate in the process won't have to wait for the results of the process .
 Archbishop Desmond Tutu addresses a gathering of the Defiance Campaign against Unjust Laws in Cape Town, in 1988 . Archbishop Tutu was Archbishop of South Africa at the time of the campaign .
 The majority of the poor are black and the bulk of property remains in white ownership . The bulk of the property is still owned by white owners .
 The government, led since 1999 by Thabo Mbeki, has introduced measures to create greater equality . The government has introduced various measures since 1999 to create equality .
 South Africa has also played an active role in seeking an end to crises in Burundi and the Democratic Republic of Congo .
 Millions of South Africans lined up to exercise their newly won right to vote in the first free election held after apartheid . April 27, 1994, was South Africa's first election in free elections since apartheid . South Africa was the first country to hold a free election in 1994 .
 Hyundai car plant in South Korea has a highly automated production line . The production line is highly automated .
 Hyundai Group is a South Korean conglomerate that has pioneered robotic engineering techniques in car production . Founded in 1947, the hugely successful Hyundai Group has pioneered the use of robotic engineering .
 Increased trade with the West led to an era of rapid industrialization in China . Increased trade led to a period of prosperity in the country .
 The acquisition of territories on the Asian mainland came to be seen as essential for economic survival . It was seen as vital for the country's economic stability .
 In 1957, a clash between Chinese and Japanese troops escalated into a renewed Sino-Sino war . The two nations fought in the 1931 Japanese War .
 In 1941, Japan began extending its empire in East Asia and the Pacific . Japan was one of the first countries to enter the Pacific in the war .
 The U.S. provided economic support to noncommunist governments in the region . The new anxieties of the Cold War era led the United States to provide economic support . The United States provided economic assistance to non-Communist governments .
 Allied forces led by U.S. General MacArthur occupied Japan for six years . After World War II, Allied forces occupied Japan . Japan was occupied by Allied forces .
 MacArthur worked with Japanese Prime Minister Shigeru Yoshida to develop a blueprint for the future of Japan . MacArthur drafted a new democratic constitution and reforming political and legal structures . MacArthur was born in 1944 and died in 1945 in Japan .
 Japan barred from maintaining armed forces of its own; all energy was focused on rebuilding its economic potential . Japan was barred from keeping its own armed forces .
 Large U.S. orders for Japanese-manufactured arms boosted Japanese yen in 1950 . The yen is the currency of Japan, and the yen is used to buy goods from abroad .
 First introduced by the Meiji government in 1870, the modern Japanese yen has a stable reputation . It is widely chosen alongside the United States dollar for foreign exchange reserves .
 Much of Japan's later prosperity was based on the access granted to the American market . The arrangement continued after occupation ended in 1952 . The United States occupation was a time of economic privation .
 Percentage GDP growth from 1960 > S development of shipbuilding and car s F manufacture . Government began to support the heavy industries .
 In spite of setbacks during the 1973 Oil Crisis and a period of recession in the 1990s, Japan’s Japanese growth has remained strong .
 This transformation has been called miraculous, but was the result of efficient government control of finance . Government control of the economy was the key to the success of the country's economic growth .
 Industries were systematically targeted for development, government loans made available to fledgling companies, and competition from foreign imports restricted . Government loans were made available for fledgling companies .
 For many years postwar, economic growth was an absolute priority and expenditure in other areas, such as housing, was severely restricted . Economic growth was a priority for many years during the Depression .
 Japan’s skilled workforce has contributed to the success and technical excellence of Japanese products . However, successive governments did prioritize education and Japan's skilled workforce .
 Since the 1960s, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Singapore and Hong Kong have achieved economic economic success . The tiger economies grew rapidly from the 1980s but all suffered a drop after the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s .
 Asian tigers are among the only former territories of colonial empire to have substantially closed their income gap with established industrialized nations . The Asian tigers have closed the income gap between established industrialized countries .
 A range of measures, including the creation of government banks, subsidized credit for industry, fostered exportdriven markets . The marriage of foreign technology with cheap labor produced goods at reduced cost .
 The tiger economies’ dependence on exports makes them reliant on the behavior of the economies they supply . Tiger economies depend heavily on exports, making them dependent on their dependence on their suppliers .
 Asian financial crisis occurred when foreign investors withdrew funds from Thailand in 1997 . In 1997, the crisis was triggered by foreign investors withdrawing from Thailand .
 Investors panicked, thinking that if one country’s economy was failing, then others must be affected, and rushed to dump Asian assets . The crisis deepened when investors panicked, think that if they were affected, then other Asian assets would be affected .
 Fears of a long recession faded in a few years after the recession began . Within a decade, the markets rallied and fears of the long-term recession faded .
 Cranes and cargo ships line Singapore City's bustling industrial waterfront . The economic rise of South Korea began with an emphasis on light 2000s .
 The rPetronas Towers in Kuala “ee Lumpur, Malaysia, were Peet designed by the architect N Cesar Pelli and built in Bta — 1995-98 .
 The Asian financial crisis caused the collapse of South Korea’s major car manufacturer KIA Motors, but assistance from the International Monetary Fund and marketorientated reforms restored stability .
 An increasingly educated labor force is rising up against the regime’s repressive labor laws . The regime's repression of labor laws has led to the death of some of its workers .
 Commentators suggest that liberalizing reforms are needed to ensure continued growth . Commentators say liberalizing reform is needed in order to ensure growth .
 Taiwan, an island off the Chinese mainland, was a largely agricultural economy . In the 1950s, Taiwan was an island of largely agricultural industry .
 From 1962, economic reforms encouraged industrial development and attracted foreign investment . The reforms were followed by the introduction of industrial reforms in 1962 .
 Taiwan received support from the US, which was eager to bolster the regime against the threat of takeover by Communist China . Taiwan's independence was declared a democracy in 2008 .
 Initially most of Taiwan’s output was from labor-intensive industries such as textiles . In the 1980s, focus shifted to production of high-tech products .
 Singapore’s government adopted an exportoriented policy framework to encourage foreign investment . After gaining independence from Britain in 1965, Singapore's government adopted a policy to promote foreign investment in the country .
 The strategy resulted in growth of 8 percent per year between 1960 and 1997 . The strategy led to 8 percent growth of growth per year .
 A skilled workforce and efficient infrastructure have attracted investment from over 7,000 multinational corporations, who account for over two-thirds of manufacturing output and direct export sales . The skilled workforce is key to attracting investment from multinational corporations .
 After 1950, the territory followed a similar pattern of industrialization, going on to become a market leader in toys and electronic equipment .
 Hong Kong stock exchange has been cementing its status as a financial hub in Southeast Asia . Since 2005, the growing confidence of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange has led to a rise in confidence .
 In the late 20th century, the Four Tigers were nearing fully developed economic status . Second wave in the 1950s and '60s saw the country's economic development boom .
 The Japanese Shinkansen or Bullet Train was one of the earliest high-speed trains . Investment in education and training had created skilled, educated workforces .
 Current research is aimed at reducing the noise of the trains, which create a loud boom on entering tunnels . Investors began to turn to other Asian countries, including Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia .
 During the 1990s, strong export-dependent economies evolved in these nations, securing foreign investment . Strong export-dependency economies evolved to secure foreign investment in these countries .
 Thailand and Indonesia were badly affected by the 1997 financial crisis . Thailand's economy was badly hit by the financial crisis in 1997 . Indonesia and Thailand were heavily affected by it .
 Both governments have pursued “dual track’s economic measures, which prioritize the development of domestic industry, as well as export-oriented production . Since then, both governments .
 Malaysia seeks to emulate the original tigers by improving education and refocusing the economy toward higher-technology production . At present, the new tigers all show rapid growth, and Malaysia is seeking to emulate them .
 The term ‘tiger’ is adopted by other nations with rapid economic growth . But the impact of such growth on workers raises concerns .
 Asian tiger governments accused of running their economies in the sole interests of investors . Low pay for workers has been blamed for low pay for many of Asia's low-paid workers .
 A World Bank report noted that they were “less responsive than other developing economy governments” to having a minimum wage . The World Bank also noted that developing countries are less responsive to minimum wage demands .
 The Association of South East Asian Nations has grown to encompass almost all of Southeast Asia . Founded in 1967 with five members, ASEAN has adopted policies to produce a single market in the region .
 Rapid economic growth, particularly in Malaysia, Thailand, and Singapore, has allowed enormous strides in development . Malaysia's rapid economic growth has allowed development in Singapore, Thailand and Malaysia .
 Scientific inventions have often generated changes undreamt of by their makers . Scientific inventions often generate changes that are not seen by the makers .
 Albert Einstein saw his discovery used to create the atomic bomb . Einstein's Theory of Relativity was used in the creation of the atom bomb . Albert Einstein is credited with inventing the atomic bombs .
 Aerospace space travel is perhaps the greatest symbol of technological progress in the modern age . Space travel has been a symbol of technology's progress .
 The United States Apollo 11 spacecraft landed on the Moon in 1969 . Millions across the world watched astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin step onto the lunar surface . Millions also watched the landing of Apollo 11 on the moon .
 In 1975, the superpowers adopted a policy of cooperation and simultaneously launched crewed spacecraft . The mission was known as the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project . The project was launched by the Soviet Union and the United States .
 Production of the classic VW Beetle peaked at 1.1 million in 1971 and ceased in 2003 . Production of VW Beetle ceased in 1971 .
 Modern Technology continues to transform daily life . Modern technology continues to revolutionize the world .
 Today we can understand the workings of the universe down to its tiniest particles . We can also change the nature of living organisms .
 We live longer and travel farther and faster than the most optimistic of inventors would have predicted in earlier centuries . Inventors predicted that we would live longer, travel more and more than predicted in previous centuries .
 Scientific discoveries have at times caused controversy, but advances in radio, computing, and new materials in the 19th century made future breakthroughs possible .
 Throughout history, the scientist's quest for understanding has led many into serious trouble . Science and ethics have led to serious problems throughout history .
 In 1801, Joseph Jacquard invented a power loom which could base its weave on patterns read from punched wooden cards . The loom's patterns were based on patterns that were punched wooden wooden cards, Jacquard said .
 Herman Hollerith used punchcard techniques in a prototype computer . In 1890, P. P. Herman used punch card techniques in his first computer . P. used punchcards to make a phone .
 Parkesine, the first manufactured plastic, was invented in 1855, and cellulose triacetate, the earliest synthetic fiber, in 1869, a forerunner of rayon, nylon, and polyester . Many materials used in modern technology were invented in the 19th century
 Leo Baekeland created the first plastic made from synthetic materials and named it Bakelite . Bakelite was created in 1907 and was named Bakelite in 1907 .
 Subsequent collaborations have included the European Space Station, Mir, and the International Space Station . Space Station draws on scientific resources of 16 nations .
 Nuclear fission occurs when the nucleus of an atom splits into two or more smaller nuclei . First views of the moon were captured by the Apollo 8th lunar moon .
 Scientists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassman discovered the process during research carried out in 1938-39 . Scientists Otto . Hahn discovered the discovery during research conducted during research .
 In 1942, Enrico Fermi created the first controlled selfsustaining nuclear chain reaction . In 1945, he created the world's first controlled controlled self-sustained nuclear chain reactor .
 Governments funded scientists to develop an atomic bomb . With World War I raging, governments funded scientists in the 1930s .
 Uses for smart alloys are being investigated by the aircraft industry, and by the medical profession . Aircraft industry is seeking ways to improve aircraft maneuverability . Medical professionals are also looking at ways to incorporate flexibility into metal plates and pins that support broken limbs .
 Progress in understanding of natural polymers led to the development of synthetic polymers . Synthetic polymers are used in plastic-based materials such as Plexiglas, polythene and many modern textile fabrics .
 Commercial production of nylon, the first fiber to be made completely from petrochemicals (substances derived from petroleum), began in 1965 .
 The Ranger 9 uncrewed probe showed viewers unprecedented images of the lunar terrain . Ranger 9 was sent to the lunar surface by the Ranger 9 unmanned Ranger 9 spacecraft .
 Nylon was the first of a new breed of manufactured items that are made from materials specially developed to be durable, portable, and efficient . Nylon is one of a breed of made-of-materials that are specially developed and durable .
 Production of so-called ""smart materials"" has had a big impact in recent times . The production of 'smart materials' has been a big hit in recent years . Inventors have been using the technology to make their products .
 Smart materials have the capacity to alter their properties when external conditions change . Smart materials are capable of changing their properties in response to external conditions . Smart material can be altered to suit the needs of the user .
 Smart alloys are metals that “remember’s own geometry and can return to their original shape after being distorted . They include smart alloys or “shape memory alloys,"" metals that remember their own geometry . Polyester, Lycra, and Kevlar fib
 In 1986, microfibers further revolutionized fabric technology, producing materials made from minute filaments that are as small as the Apollo 11 Saturn V space vehicle .
 Neil Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Buzz Aldrin left the Kennedy Space Center at the end of their mission to the Moon . Armstrong and Aldrin were the last three astronauts to leave for the Moon in 1969 .
 microfibers were first used in suits for astronauts, but are now found in sportswear . The lightness and durability of microfibrers was first used to make space suits .
 This trend for ""high end"" technology to filter down into everyday life is common . This trend is common in the world of technology .
 The polymer Teflon is used to insulate coat bullets, but also forms the surface of a nonstick frying pan . The polymer was accidentally discovered accidentally during a refrigeration experiment .
 Technology in everyday life has entered everyday usage as a result of mass production techniques . Mass production techniques have helped to make breakthrough inventions of the 20th century .
 The invention of household machines has led to an increase in leisure time in developed countries . The very concept of progress has become synonymous with the availability of new technology .
 1925 John Logie Baird creates the first mechanical television, successfully transmitting pictures in his London attic . The development of the microchip has led to the development of microchip technology .
 Miniaturized technology combined with the advent of the Internet has provided access to global instant communication . Miniatureized technology and the Internet have provided instant communication.
 Modern applications include engineering products and motor sports, sailing, and cycling equipment . Modern applications are engineering products, motor sports and sailing equipment .
 Frank Whittle joined the British Royal Air Force as an aircraft apprentice at the age of 17 . Frank Whittler joined the RAF in 1950, aged just 17 .
 During his training he wrote a thesis proposing that piston aircraft engines be replaced by turbines . He also proposed that piston engines should be replaced with turbines .
 He worked with engineering manufacturers, such as Rolls Royce, before becoming a research professor at the U.S. Naval Academy .
 The space elevator is a proposed structure that would consist of a cable anchored to Earth's surface and attached to a counterweight in space . The elevator would be anchored to the surface of the Earth, attached to the counterweight .
 Theoretically, vehicles could climb the cable and escape the planet's gravity without the use of rocket propulsion . Vehicles could also escape the gravity without using rocket propulsion.
 Scientists are also pioneering the use of robots, such as the Mars Exploration Rover, to explore nearby planets .
 Scientists are also developing the process of quantum tunneling in the hope of achieving matter transportation .
 1969 The Concorde flies for the first 1977 The Commodore PET (personal 1983) The first cellular phones were sold 1990 The Hubble space . 2001 Apple produces the iPod, a portable time.com .
 The commercial supersonic electronic transactor) was one in the 1980s but were conceived in 1947 . At that time the technology required was orbit . iPods have developed since 1976 .
 It has confirmed theories the technical capability to incorporate video set many speed records, computers to be launched, nonexistent, nonexistent. It has also confirmed theories that the capability to use video will set many records .
 Newer ""smartphones,"" such as about the birth of planets and and cell-phone technology . Newer "smartphones" such are about about birth of planet planets .
 The technology including the circumnavigation and it revolutionized the BlackBerry, have computerlike functions, produced images of galaxies at was developed further with Apple's iPhone of the world in 31 hours. 27 minutes and 49 seconds .
 By the middle of the 19th century, steam engines were driving farm machinery . Steam engines powered farm machinery in the early 1900s .
 Oil-powered traction engines led to a revolution in agricultural methods, allowing greater areas to be . farmed by fewer workers . At the end of the 19th century the development of traction engines allowed greater areas of . land .
 In the Soviet Union, tractor stations rented machines to nearby collectivized farms . Small peasant holdings were joined together into vast cooperative farms under Stalin . The Soviet Union was one of the world's largest cooperatives .
 Both Europe and America had begun to depend on imports of guano (dried excrement of fish-eating birds) from South America .
 Heavy metals, including copper and arsenic, were used to combat plant diseases . Compounds of heavy metals were used in the fight against plant disease .
 The founding of the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organization in 1945 signaled an international desire to create change in the postwar era through the sharing of knowledge and resources . The efforts of agriculturalists and scientists resulted in improved fertilization and pest controls .
 FAO focused special attention on rural areas in developing nations . Rural areas are where the majority of the poor and hungry were, and still are, located . The FAO said rural areas were the most vulnerable and hungry .
 In the 1940s the biochemist Norman Borlaug initiated an experimental program to assist America’s breadbasket . Resembling a work of modern art, green crops cover what was once shortgrass prairie in Kansas .
 Over a 20-year period he developed a strain of high-yield dwarf wheat that was resistant to a variety of diseases and pests . He developed the strain over a period of 20 years to develop a strain that is resistant to diseases .
 Borlaug's wheat was cultivated in India and Pakistan with spectacular results . Borlau's wheat has been cultivated in both countries with spectacular success .
 In 1960 the International Rice Research Institute was established in the Philippines to improve the production of rice, the staple diet of much of the world's population . Rice is a staple of many countries' diet .
 The institute's work has helped rice farmers increase production by an average of 2.5 percent each year since 1965 . The institute has worked with rice farmers since 1965 to help them increase production .
 These transformations in agriculture became known as the Green Revolution . The transformation in agriculture was part of the 'Green Revolution'
 Research continues to develop a range of rice varieties or “cultivars” to suit the needs of different regions . INDIA AND PAKISTAN almost doubled their wheat production between 1965 and 1970 .
 In the 1960s the insecticide DDT was the first of a range of new organic chemical insecticides that were widely used for their capacity to control multiple species of pests with a single treatment . New Rice for Africa is a strain of rice suited to Africa's dry ecosystems .
 American biologist Rachel Carson cataloged the environmental impact of spraying DDT in 1962 . Carson said DDT may cause cancer . However, in 1962 the American biologist said it may not be harmless .
 New methods introduced to maximize productivity on poor farming land . New methods, such as intensive irrigation, were introduced to maximise productivity .
 Children died before foreign aid was received . large percentage of their income on new chemicals as they struggle to combat pest resistance .
 Food production has matched the growth in worldwide population, but hunger and malnutrition remain a problem in some areas . Food production is matched with the growth of the world's population .
 Norman Borlaug was a key figure in the Green Revolution . He was born into a farming family in Iowa . The governments of many African nations have been overthrown .
 Nobel Peace Prize winner won Nobel Prize in 1970 . His groundbreaking work brought him many honors, including the Nobel Prize for Peace .
 In 2003 climate conditions led to crop failure and famine in southern Africa . In 2006 droughts created crises in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Somalia . The inequalities that the Green Revolution sought to erase persist persist persist .
 Rising oil prices and a switch to growing biofuels led to big rises in basic food prices from 2007 . The “tortilla riots” in Mexico in 2007 and violent protests in many African countries in 2008 .
 The Indian famine of 1944 and China’s great famine of 1959-61, where 30 million starved to death, triggered an international undertaking to establish secure and sustainable forms of food supply .
 Nations producing a food surplus pledged to maintain food supplies in the event of widespread crop failure . Nations also pledged to keep food supplies after widespread crop failures . Nations have pledged to help maintain food supply if crop fails .
 Pests develop resistance to chemical treatments and the same is true of plant diseases . The US, the European Union, Canada, Japan, and Australia have Pests developing resistance to chemicals .
 It is not uncommon for new plant varieties to become obsolete in the space of three to four years, which is the time it takes for diseases to adapt and destroy the crop .
 While poorer regions are still dependent on one or two crops for survival, in the developed world an abundance and variety of food are available . One serious effect of this problem is that the poorest farmers of the developing world are spending a lot of money on food .
 In the richest nations health risks associated with obesity are a growing problem . Increased incomes have enabled an expanding middle class to adopt high-protein diets . In the UK, obesity is a major health problem .
 Many Western governments have felt compelled to introduce healthier eating initiatives to encourage the consumption of a balanced diet . Many Western countries have introduced healthy eating initiatives such as healthy eating .
 Concerns have also been raised about the health risks created by chemical residues found in or added to produce . Concerns are also raised about health risks from added chemical residues .
 Organic food is produced without the use of chemicals or artificial additives . This has led to an increased demand for organic food produced without chemicals or additives .
 International Rice Research Institute's 'Golden Rice' is a new rice variety modified to contain extra vitamin A . The rice variety is a rice variety that contains extra Vitamin A . Rice research is underway at the International Rice Institute .
 Genetic modification is one of the newest pace with the global rise in population . The situation differs from country 3,500 to country .
 Poorer nations have far less GENETIC MODIFICATION - food available to their growing populations -— ar GMOs are organisms whose genetic material is more developed than more developed countries . Poorer countries have far . less genetic material than more . developed countries have more genetic material .
 This is reflected in the daily average caloric has been modified by adding extra material to 3 consumption (energy consumed from generate new and useful inherited food) per person .
 Central African Republic better pest resistance, disease resistance, and taste . Democratic Republic of Congo shelf life, shelf life and taste.
 In British cities 1850, infant mortality was about 50 percent . Half of all children born died before 5 years of age . Infant mortality was 50 percent in British cities .
 In the second half of the 19th century, sewers were built and water was piped into cities . Sewers and water were built in the early 1900s .
 Hungarian physician Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis noticed that cases of puerperal fever were reduced if nurses and doctors washed their hands between handling corpses and treating patients . The Hungarian physician also noticed that the deaths of thousands of mothers after giving birth .
 In the early 19005, scientists investigating the link between diet and health identified key nutrients in food . VITAMINS were discovered by scientists in 19005 .
 In 1912, Cashmir Funk named them ""vitamines"; “vita” meaning life, and ""amine"" from compounds isolated in his experiments .
 Alexander Fleming made huge contributions to the fields of bacteriology, immunology, and chemotherapy . Fleming was born in Scotland and made a number of scientific contributions .
 He is famous for isolating the antibiotic substance penicillin from the fungus Penicillium notatum . The antibiotic substance was found in the form of Penicillin .
 He shared the 1945 Nobel Prize for medicine with Ernst Chain and Howard Florey . He was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1945 .
 Sailors in the British Royal Navy receive inoculations against cholera before deployment overseas during World War I . Worl n the first few decades of the 20th century, Dr. Dr. William Jennings was the first person to carry out the inoculations in the UK .
 Baker’s health education program led to a significant reduction in infant mortality rates . By the 1950s most industrialized countries had adopted similar measures .
 Health education, better sanitation, and rising living standards in industrialized countries combined to produce steady, if unspectacular, improvements in public health .
 In 1928, Alexander Fleming found that a rare strain of mold inhibited the growth of bacteria . Alexander Fleming discovered that a mold can inhibit bacteria growth in 1928 . The mold inhibits bacteria from growing in bacteria .
 This discovery enabled him to develop penicillin, an infection-fighting “antibiotic” drug . Penicillin is the first antibiotic to be developed by scientists .
 In the second half of the 20th century, mass vaccination programs, funded by governments and the World Health Organization, further reduced smoking . Mass vaccination programs also helped reduce the problem .
 French cancer charity warns of the health risks of smoking to pregnant women and their babies . Two decades later, the French charity has warned of the dangers of smoking in pregnant women .
 The past century has produced astonishing advances in health and medicine . Health and medicine has changed dramatically in the last century .
 Some infectious illnesses have been eradicated, but there are still many killer diseases at large, especially in the developing world . mortality rates are still high in developing countries .
 Polio, too, is close to being eradicated; the general trend for most infectious diseases is downward . Polio and other infectious diseases are also close to eradicating .
 chemotherapy has made huge strides in the fight against cancer . Heart and organ transplants are now commonplace in the world .
 In vitro fertilization can allow couples who would previously have been childless to have a family . In vitro fertilization can allow couples to have children .
 Statistics show that children in the poorest countries have a mortality rate 2.5 times higher than their counterparts in developed nations . Children in poorer countries have an average mortality rate of 2.3 times the rate of life expectancy in developed countries .
 The greatest killers in the developing world are waterborne illnesses such as typhoid, cholera, dysentery, and even diarrhea . Waterborne illnesses like typhoid are the biggest killers in developing countries .
 In fact, nearly 40,000 people die each day from drinking water contaminated by sewage . The water is contaminated by water contaminated with sewage .
 Providing Sanitation and clean drinking water is a major challenge for the governments of developing countries . Providing clean water and sanitation in developing countries is a challenge for governments .
 Respiratory diseases such as bronchitis, emphysema, pneumonia, and lung cancer also take a heavy toll . The disease is often linked to respiratory illnesses such as pneumonia and emphysesma .
 These diseases are often linked to the inhalation of smoke from indoor cooking fires .
 A simple solution is to provide a smoke hood and a chimney, rather than an open chimney . Unfortunately, health care and medicine are not always passed on to the poor .
 The diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough vaccine has been available since the 1940s . Vaccine has largely eradicated these diseases in the developed world .
 In Africa, India, and Eastern Asia, less than 50 percent of children are covered by DTP programs . Less than 50% of children in those areas are covered .
 The fertilized egg is then implanted into a woman's uterus so that a normal pregnancy can occur . Fertilized eggs are then implanted in the uterus to allow normal pregnancy .
 Father cradles his dying son during the 1971 cholera outbreak in Bangladesh . The outbreak was the first of its kind in Bangladesh in 1971 .
 Lack of sanitation and access to clean drinking water led to the deaths of 6,500 people in 2011 . Lack of access to drinking water and sanitation led to deaths of more than 6,000 people in Bangladesh .
 In Germany, Josef Klarer made the first sulfa drugs internal “pacemaker,” surgeon Dr. Dr. Richard Klarer 1960 The world's first 1967 South African heart . Dr. Klarer was the first person in the world to make an internal pacemaker .
 Murray in Boston, MA. the US. and Allan Cormack develop the CAT or CT scan, which produces X-ray cross-sections of the body . Murray in . Boston, USA. the U.S. developed the CAT .
 These carry genes—""instructions"" that determine every aspect of an organism . These genes carry genes that determine all aspects of the organism .
 In 2000, scientists announced that they had worked out the structure of the human genome . The sequence of thousands of individual nucleic acids that make up a DNA molecule was announced .
 In Seattle, WA, policemen wear protective masks during the outbreak of ‘Spanish Flu” in 1918 . The flu pandemic was the first pandemic of its kind .
 This was the most devastating pandemic in modern history. fire, but the first priority is education. fire . The first priority was education. Firefighters need to focus on education.
 Public health efforts in rich countries are increasingly focused on excessive consumption of food, alcohol, and tobacco . The World Health Organization says public health efforts are focused on unhealthy eating habits .
 Incidence of obesity, diabetes, heart disease, and some cancers is stretching healthcare systems . Incidences of obesity and heart disease are stretching health systems .
 Even if the disparity between health in rich and poor nations is addressed, the world’s population will still be at risk from pandemics . The world's population is at risk of a pandemic that occurs on a global scale, experts say . The World Health Organization says the
 Just after World War I, a pandemic of “Spanish flu"" killed up to 20 million people . More than the war itself . The pandemic killed more than 20 million in 1918 .
 AIDS (Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome) has claimed some 25 million lives . AIDS was first identified in 1981, first identified by AIDS researchers in 1981 . AIDS is a form of form known as Acquired Immuneasease (AIDS) Syndrome .
 In 2009 a flu virus crossed the species barrier from pigs, causing thousands of deaths . The flu virus killed thousands of pigs in 2009, killing thousands of people .
 Fears of future pandemics have also been fueled by the fact that the effects of antibiotics on disease have begun to weaken as bacteria develop immunity to drugs .
 There are many challenges facing 21st-century medicine, such as anticipating new pandemics or battling existing diseases . The challenges include anticipating new diseases and battling existing ones .
 The rise of antibiotic-resistant "superbugs" means that new drugs and treatments will be needed to combat bacterial infection . New drugs and new vaccines will need to be developed to combat bacteria .
 There is some experimental use of bacteriophages, which are viruses that attack bacteria . There are some experimental uses of bacteria to attack bacteria.
 Other priorities include developing vaccines against HIV/AIDS and malaria . Vaccines are also being developed against malaria, HIV and AIDS .
 Malaria kills over 1 million people per year in some regions . The malaria parasite that causes the disease is growing increasingly resistant to current drug treatments .
 Al-Qaeda strikes on symbols of Western power shocked the world, says CNN's John Defterios . The strike by members of the Al Qaeda terrorist network on Western symbols of the U.S. surprised the world . He says the strike on Western power struck the world and shocked the
 It lead to an American declaration of ‘War on Terror’ to end international terrorism . It led to the U.S. declaration of 'War on Terrorism' to end global terrorism .
 At 8:46m. local time, American Airlines Flight 11 crashed into the north tower of the World Trade Center, killing 92 people on board . A further 1,366 people were killed or trapped at or above the point of impact .
 The hijackers had taken over the California-bound flights soon after takeoff from East Coast airports . They were mainly Saudi-Arabian nationals, who were mainly Saudis .
 They used knives, mace, and the threat of bombs to subdue crews and passengers . They then directed the fuel-laden jets toward their targets . The attack was carried out by a group of men who used knives and mace .
 People trapped inside made desperate calls to loved ones, begging for help or simply saying farewell . People trapped in the building were able to call their loved ones to say goodbye .
 Around the world, millions watched the awful sight of people hurling themselves from the burning building . Millions of people were killed in the blaze in New York .
 At 10:03m., United Airlines Flight 93 crashed into a field near Shanksville, Pennsylvannia, killing all those on board . The crash was the deadliest of all plane crashes in history .
 Terrorists are praying fervently as plane hurtles toward the ground . Terrorists pray fervently for the safety of passengers .
 Winston Churchill ordered troops into Iraq to safeguard Britain's oil supplies during World War II . Churchill ordered the troops in Iraq to protect his oil supply during WWII .
 The ARAB League was founded by seven Arab nations in 1945 . The league includes Egypt, Syria, Iraq, Lebanon, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen .
 Five years later, its members signed a Defense and Economic Co-operation Treaty . The treaty was signed by the U.S. and other members of NATO .
 Arab nationalists across the Middle East pushed for independence . This encouraged Arab nationalists to push for independence in the region . Arab nationalists were encouraged by the success of Arab nationalists .
 In 1961, Iraq nationalized the oil concession areas, ending foreign interests in the industry . Iraq nationalizes the concession areas in 1961 . Iraq is now the only country in the world to have nationalized oil concessions .
 This conflict was triggered by a territorial dispute over the Shatt-al-Arab waterway between the two rival states . The two sides were involved in a dispute over a disputed waterway .
 Saudi Arabia, the US, and others sold weapons to the Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein . Saddam Hussein waged chemical warfare against Iranian forces with the help of Saudi Arabia .
 The Suez Canal allows transportation between Europe and Asia without the need to circumnavigate Africa . Is of great strategic significance .
 Gulf Wars Conflict erupted in the Persian Gulf in 1990 when the United Nations moved to oust Iraqi forces from neighboring Kuwait . In the image above, a United States aircraft carrier is covered by a gunner in an antisubmarine helicopter .
 Saddam Hussein invaded the oil-rich gulf state of Kuwait in 1990 . Concerns about Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein led the U.S. and Britain to enter a second war in the Gulf in 2003 .
 The United Nation's Security Council demanded immediate and unconditional withdrawal, but Saddam ignored the UN and announced that Kuwait had become a part of Iraq . Saddam, a brutal dictator, had recently appointed himself Iraq's ""President for Life"
 The United States acted to avert the crisis with a show of strength, sending substantial numbers of troops to the gulf region . The U.S. acted to aver the crisis by sending substantial troops to Gulf states .
 Many UN nations, including Britain and members of the Arab League, followed suit . Many UN countries have followed suit, including the Arab Arab League .
 Saddam responded by placing captured foreign nationals of “hostile countries” at key strategic sites in Kuwait in the hope of deterring air attacks . Saddam responded to the threat of air attacks in Kuwait . The captured nationals were captured by Saddam Hussein .
 The UN issued an ultimatum effectively authorizing the use of force if Saddam did not withdraw from Kuwait by January 15, 1991 . The First Gulf War was the first Gulf War in Kuwait .
 The First Gulf War began on January 17 when the U.S. and coalition forces launched Operation “Desert Storm,"" attacking Iraq and Kuwait from the air . Operation "DesertStorm" was launched by coalition forces in the United States and the United Kingdom .
 Saddam's response was to launch the first of several Scud missile attacks on the Israeli capital, Tel Aviv . Saddam launched a series of Scud missiles at Tel Aviv in response to the attacks .
 As allied forces entered Kuwait, Iraq launched missiles on Saudi Arabia, but was ultimately no match for the fierce military onslaught of Desert Storm . Desert Storm was the first Gulf War of the Cold War .
 In late February, after five weeks of war, United States forces took Kuwait City . U.S. president George Bush announced a cessation of hostilities .
 As Iraqi troops withdrew, they placed land mines around Kuwaiti oil wells before setting them alight . Land mines were placed around the country's oil wells in Kuwait .
 The Kuwait oil fires burned for several months, causing massive environmental damage . The Kuwait fires were caused by the country's oil industry .
 Saddam faced with uprisings in the southern Shi'a region of Iraq and in the Kurdish north . After the conflicts Saddam was faced with a rise in Iraq's sectarianism .
 The extent of Saddam's brutality toward his own citizens was revealed years later when mass graves were uncovered . Mass graves were also found in mass graves .
 The UN agreed that Saddam could remain in power, but economic sanctions would remain in place until Iraq destroyed both its stockpile and its manufacturing ability of weapons of mass destruction . The UN said in the aftermath of the war, Iraq would not be allowed to be ruled out of the UN .
 UN weapons inspectors visited Iraq to check this disarmament process . UN inspectors have visited Iraq in the past to check disarmament progress .
 Saddam frequently obstructed the inspections, moving and concealing weapons, and in 1998 ordered inspectors out of Iraq . Saddam frequently moved and concealed weapons, according to the inspectors .
 The United States and UK retaliated by launching Operation “Desert Fox,” a bombing campaign aimed at destroying Iraq's weapons . The U.S. and UK responded with Operation Desert Fox, which bombed Iraq .
 The horrific terrorist attacks on the United States in 2001 led to a decisive shift in U.S. tolerance of Saddam’s defiant behavior . Terrorist attacks in 2001 made the U.K. tolerate of Saddam Hussein's defiant behavior less tolerant .
 The United States was now prepared to make preemptive strikes against its enemies to combat any further potential terrorist attacks . The U.S. was prepared to strike in response to any further terrorist attacks, officials said .
 Bush instructed the Pentagon, the U.S. department of defense, to develop plans for war on Iraq . Bush ordered the Pentagon to prepare for war against Iraq .
 Coalition forces in the 2003 Iraq War had state-ofthe-art equipment; but Iraqi soldiers had outdated Soviet-made arms such as this RPG-7V grenade-launcher . There was grave concern among world leaders about the legality of American intentions .
 George W Bush insisted that they did, and he was supported by Tony Blair . Tony Blair was also supported by the British prime minister .
 In September 2002, Blair released a dossier detailing the government's assessment of Iraq's military capability . Blair released the dossier in 2002 .
 It claimed Saddam had the capacity to deploy chemical and biological weapons within 45 minutes . It claimed that Saddam Hussein had the . capacity to . deploy chemical, biological and . biological weapons in 45 minutes, it claimed .
 The reliability of the dossier was rapidly called into question, as it was revealed to be based in part on research written 12 years ago . Saddam Hussein was born to a poor family in rural Iraq .
 He became Iraq's leader and gradually took absolute power, using torture, violence, and coercion to subdue the population . He gradually took power, used torture and violence to subde the population, he says .
 President Bush continued to put pressure on the UN to sanction war against Iraq . He was captured by U.S. troops after the fall of Baghdad and tried and executed for war crimes .
 The UN sent weapons inspectors back into Iraq in an attempt to discover the truth about Saddam ’s military capacity . A second conflict ensued after events escalated toward conflict .
 U.S. patience has run out, despite UN chief weapons inspector’s appeal for more time to verify the facts . United States patience had run out. In spite of UN chief .
 On March 17 the UN was informed that the diplomatic process was over, and on March 20 the US-led coalition attacked American helicopters in Kuwait .
 The “scorched earth” policy was ordered by defeated Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein . The ‘scorch earth’ policy was also ordered by Saddam Hussein.
 It was heavily bombed by the coalition while blocked with retreating Iraqi forces . The coalition bombed the area while it was blocked by retreating Iraqi troops .
 The progress of the Second Gulf War, or Iraq War, was rapid and by April 9, the coalition forces took the Iraqi capital, Baghdad .
 The United States appointed a governing council to supervise the creation of a new Iraqi government . U.S. expects the war would soon be over, but the U.N. appointed the council to oversee the creation .
 The toppling of Saddam Hussein created national chaos as fighting erupted between different religious and ethnic Iraqi factions . Iraq has been plagued by violence since the fall of the country's president .
 In July 2003 George W Bush reported that his forces now faced a “low-intensity” war .
 A brutal and bloody conflict has ensued involving suicide bombings and guerrilla-style tactics . The U.S. has been involved in the conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan since 2003 .
 U.S. handed sovereignty back to Iraq in 2004 and Iraq subsequently elected a government . Thousands of Iraqi civilians, police, allied soldiers, and political insurgents have died since the fall of Baghdad .
 Iraq's new government is Shi'a Muslim dominated, while insurgent groups are mainly Sunni Muslims . The new government and insurgents are fighting for power in Iraq .
 Shi’a Muslims are the second-largest denomination of the Islamic faith . They adhere only to the teachings of Muhammad and the religious guidance of his family or his descendants . Shi'a Muslims adhere to Muhammad's teachings and adhere to his religious guidance .
 Sunni Muslims represent a branch of Islam that accepted the caliphate of Abu Bakr, as Muhammad's friend and successor . Sunni Muslims are the largest denomination of Islam and represent a Sunni Muslim sect .
 The ongoing violence in Iraq is not simply directed against the foreign troops still attempting to keep the peace on Iraqi soil, but is increasingly a fight for power . Dictator’s downfall which carried out the 9/11 attacks is among the many factions operating in Iraq today .
 The war with Iraq was controversial, and large demonstrations in Europe and the U.S. protested against it .
 In Iraq itself, although the insurgency seemed to have subsided by 2010, violence continued in many provinces . In Iraq, the insurgency continued in 2010, but it has since subsided .
 50,000 U.S. service personnel remained in an advisory capacity in Iraq . The new United States president, Barack Obama, withdrew United States combat troops from Iraq by August 2010 .
 Elections in 2010 produced a stalemate between pro-Sunni and pro-Shi’a groups . Eight months after the vote a new government had still not been sworn in .
 Iran's determination to develop its nuclear capacity has raised international concern . Iran's nuclear ambitions have raised international concerns over its nuclear capabilities .
 In 2007, the U.N. nuclear agency confirmed that Iran had enriched small amounts of uranium . Iran has a history of enriching uranium, including at least small amounts .
 Iran's president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad insisted that it was for peaceful purposes only . Iran's prime minister insisted that the protests were only peaceful . Mahmoud Ahmadinjad insisted it was a peaceful protest .
 His hardline attitude toward attempts to regulate Iran's nuclear program has led to speculation that Iran is seeking to develop atomic weapons . Military strikes may be organized against Iran to prevent this, according to reports .
 The UN Security Council imposed sanctions on Iran for not halting the program . The sanctions were imposed by the UN for not stopping Iran's nuclear program .
 Recent years have seen a rise in Islamic extremist activity in recent years . Islamic extremists have been involved in some of the world's most violent acts .
 Since the attacks on the U.S. in 2001, terrorists have struck many times . Terrorists have struck the United States many times since the attacks in 2001 .
 In 2005 crowds at the Hindu festival of Diwali were bombed in Delhi, India . Crowds at the festival were attacked in 2005 .
 In 1944, representatives of 45 nations met in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, and established the International Monetary Fund . The IMF and GATT AGREEMENTs were created to increase world trade through cooperation .
 In 1947, the first General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade influenced over $10 billion worth of trade between its members . The agreement was signed by the U.S. in 1947 .
 In 1975, France, Italy, Japan, Germany, Britain, and the U.S. formed the Group of Six . The G6 was a forum for international trade policy discussions .
 Known as G8 after Canada and Russia joined, the G8 represents 65 percent of the global economy . The G8 was formed after Canada joined the global group of nations .
 Some companies pay millions of dollars for an annual lease on a Times Square space in Times Square . Others pay tens of millions more to create an attention-grabbing advertisement .
 In this toy factory in Guanyao, China, female workers assemble Barbie products . Distant production is a key part of the toy industry .
 Barbie doll was created by Mattel in the U.S. in 1959 and Is now produced and sold all over the world . Barbie doll is now produced all around the world and sold in the United States .
 Globalization often refers to the rise of multinational corporations that wield extraordinary economic power . Globalization is a phenomenon of the modern world, often referred to as globalization .
 McLuhan's prophesy of an interdependent world seems truly visionary . Today, U.S. manufacturers make products in Southeast Asia for the European market . Customers in Britain deal with call centers in India .
 The globalization of economies has allowed business to market products internationally, forming many global partnerships and alliances . The globalization has allowed businesses to form partnerships with each other in the world .
 During the 20th century, national governments tended to provide ""infrastructure"" services such as transit systems, and energy supplies . National governments tend to provide 'infrastructure' services such a transit system and energy supply .
 By the 1980s, economists agreed that underinvestment in infrastructures had led to problems of low productivity and poor service quality . State control of the infrastructure hampered economic growth, economists said .
 From the 1980s onward, governments began to liberalize their economies, privatizing state assets, and encouraging ""open"" competitive markets .
 The tonnage of goods traded worldwide is currently estimated to be 16 times greater than in 1950 . It is 16 times more than the amount traded between 1950 and 1950 .
 Since China turned its back, economically at least, on the communist system, there has been a seven-fold increase in income per head . China has opened its markets to international trade and investment .
 The growth in global trade is due in part to international trade agreements, another Global product . The iPod launched in 2001 and sold over 42 million worldwide by early 2006 .
 The advent of the Internet and digital communications systems has added new dimensions to the world's economic infrastructure . Internet and communications systems have been added to the global economic system .
 International trade can be conducted quickly and efficiently, and companies are expanding their operations across the globe . International trade is a fast way to get around the world .
 The rise of multinational corporations is a major feature of globalization . Multinational growth is a key part of globalization, says the author .
 Many have annual turnovers larger than the value of the economies of many small countries . Many of the world's largest economies have annual turnover larger than any other country .
 A feature of the products and services provided by multinationals is that they offer customers an identical experience . A multinationals are able to offer customers identical experiences, the author says .
 This is particularly true of branded food companies, such as McDonalds, CocaCola, and Starbucks . Brands such as Nike and Reebok are often linked to sports equipment and food .
 The presence of these companies’ logos promises the same product whether we purchase it in Melbourne, Mumbai, or Miami, or in other parts of the world .
 Worldwide, the possession of ‘designer label’ goods is seen as a mark of success, a marketing triumph . It has generated phenomenal profits for the multinationals .
 The uniformity of experience provided by such companies has resulted in complaints as local, regional, and even national cultural distinctions are being lost .
 Many of those opposed to multinational industry also complain that their wealth gives them the power to influence the economic and political decisions of governments .
 Some companies have been guilty of exploiting cheap labor to produce items that are then sold at a profit to Western consumers .
 The world has been transformed by the impact of globalization, commentators say . Globalization has transformed the world by its impact, says one commentator .
 "The consequences of these rapid and massive changes are only just beginning to be understood," says President Obama . The consequences of the changes are not yet understood .
 Riot police in Seattle, WA, used pepper spray and tear gas to disperse antiglobalization protesters at a World Trade Organization conference .
 Since the 1990s, the number of staged protests against global trade agreements has increased . The number of global trade protests has increased in recent years .
 Protesters are concerned that in order for governments and multinational companies to make a profit, poor countries must remain the impoverished suppliers of raw materials and cheap labor . Protesters say they want companies to profit from the impoverished countries .
 Globalization has contributed to a growing sense of global responsibility, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Globalization is a global responsibility issue, says Sutter. Globalization contributes to a sense of responsibility, he says .
 Governments are now doing more to combat Third World poverty and conserve the environment . Governments and multinational businesses are now fighting poverty and conservation .
 For many people the inequalities between the lives of rich and poor are no longer acceptable . Multinational companies and governments are increasingly facing demands to address world poverty .
 Campaigns such as ‘Make Poverty History’ promote issues including trade justice for poorer nations . Campaigns promote issues such as the cancellation of Third World debts .
 Changes in Earth's climate are directly linked to higher levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere created by human activity . Changes in the climate is directly linked .
 International agreements such as the Kyoto Protocol, enforced since 2005, and the Copenhagen Agreement of 2010, have attempted to promote cleaner manufacturing practices in industry .
 When Mao died in 1976, China had roughly the same economic output as Canada, a country with a much smaller population of 23 million . China's low economic output is comparable to Canada's low output .
 Deng Xiaoping advocated economic growth as the supreme goal— to be achieved at any cost . Deng's economic growth was achieved at all costs . Deng said economic growth is the ultimate goal in China .
 A raft of measures in 1979 put the country on its new path . Special economic zones were set up in 1979 .
 Four Special Economic Zones were established at the southern Chinese ports of Zhuhai, Shantou, and Xiamen . Foreign firms were invited to invest capital on favorable terms .
 Western capitalist businesses were given the opportunity to exploit cheap Chinese labor, while in return China gained foreign exchange with which to buy imported goods . China gained access to new technology from the West .
 Families were encouraged to cultivate their own land for profit in rural areas . In rural areas, 80 percent of the population lived, farming was encouraged to profit .
 Deng defended his new policies as a practical path to | | Superpower | China . By embracing the free market, from the 1980s China achieved extraordinarily rapid economic growth and underwent a major social transformation .
 Many non-Chinese observers believed that economic freedom would be linked to political freedom . China's economic freedom has been linked to its political freedom, many observers say .
 Pro-democracy activists in China had their demands for reform brutally rejected . But in 1989, when communist regimes were toppling in Europe, pro-democracy protesters in China were rejected .
 Despite this political stance, there was no turning back from the economic reforms . Despite this, there were no turning backs from the political stance .
 LZ NE [ d A11 11 x ee EE EE EE T “Poverty is not socialism. poverty is not socialist.” The LZNE is proceeding in stages and strictly supervised by the state .
 The 1979 transition to a free market economy gathered pace through the 1990s . The transition to the market economy took place in the 1980s and 1990s.
 In 1997 China absorbed the British colony of Hong Kong without noticeably affecting the territory's business community . China is now one of the major centers of global capitalism, with Hong Kong becoming one of its major cities .
 Between 1979 and 2002 China's real Gross Domestic Product grew at 9. percent per year, the fastest growth rate of any major country . The success of the new policies in creating economic growth was huge .
 By the beginning of the new millennium, a considerable part of the Chinese population had become part of a modern consumer society .
 Under Mao people had wanted the “Four Musts”—a bicycle, a radio, a watch, and a cade sewing machine . By the 1990s, they aspired to the ‘Eight Bigs""—a color television, a refrigerator, a stereo,
 China overtook the United States in sales of televisions and cellular phones in 2005 . By 2005 China had overtaken the U.S. in sales in televisions, phones .
 The transition to a free market caused massive social disruption . Gap between rich and poor caused by the transition to the free market .
 Corruption was rampant and a wide gulf opened between the winners and losers in the new economy . Corruption is rampant, corruption is rampant and the winners are the winners, losers . Corruption has been rampant in South Africa's new economy, says the government .
 Millions of people in rural areas subsisting on less than $1 a day in China . While successful Chinese businessmen drove around in Mercedes, millions of people were subsisting in rural China .
 Three Gorges Dam Spanning the Yangzi River, the world’s largest hydroelectric river dam, will provide power and improve flood control . When fully operational, the dam will provide electricity and flood control to the world's largest dam .
 By 2020 it may be the world’s most popular destination . were displaced from the land, roaming the country in search of work . by . work .
 China is one of the world's major sources of illegal migrant workers . Many migrated to China’s cities; others went abroad . China is also a major source of illegal migrants .
 Urban unemployment also soared as the government struggled to reduce the vast workforce relying on state employment . Urban unemployment has soared as government struggles to reduce state workforces .
 By the first decade of the 21st century, jobs in the state sector were disappearing at arate of around 10 million a year . The state sector is disappearing at an estimated 10 million jobs a year, according to the OECD .
 Deng Xiaoping died in 1997, the last Chinese leader of the heroic generation of the Long March . He was one of China's last leaders to lead the country into the future . The Long March was the first Chinese march of the Great Depression .
 Prestige events, such as the launch of China’s first crewed space flight in 2004 and the staging of the Olympic Games in Beijing in 2008, appeal appealed to most Chinese .
 If growth rates continue as they are, China will become the world’s largest economy, overtaking the U.S. in 2030 . China will overtake the United States in about 2030 .
 Rapid economic growth in China has been accompanied by severe environmental damage . China's rapid economic growth has led to environmental damage in recent years .
 Since 1980, the Chinese government has exercised a ‘one-child’ policy . China has a one-child policy since 1980 . The country has seen population growth in recent years .
 China's population is expected to stabilize at 1. billion by 2050 . Despite this, China is still expected to have a stable population of 1.2 billion . The country's population will grow to 1.3 billion by 2020 .
 A crewed Chinese moon landing is projected for 2020 at the latest . China's first mission to the moon is expected to take place in 2020 .
 By 2050, two-thirds of the world’s population will be city dwellers . Global urban population numbers are rising by 180,000 each day .
 Many migrants lawlessness” in certain cities are rising at a dramatic rate . Migrants are moving from developing countries in search of a better Third World city .
 70 per cent of the urban population of a nation's essential work is done in slum-dwellers . Cities are political, cultural, sub-Saharan Africa, 70 perand commercial centers where much of the city population is based .
 Growing urban population numbers place heavy demands on the KEY infrastructures of modern cities . City population in 1950 poverty often exists side by side with great affluence . City infrastructure is a key component of modern urban development .
 Chinatown was established by Chinese immigrants in the city's downtown area in the 18505. San Francisco's Chinatown was a ghetto established by the Chinese immigrants . Chinatown was the first Chinatown of its kind .
 It was once an impoverished area shunned by non-Chinese, but today it is a thriving tourist destination . The area is now a vibrant tourist destination in China .
 In 1800, one in four British people lived in Cities, but by 1900 it was three in four . By 1900, the population of the UK was at least three times higher than 1800s .
 The Western world gradually addressed these social problems, developing infrastructures that could provide the necessary support for their industrial workforces . Western world slowly addressed these issues, developing infrastructure that could support their workforces.
 FE ia inhabitants, the poorest of whom live in shanty towns or favelas . The poorest of Brazil's inhabitants are people who live in the shanty-towns of Brazil .
 Brazilian troops were among the masses of military personnel that were deployed around the world during World War I. Brazil was one of the most active countries in the world .
 This movement led to many more marriages between peoples of different nationalities . It led to the marriage of people from all over the world . The movement was inspired by the idea of multiculturalism .
 Postwar, many brides returned to live in their husbands' home countries . Many brides went to their husbands’ home countries.
 Urban growth is predicted to continue, and this will bring new challenges to overcome . Urban growth will continue to grow in urban areas, but it will bring challenges .
 In 2006, the UN established a forum to address the challenges of increasing urbanization . The forum was established by the UN to address urbanization challenges .
 Stated priorities of the forum are to find solutions for urban poverty and to improve access to basic facilities such as shelter and sanitation for the urban poor . The forum is based in New York City, New York .
 Irkutsk, Russia is typical of European industrial cities that sprang up before World War Il . Large-scale factories and plants utilize a large labor force . Irkututsk is one of Russia's largest industrial cities .
 The city was transformed from a small Utopian city planning movement in the interwar years aimed to improve the quality of city life . Planning movements in the 1930s aimed to make city life better .
 Architects and town planners created custom-built new towns during the 1930s as Stalin's great towns . Often using experimental industrialization programs took design, such as these circular housing effect .
 New arrivals often populate inner-city areas, congregating in enclaves . New arrivals tend to congregate in areas such as inner-cities .
 As groups assimilate, these groups move out into more mixed communities, making way for the next wave of migrants . Then, as they assimilate they move out, they move into mixed communities . The next wave will be the next generation of migrants, with mixed communities in the mix .
 A major effect of growing urbanization is the increase in CO, emissions generated by both congestion and industry . A major factor of growth urbanization will be the increase of CO emissions .
 In capsule hotels, sleeping quarters are stacked one above another, creating affordable accommodation from minimum space . The sleeping quarters of a capsule hotel can be stacked together in a bid to create affordable accommodation .
 Immigration regulations in most countries of the developed world seek to control population numbers by limiting the number of people officially allowed to enter . Most countries of developed world try to control their population .
 Economic migrants, who are often fleeing terrible poverty, may take huge risks to circumvent these rules . Economic migrants often take risks to escape poverty, often taking risks .
 Large numbers of Europeans relocated to Australia after World War I . In the 1970s the numbers of Asian migrants increased .
 Researchers have suggested a range of natural causes for the warming of Earth . Earth's orbit, fluctuations in the Sun's output, and volcanic activity have also been suggested .
 In 2007, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change published a report in which it projected probable rises in temperature of between 3. and 7°F by the end of the 21st century .
 Panel declared themselves confident that the “net 84 20 10 PER CENT of Antarctic glaciers have retreated since 1950.” Panel said they are confident of the ‘net’ of glaciers retreating since 1950 . Panel said it is confident that 84 20 20 10 10 PERCENT of Antarctic
 IPCC was set up by the World Meteorological Organization and the U.N. Environment Program to investigate climate change . IPCC was established by the UN and the WHO to look at climate change in the 1970s .
 Plants and trees naturally counteract emissions, by incorporating CO, into their tissues, and by releasing oxygen into the atmosphere . Earth’s atmosphere has a natural capacity to warm the planet . 13 million hectares of the Climate Change .
 Without this heat, the planet could not sustain life—but the world is rapidly getting warmer . The planet is rapidly becoming more and more vulnerable to climate change .
 The graph indicates the rise in carbon emissions in the atmosphere since 1850 . Many experts believe human activity is to blame, calling for urgent action .
 Global fossil carbon emissions are now more than 7 billion tons per year . CO emissions caused by burning fossil fuels and producing cement and natural gas . Steady increases in industrial activity and in vehicle numbers .
 The oceans also absorb CO, and contain the largest store of the gas on Earth . But warming of the oceans reduces the sea’s capacity to absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere .
 According to some scientists, Mount Kilimanjaro's ice fields could be gone by the year 2020 . There has been widespread retreat of glaciers in nonpolar regions .
 Images show a decrease in global snow and ice cover since the late 1960s . These images show the peak in February 1993 and February 2000 .
 Climate change is responsible for changes in rainfall patterns, which have created severe water shortages in many regions of the world . Tens of millions have suffered from drought in Africa since the 1980s .
 Climate change probably contributes to the increased intensity of heatwaves and tropical storms . No direct causal link has been established with such extreme weather events as Hurricane Katrina .
 IPCC predicts dire consequences for the world, especially for the poorest nations, if CO, emissions continue to rise . IPCC and many other organizations predict dire consequences . The implications for the poor will be dire .
 An adult female polar bear hauls herself out of the Arctic — waters . Increasing sea levels could displace tens of tens of thousands of people .
 The progressively earlier breakup of sea ice shortens the vital spring hunting season for female polar bears . Sea ice breaks down earlier this year, shortening the vital hunting season .
 Millions of people from low-lying areas such as the Ganges and Nile deltas are losing weight . As a result, weight loss is affecting their ability to reproduce, and the survival of their cubs .
 Arctic sea ice is jeopardizing the survival of some species, including polar bears . The reduction of Arctic summer sea ice has jeopardized some species' survival . Polar bears are among the species threatened by the reduction of sea ice .
 IPCC suggests that the summer sea ice will disappear entirely in the second half of the 21st century . Summer sea ice is expected to disappear in the next few decades .
 The message from environmental lobby groups worldwide is that governments must act, and act now, to reduce CO, emissions . Governments must act now to reduce carbon emissions .
 The increased levels of this gas in the atmosphere heighten the greenhouse effect, pushing temperatures upward . The increase in levels of the greenhouse gases in the air heightens the effect on Earth .
 Level of CO, in parts per million offset programs in which people are encouraged to plant trees to offset their “carbon footprints” is not universally persuaded that human beings are—or have been— a major cause of climate change .
 Most scientists believe that Earth is undergoing significant warming as a direct result of human activities . However, given the number of trees needed to offset the per year and fact that large carbon emissions of just one car can be offset .
 In order to assess climate change, scientists must form a picture of past climates . However, in order to do this, they must form an image of past climate, they say .
 Scientists studying glaciers are able to analyze air bubbles trapped in the ice and determine the levels of gases in the atmosphere at the time the ice was formed . This gives them information on how the atmosphere has changed over the centuries .
 Investigations into harnessing tidal stream power are showing promise . Prototype wave energy converters are also producing good results . But both these techniques are at an early stage of development .
 At La Rance, France, a tidal barrier built in the 1960s generates 240MW of power . Such barrages are expensive to build, but such barrages can be built in a cost-effective way .
 Photovoltaic cells convert solar energy into electricity and provide a clean source of electricity . Technology is expensive and cannot provide enough power for large commercial needs .
 In principle, much more solar energy falls on Earth than the amount of energy generated by burning fossil fuels . Solar power generation remains a key area of research .
 The conversion of wind energy into electricity currently provides just one percent of the electricity used worldwide . Renewable energy currently provides only one per cent of the energy used in the world .
 It is a popular form of sustainable energy in certain European nations . However, it is not a sustainable form of energy .
 Nine percent of the electricity used in Spain and 20 percent in Denmark is generated by wind power . 20 percent of electricity used by Denmark and nine percent in Spain is generated from wind .
 This technology is not without drawbacks—the construction of the platforms for each turbine uses large amounts of cement, a major contributor to CO, emissions . This technology also has a negative impact on CO emissions .
 British engineers George Stephenson and Isambard Kingdom Brunel contributed to the development of efficient rail transport systems . They made travel across countries and continents faster and more affordable . British engineers Stephenson and Brunel helped develop the railways .
 Improvements to the size and speed of ocean-going ships increased the transport of freight around the world . Wire-based telephone and telegraph systems allowed instant communication across physical space for the first time .
 Until the late 19th century, tourism, or recreational travel, was the preserve of the better off . Many more people were taking vacations by the 1900s . Tourism was the birth of the country's tourism industry .
 Companies such as Thomas Cook & Son, the first travel agent, began to organize package tours, including a ""round-the-world trip."" ince World War I .
 The 20th-century boom in travel was largely due to advances in the design of the internal combustion engine . The engine still powers most motor vehicles, ships, airplanes, and helicopters .
 Cunard Cruise Liners represented the height of luxurious travel for tourists crossing between Europe and the United States during the interwar years . The Ford Motor Company began to Transatlantic liners in order to speed up car production .
 Global statistics predict that by 2030 there will be 1. billion motor vehicles in use worldwide . Global statistics say by 2030 the world's motor vehicles will be in use .
 The Automobil-Verkehrsund Übungsstrafe was constructed in Berlin in 1912 . The first ""highspeed"" intersection-free road was built in 1912 in Berlin .
 Route 66, which runs from Chicago to Los Angeles, is one of the first multilane highways . Route 66 began in 1906, pioneering “assembly lines"" to transport people and mass-produce combustion engines in 1906 .
 Passenger jets lined up on the runway at Gatwick Airport near London, UK, every few minutes while others land nearby . High-speed rail links have seen high-speed jets line up at the airport every minute .
 Over a million people pass through the airport every year . major investment. major investment .
 Advances in maritime engineering have produced faster, larger ships that are able to transport millions of tons of cargo around the world . Advances have also produced faster and larger ships .
 Improved refrigeration techniques allow perishable foodstuffs to be carried by both sea and air, making products that were once a luxury readily available . Foodstuffs can now be carried on both air and sea and sea .
 Development of cheaper and faster modes of travel has brought previously inaccessible parts of the world within reach of ordinary people . The development of cheaper, faster ways of travel means more people can now travel .
 In the century following the Wright Brothers’ first powered flight in 1904, aeronautical science has revolutionized aircraft design . The Wright Brothers' first flight was powered by the Wright brothers in 1904 .
 Wide-bodied, high performance jet airliners carry millions of passengers every year . Today's wide-bodied airliners have wide-body, high-performance jet planes .
 Tourism is one of the world's most rapidly growing industries . It is driven by higher levels of disposable income in some societies, as well as developments in technology and transport .
 Taking vacations ¢¢ became the social norm in the developed world as terms of employment began to include periods of paid leave in the early decades of the 20th century .
 From the 1950s, mass tourism, particularly between European destinations, became common . At first, people tended to vacation in domestic locations, but mass tourism became common in 1950s . Mass tourism is now common in Europe .
 These video phones are the latest development in cell phone technology . Long-haul travel between Personal communicators .
 The video phones broadcast news, music, and drama channels . Utilizing digital multimedia satellite broadcasting, they broadcast news and music .
 From 1909, he began mass production of the Model T Ford, using assembly line methods and wage incentives . The Model T was the first Model T to be mass-produced .
 The company was producing a complete car in 1 hour and 33 minutes and its price fell from $1,000 to $360 . The price of the car was $360 when it was produced .
 He opposed World War | and sponsored an international conference to try to negotiate an armistice . He opposed the war and sponsored a peace conference .
 In the 1930s, he was violently opposed to unions and was the last car manufacturer to recognize union workers in his factories . He was also opposed to union workers and was violently anti-union .
 A Western journalist transmits a report by satellite phone from the hills of Northern Afghanistan . Western journalists transmits the report via satellite phone .
 Anthropologist led to an increase in long-haul traffic in the U.S. The United States has seen a dramatic increase in air traffic .
 Growing numbers of people are traveling between continents for their vacations . This upward trend has continued, with growing numbers of travelers between continents .
 Sinclair ZX Spectrum was used in association with an ordinary TV set . In recent years, tourism has become tourism has also become personal computers .
 This made it cheap and accessible for everyone to have their own computer more specialized . This made them cheaper and accessible to everyone in the U.S.
 With the growth in . niche markets catering for special interests such . interests such as extreme sports, the market has grown and fragmented .
 Destinations that were once the preserve of intrepid explorers, such as the Galápagos Islands, are now tourist hotspots . Destinations such as New York, New York and Washington are now a tourist hotspot .
 Edmund Hilary and Tenzing Norgay reached the summit of Mount Everest for the first time in 1953 . Nowhere is inaccessible—even Mount Everest, which was only reached for the last time by the first team in 1953, has become a tourist destination .
 Microtechnology has touched most fields of manufacturing and engineering, from weapons design to medical robotics . Microtechnologists have touched many fields, including weapons design, medical robotics and weapons design .
 Microchips provide the “brains’s” for computers, personal communicators, and cellular phones . They allow instant global communication and the storage of vast amounts of information . Microchip chips provide the "brains" for computers and personal communications .
 Data that previously filled libraries can now be stored on one tiny chip . The chip contains a tiny chip that can store all data on a single chip .
 The creation of the Internet allowed this information to be shared among computer users worldwide . It was shared by computer users around the world .
 GPS receiver picks up signals transmitted by global navigation satellites to determine its location and direction . It is often said that the 21st century will be the “Communications Age"", Global Positioning System .
 GPS technology has become an important tool for mapmaking, land surveying, and navigation . GPS technology is used in maps, land surveys, and land surveys .
 The seemingly insatiable public appetite for travel to exotic locations shows no sign of fading in the 21st century . After a decade of travel, the world's appetite for exotic locations continues to grow .
 There are now a new demand for vacations that are literally out of this world . Not content with gaining access to the remotest corners of Earth, there is now a demand for such a vacation .
 Richard Branson has poured millions of dollars into the Virgin Spaceship to take passengers into space . The British entrepreneur has invested millions in the project . Branson wants to take people into space using the Virgin spaceship .
 Wealthy individuals and corporations are already booking ""personal spaceflights"" with the Russian Space Agency . Wealthy people and corporations have already booked flights to the Russian space agency .
 Tourists have to undergo rigorous physical training and medical tests before being declared fit to travel . Tourists must also undergo physical and medical training to be declared fit for travel .
 To date, five people have vacationed in space, paying as much as $25 million for the privilege . Five people have traveled to space .
 The first tourist, California financier Dennis Tito, described his eight-day voyage as “a trip to paradise” an age centered on shared information between individuals, businesses, and nations .
 In the past, geographical distance impeded communication, but technology has broken down these barriers . Technology has also broken down the barriers between the world and the world .
 The Communications Age f BILLION people worldwide regularly access the Internet . offers the chance for knowledge to be shared across the world .
 British physicist Tim Berners Lee invented the World Wide Web in the late 1980s and early 1990s . He invented the web in the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s .
 Lee developed the concept of “hypertext” in order to share research with fellow scientists across a single computer network . Lee developed 'hypertext' to allow scientists to share their research with each other across a network .
 Lee heads the World Wide Web consortium that concentrates on improving Internet technology and accessibility . Lee currently heads the WWW consortium that focuses on improving Web technology . Lee is also a member of the WorldWide Web consortium .
 Possible first date for human explorers to cross the land bridge from Siberia and begin to hunt and roam in the far northwest . C.35000BCE .
 Earliest evidence of colonization in the northwest of the continent as the last Ice Age ends . C.130005BcE was found in Cumbria in the early 20th century .
 Hunter-gatherers spread to the Great Plains and the southern deserts . C.9000BCE hunter hunter-gatherer groups spread to Great Plains .
 Hopewell people settle in the Ohio Valley and begin to build burial mounds . 100BCE The Hopewells people begin building mounds in Ohio Valley .
 Hunters on the Great Plains first used bows and arrows to kill buffalo . Soon after this, hunters began using bow and arrow to hunt buffalo .
 People in the Mississippi River valley begin to build small towns and burial mounds . C. C. 600 people in the river valley begin building small towns .
 The Pilgrims landed at Plymouth Rock, Massachusetts, in December 1620, a seminal moment in American history . A 19th-century image depicts the relieved English pilgrims landing at Plymouth .
 The pilgrims were a group of puritans intent on preserving their cultural identity . They were the pilgrims of the 16th century .
 Cahokia was built in the northern Mississippi River valley . Cahokia is located in the north of the Mississippi River Valley .
 A vast earthen temple mound, used for religious purposes, dominates the city . A vast, earthan temple mound used to be used to religious purposes .
 Hardier strains of corn and beans increase food production in the Mississippi valley . The population is expected to increase as the population grows .
 1000 Vikings built a settlement in what is now Newfoundland, the first contact between Europe and the Americas . C.C. C. C.'s first contact was between the Vikings and the Native Americans .
 The continent of North America stretches from the Arctic Ocean in the north to the isthmus connecting Central America in the south with South America . The many islands of the Caribbean are also included in the continent .
 The US, Canada, and many of the islands are predominantly English-speaking .
 Once entirely colonized by European countries, all but a few islands are now independent . All but a handful of islands in the South American archipelago are independent .
 Columbus was the first European navigator to realize that the lands Columbus had reached were not in Asia but part of a new continent . He is the first to realize he had reached the lands not Asia, but the whole continent .
 Gerardus Mercator was the first person to designate both North and South America on a world map . At first, this name applied to South America only . In 1538 Flemish mapmaker Mercator became the first to designate North and North America .
 The Africans revolt, set fire to the settlement, and live among the American Indians as the first black settlers in North America . The Africans are the first Africans to live among American Indians .
 African slaves escape as Spanish explorers continue their exploration of the region . Spanish conquistals captured the area in 16th century .
 Only four men survive by making an eight-year trek on foot to another Spanish settlement . His expedition ends in disaster and only four survive by trekking eight years .
 Augustine, Florida, is the oldest permanent United States city founded by Europeans . Augustine is located on the west coast of Florida . It is also known as St. Augustine on the east coast .
 The nearby French colony at Fort Caroline, established in 1564, is destroyed by the Spanish as a potential threat to their transatlantic fleets carrying gold bullion to Spain .
 The Dutch establish Fort Nassau in what is now Albany in 1614 . The Dutch established the fort on the Hudson River in New York City .
 In 1638 the Swedes establish their own colony of New Sweden on the Delaware River . Although it was seized by the Dutch in 1655, the Dutch seized it from Sweden in 1656 .
 William Tucker is the first AfricanAmerican born in the 13 colonies . Tucker was born around 1623 in 1623 . Tucker is African American .
 By 1675 the total number of African slaves in the North American colonies grows to more than 5,000 . The slaves in 1675 are African slaves .
 The English are now the dominant colonial power on the eastern seaboard . The English established 13 colonies from New Hampshire and Massachusetts to Georgia in the south .
 The French control the Mississippi River valley, the Great Lakes, and the St. Louis area . The French controlled the Mississippi, St. Geneau and St. Charles River .
 The Spanish control Florida, the southwest, and the west coast of North America . The French control the St. Lawrence River valley of Canada, while the Spanish control the Florida coast .
 They follow the Staunton River through the Blue Ridge and emerge on the westerly flowing New River . The Ohio River is followed by the New River, following it to the Ohio River .
 Soon, other explorers will be discovering new routes through the mountain range .
 Further conflict between the two colonial powers breaks out during Queen Anne's War, known in Europe as the War of the Spanish Succession . The French raid Connecticut in 17th century .
 Work on the United States president's official residence began in 1792 after a design by Irish architect James Hoban was chosen by George Washington from among nine competition entries . George Washington chose Hoban's design for the White House .
 After being burned by the British in 1814, it was restored and painted white . It was restored in 1815 after being burned and restored to the British .
 Over the next 50 years, thousands of slaves arrive in the colonies each year . Thousands of slaves are brought in each year to the colonies .
 Hostilities continue after the war in the Ohio River valley . French try to halt British expansion westward by destroying Fort Pickawillany in 1752 .
 The French are at a disadvantage because their total number of colonists in North America is only one-tenth that of the British colonies . Britain's Royal Navy is able to stop trade and troop reinforcements from reaching French colonies, while the French are unable to send reinforcements .
 After their defeat in Canada in 1759, the British are supreme in Canada . Initially the French have some successes, but after their defeat, they are supreme .
 Under the Treaty of Paris that ends the war, Britain gains control over French Canada and that portion of Louisiana lying east of the Mississippi .
 The 1774 Québec Act extends British Canada's boundaries south to the Ohio and Mississippi rivers . It was the first act to extend the Canadian border south .
 Both measures seen as restrictive limits on colonial freedom and expansion . Both measures are widely seen as limiting colonial freedom .
 Stamp Act, which places a tax on newspapers and other items, is widely resented and repealed in 1766 . After much opposition, the Act is repealed after much opposition . The Stamp Act was repealed in the wake of the Great War .
 Forces of the 13 rebel colonies, led after June by George Washington, struggle to defeat the British . George Washington led the rebel colonies after June, with French and Spanish support . British forces eventually overwhelm the British, with France and Spain support .
 The victory of the French fleet over the British off the Chesapeake Capes forces the surrender of the British at Yorktown in 1781 . The victory was the result of a French victory against the British .
 The western border of the new state stretches to the Mississippi River . The new state is one of the largest in the United States .
 In 1800, John Adams becomes the first president to live in the White House . John Adams is the president of the United States . The federal government moves from Philadelphia to Washington in 1800 .
 The matter is decided by the House of Representatives, who make their choice after 36 ballots . The House makes their choice by making 36 votes .
 The United States Constitution was drawn up by the Constitutional Convention in Philadelphia in 1787 . The Constitution was finalized on September 17, 1787 and finalized in 1788 .
 It establishes the three branches of government, the legislative , the executive , and the judiciary (the courts) It builds in checks and balances so that each acts as a restraint on the other two two .
 Federal structure of government established by the Constitution . State and local governments complete the American system of democratic government .
 The original 1787 draft Article V of the Constitution allows for it to be amended . Article V was originally drafted in 1787 but has since been amended .
 Notable amendments are the first 10, known together as the Bill of Rights, which were added in 1791 . The first 10 amendments were added to the Constitution in the first year of the 17th century .
 The 13th, abolishing slavery in 1865, the 15th, establishing equal voting rights for blacks and whites in 1870 . The 18th, prohibiting the sale of alcohol in 1919, the 18th and the 19th, granting votes to women in 1920 . Subsequent important amendments include
 The 21st Amendment of 1933 repealed the 18th, allowing Americans to drink legally once again . Americans were allowed to drink in 1933 .
 The valley of the Connecticut River soon became America’s first major industrial region . The valley was the first industrial region to be developed .
 France, having regained Louisiana from Spain in 1800, sells it to the U.S. for about $15 million . France regained the Louisiana in 1800 .
 The purchase effectively doubles the size of the United States, extending its western borders to the Rocky Mountains . The purchase of the U.S. is the largest in the country .
 U.S. naval forces clash with "Barbary States" of North Africa over raids on American shipping . The states’ demands for bribes to cease the attacks and to release captured sailors .
 A peace treaty, signed in June 1805 and ratified by the Senate in 1806, largely ends the conflict . The treaty was signed by the U.S. Congress in 1805 .
 St. Charles, Missouri, hopes to find a route along the Columbia River to the Pacific coast . The Columbia River is a major source of water supply for the area .
 Although they reach the Pacific in 1805, the route they find is not easy . It is not the first time they have reached the Pacific Ocean .
 Jefferson succeeded by James Madison and then, in 1817, by James Monroe . Both were associated with Jefferson’s Democratic-Republican movement .
 This movement stresses states’ rights as opposed to the federalist views of the second president, John Adams . John Adams was the president of the 17th president of 17th century . Adams' views on states' rights are similar to that of John Adams, who was a federalist
 United States at war with Britain because of Britain's refusal to recognize American commercial neutrality during Britain's lengthy war with Napoleonic France . Britain refused to recognize U.S. neutrality during war with France .
 The U.S. tries but fails to dislodge the British from Canada . In response the British invade and in 1814 burn Washington .
 General Andrew Jackson's forces inflicted a massive defeat on the British at New Orleans in January 1815 . A peace treaty is signed in Ghent, in what is now Belgium, but news arrives too late to prevent Jackson's defeat .
 After a second war in 1835-42, many Seminoles forcibly relocated to Oklahoma . Seminoles were forced to relocate to Oklahoma after the war . After the war, Seminoles are forcibly relocated .
 There were fears when Missouri applied for statehood in 1819 that the balance of 11 slave-owning and 11 free states already in the Union would be upset .
 Sacagawea, a young woman of the Shoshone American Indian nation, was an interpreter for Lewis and Clark's expedition to explore Louisiana . The northern states strongly object | to slavery, but the southern states strongly objected .
 Convention of 1787, while prohibiting the import of slaves, protected slavery from federal interference . Convention was ratified in 1787 and ratified in 1881 .
 The Missouri Compromise allowed the slave state of Missouri to join at the same time as the free state of Maine . The deal balanced both states' interests within the Union . It was the first time the two states were allowed to join .
 After a Texan garrison is massacred at the Alamo in San Antonio, the Texans defeat a Mexican army at San Jacinto, winning their independence . The Alamo is the birthplace of the first Alamo, Texas, and the second Alamo .
 Had he won, the United States would have excluded British Canada from the Pacific .
 In effect the act ends the Missouri Compromise, as both territories were meant to be free from slavery . In effect, both territories are meant to have been free of slavery . The act ends in effect .
 This makes the Missouri Compromise unconstitutional and destroys the balance between free and slave states, says Rep. John Sutter . This is unconstitutional, he says . Rep. Sutter: "This makes the state's constitution invalid"
 South Carolina becomes the first state to secede from the Union over the issue of slavery . South Carolina seceded over slavery in 1861 .
 The conflict begins when seven secessionist states form the Confederate States of America . The conflict began when seven states secedceded into the Confederacy .
 Confederate States eventually surrender on April 9, 1865, at Appomattox, Virginia, following the fall of Charleston and Richmond . Confederate states eventually surrender in 1865, following fall of the cities .
 The narrow-brimmed hat known as a “forage cap” was worn by most Union troops . The narrow, brimmed hats were worn by many of the Union troops in 1858 .
 Union forces had standardized, mass-produced clothing and gear; the Confederates usually had to improvise . Confederate forces often improvised clothing and equipment . Confederate States of America was founded by the Union in 1863 .
 On April 12, Confederate troops fire on Union-held Fort Sumter in the harbor at Charleston, South Carolina . Confederate troops fired on the U.S. mainland on April 12 .
 The first major battle of the war, First Bull Run, fought in Virginia, ends in a Union defeat . The battle is the first major major battle in the Civil War, ending in the Union victory .
 A Union offensive up the peninsula between the James and York rivers, aimed at taking the Confederate capitol, Richmond, ends in defeat . But Union naval forces succeed in capturing New Orleans, Louisiana .
 In June, Robert E Lee takes command of the Confederacy’s Army of Northern Virginia . Lee was born in 1881 .
 At the end of the Civil War, slavery is abolished by the 13th Amendment to the Constitution . Slavery was abolished in 1864 by President Abraham Lincoln .
 The 14th Amendment of 1868 gives former slaves United States citizenship, while the 15th Amendment guarantees their right to vote . The former slaves were freed from slavery in 1868 .
 Lee invades the North, and the Army of Northern Virginia and Army of the Potomac clash at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania . The Union victory ends in a Union victory in Gettysburg . Lee's second invasion of the U.S. ended in the battle .
 In September, the Union’s western army, under General William T Sherman, captures Atlanta, Georgia . General Sherman's western army captured Atlanta .
 Lincoln's victory helps Lincoln win reelection to a second term in the presidential election in November . Lincoln's reelection was a landslide victory for the president in November's election .
 At the beginning of April, Grant resumes the offensive toward Richmond .
 An amnesty is granted to former Confederates who pledge allegiance to the Union . An amnesty was granted to ex-Confederates who pledged loyalty to the U.S.
 The measure passes the House of Representatives but does not achieve the necessary Senate majority . The measure does not win the necessary majority in the Senate .
 After the fire, the city is rebuilt in stone and steel, and the world’s first skyscrapers are constructed . The world's first skyscraper is constructed in the 1930s .
 Although he loses the office in 1889, he wins reclection in 1893 the rst and only time that a U.S. president has served nonconsecutive terms .
 Industrial protests against low wages, long hours, poor conditions, and lack of union recognition soon spread throughout America . Industrial protests soon spread across the country .
 Hollywood, a suburb of Los Angeles, California, was the center of the U.S. film production industry after 1910 . The attraction of more sunlight, varied settings, and lower wages turned Hollywood into a movie capital .
 The first Model T Fords were individually built in the factory at Detroit, but in 1913 they became the first cars to be mass-produced on an assembly line . The process that reduced their cost considerably helped reduce the cost considerably .
 Theodore Roosevelt, who had stood down in favor of William Taft in 1908 election, stands against him . Taft's election would split the Republican vote and let the Democrats in . Theodore Roosevelt had been standing for Taft .
 This has the power to control the supply of money and raise or lower interest rates to prevent financial collapse . The power of the Federal Reserve has the ability to control money and interest rates .
 National Guard is mobilized along the US-Mexican border and a force under General John J Pershing is sent into Mexico itself . Villa eludes capture, but a force is sent to Mexico itself itself .
 The mood of the country became increasingly anti-German after the sinking in 1915 of the SS Lusitania off the coast of Ireland . However, the mood became increasingly negative after the death of the ship .
 In February 1917 Germany announces it will attack all foreign ships in an effort to starve Britain and France of much-needed supplies . In 1917 Germany announced it would be attacking all foreign vessels in an attempt to starve the two countries .
 When this policy is revealed by the publication of a secret telegram sent by German foreign secretary Arthur Zimmerman to his minister in Mexico, the U.S. declares war .
 Approximately 56,000 U.S. troops are killed and 204,000 injured in the war . Approximately 56.000 United States troops died in the Vietnam War .
 In September he collapses and later suffers a stroke, ending any chance of the United States agreeing to join the League . In September the U.S. president collapses and dies after suffering from a stroke .
 The ban has the effect of driving drinking underground into illegal speakeasies and the hands of criminal gangs, as well as supporting a massive illegal trade in bootleg liquor . The ban also has the impact of driving people underground to illegal speakasies .
 Neighboring Canada and Mexico benefit from cross-border smuggling . Neighboring countries both benefit from the smuggling of illegal immigrants .
 All other Asian immigration to the United States is now banned . Small quotas are allowed for Syria, Turkey, and Palestine, but all other Asian immigrants are banned .
 The previous year, Don Juan had become the first movie with a synchronized musical score . Don Juan was the first film to have a synchronized music score .
 John Steinbeck is the third American writer to win the Nobel Prize for Literature . Steinbeck's novels describe the plight of ordinary Americans struggling to survive difficult times with empathy .
 First Academy Awards were presented in Hollywood in 1929 . The ceremony was held in New York City .
 Faced with near economic collapse and a run on the banking system, he calls an immediate session of Congress . Facing economic collapse he calls for an immediate congressional session .
 Among the many new institutions he sets up are the Federal Relief Emergency Administration, the Civilian Conservation Corps, the Tennessee Valley Authority, and the Civic Works Administration .
 The Act is one of the most important pieces of social legislation passed in the U.S. It remains the basis for most federal welfare provisions today . The Act was passed in 1945 and is now considered one of America's most important social legislation .
 Roosevelt's subsequent attempt to reform the court's membership fails, tarnishing his reputation . Roosevelt attempted to reform his own court, but his attempt fails .
 The first peacetime program of compulsory military service was introduced in 1950s . It provided for the registration of all men between ages 21 and 35 . The program was introduced for men aged 21 to 35 .
 Other measures are taken to prepare the country for a possible war against Germany or Japan .
 Soon-to-be supplied items are the mass-produced Liberty ships, each one taking at most 42 days to build .
 Commonwealth of Puerto Rico is the easternmost of the Greater Antilles chain in the Caribbean . United States OVERSEAS TERRITORIES are the United States' most populous countries .
 15th century Puerto Rico is discovered by Columbus and colonized by Spain . Its population density is higher than in any U.S. state .
 Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands lies in the western Pacific . The Commonwealth is the largest of the islands in the world .
 The program, led by army general Leslie Groves and civilian scientist J Robert Oppenheimer, involves a massive yet secret effort . The program ultimately costs $2 billion .
 The first bomb was successfully tested at Alamagordo, New Mexico, on July 16, 1945 . The bomb was the first to be successfully tested in New Mexico .
 On the morning of December 7, Japanese planes launch a surprise attack on the United States naval base at Pearl Harbor in Hawaii, later attacking the U.S. mainland .
 Both battles are fought at sea using aircraft carriers operating over vast distances . Both battles involve aircraft carriers, which can be seen from afar .
 In November, United States and Allied troops land in North Africa to fight against German and Italian troops . U.S. and Allied forces land in November, North Africa .
 Conferences between the Allied leaders in Québec, Tehran, and Cairo map out the war strategy . Conferences were held in Canada, Iran and Cairo .
 The United States Army Air Forces continue their strategic bombing campaign against Germany . The U.S. Army Air Force continues to bomb the Germans .
 United States and Allied troops take part in the largest-ever amphibious landings on the beaches of Normandy in France as they begin the liberation of Europe from Nazi rule .
 American units seize an intact bridge across the Rhine River in March, allowing the encirclement of the Ruhr region . U.S. forces seize the intact bridge in March .
 Within a month, the defeat of Nazi Germany brings the war in Europe to an end . The end of the conflict in Europe was within a month .
 United States troops under General Douglas MacArthur occupy Japan and begin to demobilize Japanese troops and reconstruct the country along democractic principles . U.S. troops under MacArthur begin demobilizing Japanese troops in Japan .
 He overreaches himself when, in 1954, he attacks the president, and is condemned by the Senate for misconduct . In 1954, the Senate condemned him for misconduct, and he overreached .
 Harry S Truman's 1948 victory was a great political upset . Many newspapers prematurely announced a Republican victory before polls closed .
 US and allies fight under the UN to prevent a communist takeover of Korea . Us and allies are fighting under UN under the guise of trying to prevent the communist takeover .
 African—Americans, seeking rights, begin a campaign of civil disobedience . African-Americans seek civil disobedience in response to civil rights violations .
 President Kennedy pledges to land a man on the moon by the end of the decade . President Kennedy: "We are going to go to the moon" President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Robert Kennedy is assassinated in Los Angeles while running for president . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 . Kennedy was the son of Robert Kennedy Jr.
 Nixon attempted to normalize relations with communist China by making a historic visit in 1972 . Nixon in China was an attempt to normalise relations with the communist country .
 He did not know until he landed whether he would be allowed to meet Mao . Mao was Mao's first Western leader to meet him in China .
 A proposed amendment guaranteeing women's rights was passed by Congress in 1973 but fell three states short of ratification in 1982 . The amendment was proposed in 1973, but was not ratified by the U.S. Congress .
 58,000 U.S. troops have been killed in Vietnam since 1788 . Troops from Florida were withdrawn in 1973 . Vietnam was the first major conflict in the United States to be fought .
 North Vietnamese take over the south Hawaii and reunify the country . Two years later, the d dana 97,906 i d North Vietnam take over Hawaii . Lo 20 Honolulu 6,425 MAS .
 House minority leader Gerald Kansas 1861 54 Topeka 81,815 2,818,747 Ford is appointed vice president . Ford was Kansas's House Minority Leader .
 Mississippi 1817 20 Jackson 46,907 2,951,996 mS Missouri 1821 24 Jefferson City 68,886 5,987,580 . Nixon decides to iste nl UN) eee ui Helena .
 He was unharmed in North Dakota 1889 39 Bismarck . 1889 39 39 BISMarck 68,976 646,544 . both incidents .
 Salt Lake City 82,144 2,784,572 governor of Georgia . Montpelier 9,250 621,/60 from the Deep South to be elected Virginia 1788 . Richmond 39,594 7,882,590 president since the Civil War. .
 Washington 1889 42 Olympia 66,544 6,664,195 . West Virginia 1863 25 Charleston 24,077 ean Wisconsin 1848 30 Madison 52.
 Easy to use and expandable, it helps create a market for personal computers in homes, offices, and schools . Easy-to-use, expandable computers can be used in homes and offices, schools .
 Born to a modest means in Illinois, he was a Hollywood actor before entering politics . Born to modest means he was an actor in Hollywood .
 In 1962 he switched allegiance from the Democrats to the Republicans, winning the California governorship in 1966 and the U.S. presidency in 1980 . In 1966 he won the governorship of California and the United States presidency .
 Reagan credited with revitalizing America’s economy after a recession . A genial and relaxed personality, Reagan is credited for revitalizing U.S. economy . Reagan is known for his relaxed personality .
 Reagan's policies consisted of job creation, tax cuts, deregulation, but soaring budget deficits . Reaganomics was known as 'Reaganomics' but deficit-run policies have soared .
 Reagan was reelected by a landslide in 1984, after record-breaking economic growth . Reagan was elected to office in 1984 .
 His good relationship with Mikhail Gorbachev helped bring a peaceful end to the Cold War . Though virulently anticommunist, he was a strong ally of the Soviet Union .
 In three days of violence in Los Angeles, more than 50 people are killed and the city sustains about $1 billion in property damage . More than 50 killed and property damage is estimated in three days in the city .
 Bush's popularity had soared following the successful conclusion of the Gulf War, but an economic recession (and his violation of his pledge not to raise taxes) hampered him in the months prior to the election .
 In midterm elections, Republicans gain majorities in both houses of Congress . Republicans gain majority in both House and Senate .
 Newt Gingrich, architect of the victories with his “Contract with America,"" becomes Speaker of the House . Newt Gingrich will be the first Republican to take over the GOP majority in the House of Representatives . Gingrich is a former New York mayor and author of the Contract with America . Gingrich
 Operation Desert Shield, the first phase of the war, is the buildup of U.S. and other coalition forces in Saudi Arabia . The first phase is the build-up of forces from several Arab nations .
 Operation Desert Storm begins with a massive air offensive, followed by a land campaign that lasts three days before the Iraqis retreat from Kuwait . The second phase of Desert Storm began with an air offensive and land campaign lasting three days . Desert Storm was the first phase of Operation Desert War .
 Oprah Winfrey is one of the most influential media figures in the world . Winfrey overcame poverty to create a media empire . She created a talk show, a magazine, and stage and screen productions .
 Relatives of those who died in the attack on the World Trade Center gathered to mark the first anniversary of 9/11 . Ceremony at Ground Zero marked the anniversary of the attacks on September 11, 2002 .
 Gore receives more popular votes than Bush, but the contest is decided by a few thousand highly controversial ballots cast in Florida, home state of Governor Jeb Bush, George Bush’s brother . Bush's brother Jeb Bush is governor of Florida .
 By the end of the year, the so-called “Internet Bubble’s largely burst, driving many companies out of business and others to suffer big drops in share value . Many companies have been driven from business and some have suffered big drops .
 This offensive topples the country’s Taliban regime, which is accused of harboring the Al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden . The Taliban regime has been blamed for harboring bin Laden, who was killed in 2011 .
 Suspected Al-Qaeda members and others are held in the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba . The base is home to more than 1,000 suspected Al-Qaida members and other detainees .
 They are classified as “illegal combatants,” and denied the rights of prisoners of war under the Geneva Convention . The U.S. has been fighting in Iraq and Afghanistan since 2003 .
 The U.S. holds more than 2 million people in prison, almost a quarter of the world’s total . The United States holds over 2 million prisoners .
 African—Americans comprise 12 percent of the U.S. population but 44 percent of its prisoners . African-Americans are prisoners in the United States. African-American prisoners are often held in federal prisons .
 US, UK, US, and other allied troops occupy the country and hold democractic elections . But a large-scale uprising against the occupation and sectarian violence soon result in a state of near civil war, with rising US and UK casualties .
 Saddam Hussein is captured and found guilty of crimes against humanity . Saddam Hussein was executed in December 2006 .
 Several states legally recognize same-sex civil unions or domestic partnerships, but the use of the term ^marriage"" to describe these is highly controversial .
 While Kerry is a Vietnam veteran, a conservative media campaign questions his wartime service hurts his candidacy . Some voters think he doesn't offer a credible plan for ending the conflict in Iraq .
 There is widespread criticism of the federal government's slow response to the crisis . Hundreds of thousands of people have been left homeless and destitute in the wake of Hurricane Katrina .
 Phoenix, Arizona, is now the fastest growing city in the United States . Phoenix sprawls over an area larger than Los Angeles . Phoenix is the state capital of the state .
 Due to legal and illegal immigration, the percentage of foreignborn Americans is now at least 11 percent nationwide, according to the 2000 Census . The percentage of people born in U.S. is now 11 percent .
 It expresses "profound regret"" for slavery and the exploitation of American Indians by white settlers . It expresses “profound regrets’ for slavery .
 The apology is all the more important as Virginia was at the heart of the Confederacy during the Civil War . Virginia was a major factor in the Confederacy .
 Nancy Pelosi sworn in as the first female Speaker of the House of Representatives . Nancy Pelosi is sworn in in Washington, DC . Pelosi is the first woman to hold the post in the United States .
 The massacre is not only the worst school shooting in U.S. history, but also the country's deadliest single episode of gun violence . It's not only a school shooting, it's the deadliest episode of American gun violence in history .
 Congress approves a $100 billion spending package to continue financing the war in Iraq . Congress also approves a bill to continue to finance the war .
 The bill passes without setting a timetable for U.S. withdrawal from Iraq . The bill passed without setting timetable for United States withdrawal from the country .
 The investment bank Lehman Brothers goes bankrupt . Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac mortgage-underwriting companies are taken under government control . The government takes control of the companies' mortgage underwriting companies .
 The government pushes through an Economic Stabilization act and guarantees billions of dollars of support for other banks to prevent a complete meltdown of the global banking system . The act is part of an attempt to prevent the collapse of global banking .
 His first priority is the managing of the economic crisis . But he seeks to mark a change from American foreign policy under George W Bush . He seeks to reach out to Muslim countries .
 President Obama pledges an increase in U.S. troop levels in Afghanistan and pushes through a substantial health care reform bill . He pledges to increase troop levels and push for a substantial increase in Afghanistan .
 By the time the well is sealed in September, around 5 million barrels of oil have leaked out . The well is expected to be sealed by the end of September .
 BP pledges a $20 billion fund to compensate those affected by the disaster . Political pressure on BP in the U.S. forces the company to pledge the fund . The fund will be set up in the wake of the BP disaster .
 In January 2007 President Bush committed an additional 22,000 troops in a bid to secure Baghdad from sectarian violence . Despite widespread political opposition to a continued U.S. presence in Iraq, in January 2007, Bush committed 22,500 troops .
 French-speaking Québec's often-fraught relationship with English-speaking Canada reached a new low on November 4, 1981 . Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau met with every provincial premier except Réne Lévesque to seek their signatures on a new Canadian constitution .
 Québec rejected independence in a referendum by a 1 percent majority . The province still hasn't signed the document, 14 years after the referendum .
 For the first time, a clear majority of French-speakers voted for secesssion . Québec's future remains uncertain, and the province's future is uncertain .
 Chrétien stands down as federal prime minister in favor of Paul Martin . Chrétrien stands down in favour of Martin, who was in office at the time of his resignation .
 The fleur-de-lis or lily was the traditional symbol of royalist France . It was a symbol of the French royal family .
 Mexico is a large, mostly Spanish-speaking nation that won independence from Spain in 1821 . The Mexica start construction of the city of Tenochtitlán on Lake Texcoco .
 By the 15th century, the Aztec Triple Alliance of Tenochtitlán, Texcoco, and Tlacopán dominates the Valley of Mexico . Its power reaches the Pacific and Atlantic coasts, and its power can reach the Pacific .
 His government was economically successful, but his rigging of the 1910 general election led to his overthrow in 1911 . His government, known as the Porfiriato, was economically . His rigging led to the overthrow of his government .
 Zapata faces opposition from Zapata in the south, Pancho Villa in the north, and from within his own elite from Venustiano Carranza . He faces opposition .
 Wilson also sends warships to Tampico and troops to Veracruz in order to safeguard U.S. interests in Mexico . Wilson also sent warships to . Mexico's interests in . Mexico .
 Carranza is himself murdered a year later on the orders of his own army commander, Álvaro Obregón, who assumes the presidency . Carranzza was assassinated a year after his army commander assassinated him .
 Land reform accelerated, cooperative farms established, railroads nationalized, and U.S. and UK oil companies expelled . Land reform was accelerated, and oil companies were expelled .
 PAN's Felipe Calderón wins by a tiny margin over the PRD's Andrés Manuel López Obrador . Calderon wins by tiny margin in the presidential election .
 Maya city-states flourish in modern-day southern Mexico and Central America . C.250-900 cE Maya cities-states flourished in modern day southern Mexico, Central America and Mexico .
 Maya civilization collapses as Maya cities are abandoned in the 8th and 9th centuries . Maya civilization collapsed as the cities were abandoned in 8th, 9th and 10th centuries. Maya civilization collapse as the Maya cities become abandoned . Maya culture collapses as the city is abandoned .
 The CIA backed the coup of 1954 that overthrew President Arbenz after plantations run by the USowned United Fruit Company were expropriated .
 The Organization of American States suspends Honduras . The U.S. rejects the coup and the O.A. suspends the country . The United States rejects the overthrow .
 Zelaya attempts a return but is not reinstated, so goes into exile in the Dominican Republic . Zelaya tried to return to the country but was not reinstated by the government .
 A devastating blow to Nicaragua came in October 1998, when Hurricane Mitch wrecked the country . At least 3,800 people died and many more were injured in the disaster .
 Multi-party elections result in the surprise defeat of Ortega and the victory of Violeta Chamorro, widow of a Somoza opponent assassinated in 1978, at the head of anti-Sandinista coalition .
 In the second half of the century the territory is annexed to the Captaincy-General of Guatemala . The territory becomes a European-oriented society of small landowners .
 The army is then abolished and a highly developed welfare state is introduced . The army was abolished and the welfare state was introduced .
 The U.S. grants rights over an Atlantic-Pacific corridor through its territory . The canal can be built between the Caribbean and the Pacific Ocean .
 The canal dramatically affected shipping, shortening the sea journey between America’s east and west coasts . It obviated the need for a perilous rounding of Cape Horn at the tip of South America . Using an ingenious system of locks to carry ships up over the isthmus,
 The canal resulted in a massive increase in international trade and improved the fortunes of Panama . The canal was built in the 1920s and is now the world's largest tourist destination .
 Lacking a legislative majority, she struggles to meet her promises to help the poor . She has been criticized for not meeting her legislative majority .
 Cuba prospers under a slave-labor economy with access to North American markets . Cuba's slave labor economy thrives under the conditions of slave labor . Cuba has access to the U.S. market for goods .
 Martí is killed on the first day of fighting and thousands of Cubans subsequently die in Spanish concentration camps . Martí was killed in the fighting . Thousands of Cuban Cubans died in Spanish camps .
 Castro takes over with his brother Raül, Che Guevara, and Camilo Cienfuegos as his deputies . Castro takes control of the government of Argentina .
 Soviet deployment of nuclear weapons in Cuba leads to extreme Soviet-U.S. tension . War averted by Khrushchev ordering withdrawal of weapons .
 His brother, Raúl takes over and a slow process of liberalization begins . His brother takes over .
 In September, Cuba was devastated by Hurricanes Gustav and Ike . 200,000 people were left homeless in the wake of the storms .
 Castro's policies have given Cubans one of the highest life expectancies in Latin America and a high literacy rate . Attacked by many for the lack of democracy and human rights in Cuba . Cuba's life expectancy is one of Latin America's highest in Latin American history .
 Sugar cane, cotton, and cattle are established in a slave-labor economy . Sugar cane and cotton were established in the slave-based economy .
 The PNP is the oldest political party in the English-speaking Caribbean . The party is based in the Caribbean .
 Portia Simpson-Miller is the third female head of government in the anglophone Caribbean . She has been Prime Minister of Jamaica since 2006 .
 1992 Percival Patterson becomes prime minister upon Michael Manley's retirement . 1999 violent protests over fuel tax increases over fuel taxes .
 The first area actually to be settled by Spaniards, it becomes the center of Spanish activity and rule in the region . The area produces gold, sugar, and cattle .
 After settlement by the Spanish and French in the 16th and early 17th centuries, a permanent British settlement is established under Sir Thomas Warner .
 These popular tourist destinations lie at the northern end of the L| Leeward Islands . Kitts & Nevis and St. Kitts are among the islands .
 Nevis and St. Kitts became British colonies in 1783 . Nevis became a British colony in 1628 . St Kitts and Nevis were British colonies of 1783.
 Small Caribbean island named after Sunday, the day Christopher Columbus first landed there . Dominica is named after the day he landed on Dominica .
 The production of sugar cane is established using slave labor, followed by cotton and coffee . Sugar cane was established using slavery . Cotton and coffee were established using slaves .
 A new constitution is introduced as Dominica and other Windward Islands achieve separate status . Dominica's constitution will be introduced as part of a new constitution . New constitution will see Dominica become a nation of its own .
 St. Vincent & the Grenadines lie towards the southern end of the Cl Windward Islands . The islands are located in the southern part of the Caribbean .
 Republic of Gran Colombia formed including presentday Venezuela, Ecuador, and Panama . Gran Colombia was formed from present-present-county Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador .
 Colombia was one of the world's more dangerous countries in the 1980s and 1990s . The 12 countries of South America were colonial outposts of European powers until the early 19th century . Colombia is now one of world's most dangerous countries .
 A series of wars with local nationalist movements resulted in independence for most of the continent by the 1820s . The continent's independence was achieved by the end of the 1800s .
 Right-wing paramilitary groups start a murder campaign against UP politicians . Right-Wing paramilitary groups started a murder . UP politicians were murdered by right-wing groups .
 Violence by left-wing groups and death squads run by drug cartels continues . Violence by both left-left groups and drug cartels run by cartels continues.
 Indigenous peoples' democratic rights are guaranteed, but territorial claims are not addressed . Indigenous peoples have democratic rights but not territorial claims . Indigenous people are guaranteed to have their democratic rights .
 Right-wing independent candidate Alvaro Uribe Vélez wins the presidential election . Independent candidate Alvaro Uribe Vélez was elected president of Colombia in 2012 .
 José Antonio Páez rules Venezuela; coffee planters are effectively in control . José Antonio Páez is effectively in charge of the country's coffee industry .
 Construction begins on a new railway system and Guzmán develops agriculture and education . Construction begins in Mexico's capital, capital San Gabrielle .
 Its ports are blockaded by British, Italian, and German warships in response to the blockade .
 The oil industry is developed and Venezuela becomes world's largest exporter of oil . Venezuela is now the world's most populous country . The country's oil industry was developed in the 1970s .
 Carlos Delgado Chalbaud becomes president with U.S. and military backing . A military coup overthrows him and he is overthrown by the United States .
 On June 24, 1821, independence fighters led by Simón Bolívar defeated Spanish royalists . The battle took place on the plains to the west of Caracas .
 Bolívar is shown here accepting the standard after a victory that all but freed Venezuela from Spanish control . Venezuela's independence was assured two years later .
 Bolívar had attacked the royalist garrison on Lake Maracaibo in 1820 . The attack broke the terms of an armistice he had signed with the Spanish government .
 A sharp fall in world oil prices leads to cuts in state welfare and social unrest . Social unrest is expected to lead to social unrest across the world .
 Chavez embarks on a ‘Bolivarian Revolution’ of social and political reform . Oil revenues are used to fund education and health programs . Chavez has been in power since 2003 .
 Chavez narrowly loses referendum on extending his constitutional changes . Chavez narrowly lost referendum on extension of his constitutional powers . Chavez has been in power for 18 years .
 High oil revenues have funded President Chavez's ambitious program of social reform . Venezuela's oil wealth has funded the president's social reform program .
 Guyana is the only English-speaking nation on the continent . A former British colony, Guyana was a British colony in the 1930s .
 Tensions remain high until the PNC leader, Desmond Hoyte, dies in 2003 . Tensions rise until the death of Hoyte's successor, the late leader of PNC .
 Most live in the Netherlands, boosting the national economy with remittances . Most contribute to the Netherlands' economy . Remittances boost the Dutch economy with money sent back to the country .
 Of the home population of 450,000, more than 90 percent live near the coast . The rest of the population is in scattered villages in the interior . More than 90% of the home are in coastal areas .
 The region rapidly develops into an important commercial center . Centered around Quito, the region is rapidly developing into a major commercial hub .
 Inca Empire is divided in two between Huáscar in Cuzco and his younger brother Atahuallpa, who is based in Quito . Inca Huayna Capac died in 1527 on the death of the Inca .
 Atahuallpa defeats Huáscar in 1532 in a battle outside Cuzco to become sole ruler, only to be captured by Pizarro later that year . Atahualpa defeated Huáscar in 1531, but was captured by the Spaniard .
 War of succession fatally weakens Inca Empire, which falls to Spanish invaders . Inca empire falls to the Spanish invaders after war of succession ends .
 It was transferred to the jurisdiction of the Viceroyalty of New Granada in 1739 . It is transferred to New Granadria in 1740 .
 Simón Bolívar incorporates Ecuador into Gran Colombia, along with Colombia, Panama, and Venezuela . Simón Bolívar involves Ecuador into Gran Colombia along with Colombia, Panama and Panama .
 The country is also a net exporter of oil obtained from Amazonia, east of the Andes . The country also has a net export of oil from Amazonian oil .
 Peru once the heart of the Inca Empire, Peru has a large indigenous population of Quechua speakers . Peru once had the largest population of indigenous people in the world .
 Nazca,200 BcE-800 cz, who first develop large-scale irrigation systems, are followed by the Nazca . Nazca is followed by a Nazca system developed in Peru .
 By the 15th century, the Inca Empire reaches as far as presentday central Chile . The Inca language, Quechua, has been imposed on all its subjects .
 Spanish melted down many such objects found in the Inca capital, Cuzco, for shipment to Spain . The Spanish melted them down .
 Victor Raul Haya de la Torre founds nationalist and radical American Popular Revolutionary Alliance in exile in Mexico in exile . Haya found himself in exile from the U.S.
 Land reform begins to redistribute land to poor peasant farmers, but the military is used to suppress a communist-inspired insurgency .
 It attempts to alleviate poverty and adopts a policy of widespread nationalization . The government has adopted a policy to help alleviate poverty . It also has a policy on widespread nationalisation .
 Alberto Fujimori, an independent, is elected president on an anticorruption platform and introduces austerity program . Fujimieri was elected president in 1992 . Fujimi was elected on an anti-corruption platform and introduced austerity program.
 The self-styled Comrade Gonzalo, Abimael Guzmán, was captured in Lima on September 12, 1992 . A referendum DECISIVE MOMENT CAPTURE of COMRADE GONZALO, 1992, was a referendum on Guz
 A philosophy teacher, Guzmán founded the Maoist guerrilla group Shining Path in 1970 . He drew support from among the marginalized rural poor, drawing support from rural poor .
 Shining Path embarked on a campaign of bombings and murders throughout the 1980s . An estimated 140,000 people were killed by Shining Path in that period .
 His capture was a severe blow to the group, which thereafter declined as a threat . He was captured in 2011 . His capture is a major blow to ISIS .
 The end of Shining Path power allowed Peru to promote tourism for the first time in years . Peru's tourism industry has been rocked by the end of the Shining Path .
 The Fujimori government displayed a defiant Guzmán for the benefit of the world’s press . Behind bars, the government showed a defiant image of the Mexican drug lord .
 Without his charismatic leadership Shining Path soon lost momentum . He was able to stand again as president of Shining Path . His charismatic leadership soon faded .
 Within three decades, Potosí is the largest city in the Americas with 120,000 inhabitants . The city is now the largest in the world, with more than 120,500 inhabitants .
 Three Amerindian revolts over the seizure of ancestral lands are crushed . The revolts were crushed by the US government .
 Bolivia loses coastal Atacama and its rich nitrate deposits to Chile and is left landlocked . Bolivia is landlocked after Atacamas and rich nitrates deposits are left to Chile . Bolivia's landlocked Bolivia is left to be landlocked by Chile .
 He officially ends the War of the Pacific with Chile and starts a program of wide-ranging social, administrative, and economic reforms, building new railroads and developing the mining industry . He ends the war with Chile .
 Paz Estenssoro of the MNR takes power with the help of national police and a militia recruited from the mines . Estensesoro takes power in the first place in the country since 2003 .
 Education reform, universal suffrage introduced, and tin mines nationalized . The tin mines were nationalized, and the Amerindian community was given full rights to the community .
 President Paz Zamora makes pact with 1970s dictator General Hugo Banzer . 1990 4 million acres (1. million hectares) of rainforest are recognized as Amerindian territory . 1990 .
 A new constitution guarantees greater rights to the indigenous majority . The constitution also guarantees greater right to a new constitution . The new constitution is based on the indigenous population .
 South America's only Portuguese-speaking nation was a 19th-century empire in its own right . It was the only Portuguese speaking nation in South America .
 Jesuits play a key role in the unification of the colony and the exploration of the interior . He is accompanied by Jesuits .
 They are expelled in 1567 by Mem de Sá, who found the city of Rio de Janeiro . They are later expelled in the same year as the city .
 The Dutch are expelled by a naval force sent from Rio de Janeiro . The Portuguese cannot expel the Dutch as their country is now part of Spain .
 Pedro uses a former British admiral and a former French general to help him drive the Portuguese out of the country . Pedro uses the former British and French admiral to help drive Portugal out of Portugal .
 Both sides use guerrilla tactics in the war before the Portuguese eventually withdraw . No set battles are fought, but both sides eventually withdraw from the war .
 Rivalry between the states and the influence of the army in government cause political tensions . Rival states and influence in government create political tensions between them .
 Students took to the streets of São Paulo on September 3, 1968, to protest the military dictatorship that had seized power in 1964 . Students were inspired by rioters around the world, notably in France and Mexico .
 In the following years, hundreds died in left and right-wing guerrilla warfare . Hundreds of people died in the fighting between the left and the right .
 State censorship of the media was tightened and many of Brazil's intellectuals were forced into exile . State censorship was tightened in the 1930s, and many Brazilians were forced to live in exile . Brazil's president was assassinated in 1989 .
 Emergency measures were kept in place until 1978, and the military remained in power until 1985 .
 Police van trashed before it is torched by a protester during riots in São Paulo . Students on the rampage in Brazil during riots .
 Brazil's military dictators suppressed the protests with extreme brutality . Brazil's former military dictators are known for their brutal suppression of protests .
 Pedro I of Brazil was speaking at the IPIRANGA RIVER, September 7, 1822 . Coffee prices collapse. Pedro I was the first president of Brazil .
 There is rapid industrial growth as measures are taken to reverse the country's growing economic dependence on coffee through import substitution industrialization . The country's coffee dependence has led to rapid industrialization in China .
 Vargas, although a dictator, wins applause for his nationalist policies and economic success . Vargas was elected president of Mexico in 1992 .
 General Eurico Gaspar Dutra is elected president, but the economy falters as inflation soars . Dutra was elected president of the United States in 2008 .
 Faced economic problems and political infighting, he commits suicide . Faced with economic problems, he committed suicide .
 He leaves behind a letter blaming “dark forces"" (meaning the United States and its local supporters) for blocking his efforts to make reforms .
 He tries to break dependence on U.S. trade, but his autocratc and unpredictable manner arouses opposition and undermines his reforms . He is forced to resign after only seven months in office .
 He bans all existing political parties, but creates two official new ones . He bans existing parties but creates new ones for the first time . He also creates two new political parties .
 Fast-track economic development, the so-called “Brazilian Miracle, is counterbalanced by ruthless suppression of left-wing activists . The government has been accused of corruption in the wake of a corruption scandal .
 Leftand right-wing terrorism, including capture of several diplomats, becomes a feature of Brazilian politics . Right-wing terrorists capture diplomats in Brazil .
 Illegal diggers rush in by the thousands, threatening the way of life of the indigenous Yanomami . Illegal digers rush in and out of the region by thousands of years . Yanomamami are indigenous people who live in the region .
 Chico Mendes, the rubber-tappers' union leader and leading environmentalist, is murdered . Mendes was a leader of the union and environmentalist movement in the Philippines .
 Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva came to power in 2003 pledging to abolish hunger by putting three meals a day on the plates of every Brazilian . The first working-class president in Brazil's history .
 In 2006 he was reelected with more than 60 percent of the vote, despite a corruption scandal that tarnished his reputation as a reformer . He was re-elected in 2006, despite corruption scandal .
 Collor de Mello resigns and is impeached for corruption . He is the first Brazilian president to be impeached by Congress . Collor is first president to have been impeached in Brazil .
 Congress resists constitutional reforms, but approves privatizations of state monopolies . Congress also approves privatization of state-owned businesses .
 He is elected on a social platform to fight poverty and hunger, but in office his policies resemble those of his predecessors . In office he has been criticized for his policies .
 Brazil's ethanol industry makes it a world leader in cutting carbon emissions . The ethanol industry is one of the world's most important sources of carbon dioxide . Brazil has a history of cutting emissions from ethanol production .
 The Guarani are settled agriculturalists who live in the Paraguay river basin . They help the Spanish conquer the southern Chaco area, home to nomadic hunters who raid them .
 Over the next 50 years, the country is ruled by dictatorships and cut off from the outside world . Over the years, it was ruled by dictatorshiphips and isolation from the rest of the world .
 It is protected from the unrest affecting its neighbors and becomes an economic power . It becomes a powerful nation, protected from unrest affecting neighbors . It is also protected from other nations' unrest and becomes a power .
 He is the first of three dictators that dominate the history of the country . He was the first president of the Soviet Union .
 General Alfredo Stroessner was the son of German immigrants and a virulent anticommunist who used torture and kidnappings to sustain his rule . He was deposed in 1989 after he was forced to step down from power .
 His son Francisco succeeds him, but brings about disaster with the War of the Triple Alliance . Francisco succeeds his son Francisco, but ends up with disaster .
 More than two-thirds of its population are killed in the war, plunging the country into a lengthy period of economic decline . The country's economy has suffered a long decline after the war .
 Recovery is slow as warring caudillos set up short-lived dictatorships . Recovery in Mexico's economy has been slow since the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 His repressive military regime stifles opposition and rigs elections to win repeated electoral success . He says he will continue to win elections in spite of the fact that his government has rigged elections .
 He accuses his predecessor Lino Oviedo of plotting against him . He is embroiled in a controversy over his alleged fathering of children while a bishop . He accuses predecessor of plotting to oust him .
 Lautaro, the leader of the Araucanian Indians, is killed in 1557 . He is one of the most powerful tribes in the world .
 Chile extends its territory northward and ends Bolivia’s access to the coast . Chile has been in control of Bolivia for more than a decade .
 His policies are blocked by the legislature, and he resigns 19924 but is recalled im1925 . The army intervenes to support him; a revised constitution bolsters his powers . He resigns but is later recalled by the army .
 Bernardo O'Higgins was the illegitimate son of an Irishman in Spanish government service . He spent his childhood in Europe but returned to Chile in 1802 committed to its independence .
 General Augusto Pinochet's brutal dictatorship begins . Pinochet imprisons, tortures, and kills many of his opponents . General Pinochet is known for his brutal dictatorship in Chile .
 Pinochet, who has returned to Chile, is deemed unfit to face trial, and is released . Pinochet was deemed unfit for trial and released from prison in Chile .
 After an explosion, 33 miners are trapped underground, but are all safely rescued after 69 days . 33 miners were trapped underground after an explosion after being trapped underground . After 69 days, they were safely rescued .
 By end of the century, the whole country is divided into large cattle ranches . The whole country will be divided into cattle-rich ranches by end of century .
 Batllismo creates the first welfare state in Latin America, with pensions and free education and health service . Also implements nationalizations, church is disestablished, and death penalty abolished . Church disestablishments, church disestablishment, death penalty abolish .
 Decade of great prosperity follows until world agricultural prices plummet . World's economic boom was followed by a decade of prosperity . World agricultural prices plummeted in 2008 .
 Political freedoms are denied and the left is brutally repressed . Political freedom is denied and left is repressed. Political freedoms were denied . The left is being repressed in the country .
 Uruguay is a successful wool and meat exporter and wool exporter . Uruguay has a large cattle ranch with a country attached .
 Livestock products bring in more than a third of Australia's current export earnings . The country's biggest export export market is the country's livestock industry .
 Conflict ensues between Unitarians advocating a centralized state ruled from Buenos Aires and the provincial Federalists of the interior . Federalists argue that a central Buenos Aires state should be based in Buenos Aires . Federalist Federalists call for a central state in Argentina .
 His rule is authoritarian, even requiring the wearing of red to show support for the regime . His rule requires the wearing red to support the regime, even though it is authoritarian .
 Juan Perón first came to prominence as part of a group of proto-fascist army colonels who overthrew the government in 1943 . Perón is the current South American president of South America, Argentina .
 As secretary of labor and later vice president, he backed welfare legislation . He won the approval of the trade unions, who became the backbone of his later support . His later support came from the unions .
 He pursued a path between capitalism and communism . He was strongly nationalistic, anti-US, and anticommunist .
 In power Perón became increasingly authoritarian, jailing opponents and censoring the press . Perón jailed opponents, jailed opponents, censored the press and jailed journalists .
 He purged trade unions of communists and reorganized them along fascist lines . While his wife Evita launched a public charm offensive, he purged the trade union of communists . He also reorganized the trade unions in fascist fashion .
 Perón's second term as president from 1973-74 was not a success, but Peronism continues to be major political force . Perón was president of Argentina from 1973 to 1974 .
 Savings are wiped out as the peso is devalued, ending parity with the U.S. dollar . Savings will be wiped out when the currency devalues . Savings also wiped out .
 A small island kingdom í that once ruled the largest empire in the history of the world. EY 4^ on United Kingdom .
 Over the next century Anglo-Saxon invaders push the native Celtic population out of the south and east of the island . The native Celtic people were pushed out by the invaders . The invasion began in 10th century and spread to the east and south .
 Augustine settles in Canterbury and begins to convert the kingdom of Kent to Christianity . Augustine is the founder of the Christian kingdom of Canterbury .
 Alfred is the only English king ever to be known by this title . Alfred is known for his victories against the Danes, his wise rule and his artistic patronage .
 After the capture of London in 886, he was recognized as king of all England . He captured the city of London and became king of England .
 The world’s second-smallest continent has a great variety of landscapes, climates, and ethnic groups . The continent is home to a wide variety of cultures and climates .
 Twice in the last century, conflict in Europe led to world war . The continent is now largely at peace, with many countries members of the European Union .
 As William I, or “William the Conqueror” , he crushes a succession of rebellions and starts an ambitious castle-building program . William I is the son of William III, who is later known as William III of England .
 This protects the nobility's rights against the excessive use of royal power in matters of taxation, justice, religion, and foreign policy .
 The charter lays down the respective rights and responsibilities of laymen and the church in relation to the power of the crown . The charter was created by the Church of Christ in 2000 .
 The charter's relevance lessened as feudalism declined, and under the Tudors it was forgotten . The charter was important at the time, but was forgotten under Tudor rule .
 The Model Parliament summoned by Edward I in 1295 was even more representative in its composition . Edward I summoned the Model Parliament of 1295 in the same year .
 A treaty in 1360 gives Edward much land in return for renouncing his claim . But the French renew war in 1369 and drive the English out of many of their possessions by 1374 .
 Under the 1420 Treaty of Troyes, he becomes regent of France and heir to the French throne . He becomes heir to French throne in 1420 .
 After 1429 the French, led by Joan of Arc, push the English out of France, finally ending the war in 1453 . The French and the English fought in 1429 .
 After the end of his marriage to Anne Boleyn in 1536, he subsequently marries four more times . He then married four more women, including four women .
 Her childless marriage to Philip II of Spain, the leading Catholic monarch in Europe, makes her unpopular, as does loss in 1558 of Calais, the last English possession in France . The childless queen also loses the last French possession of Calais .
 Wales has a much older history as a nation than England . Wales was defeated in 1282 by the last Welsh king of the Welsh .
 Celts formed a number of principalities in Wales that were united in the early 1200s . Driven out of England by the AngloSaxons in the 5th and 6th centuries, the Celts left Wales .
 When Edward | came to the English throne in 1272, he summoned the Welsh prince, Llywelyn Il, to pay homage .
 After the prince was killed that year in an ambush, Edward swiftly reinforced his conquest by building castles such as Harlech to subdue his new realm .
 Defeat established an English hegemony over Wales that endures today . Defeat established a British hegemony that ended up in Wales . The defeat established the English dominance over Wales .
 13 colonies are established along the eastern seaboard of America, as well as colonies in Canada and the Caribbean . In all, 13 colonies were established in 17th century .
 The creation of the British Empire during and after the 1600s brings huge wealth into the country . The British Empire brought huge wealth to the UK during the period .
 1639 civil War begins in Scotland over religious differences between the king and the Scottish church . A believer in the Divine Right of Kings, he rules without parliament .
 Catholic rebellion in Ireland in 1641 and civil war in England between king and parliament in 1642 turn the conflict into a threekingdom war . Civil war in Ireland and England between King and Parliament turn into three kings .
 In 1648 Charles is defeated by the parliamentarian army, led by Oliver Cromwell . In 1649 he is put on trial for treason for treason . 1649 is executed and a commonwealth is established .
 Catholic opposition in Ireland is brutally crushed by Oliver Cromwell, who acts as Lord Protector from 1653 until his death in 1658 . Cromwell was the Lord Protector of Ireland until 1658, when he died .
 An attempt by Charles II to regain the throne in 1650-51 is defeated . Charles II's son Charles II is defeated by Charles III . Charles III of the 1650s is the son of Charles II and Charles II .
 The English republic, however, is not a success, because it fails to gain support or establish lasting institutions . The English Republic was founded in 1903, but failed to become a success .
 Dalraida in the west, the Pictish kingdom in the north, Strathclyde in the southwest, and Lothian in the east . Lothians is one of Scotland's most populous counties .
 Scotland kept its parliament until the Act of Union in 1707 . After the accession of James VI to the English crown in 1603, the Scottish Parliament was kept in Scotland .
 With the passage of a Bill of Rights in 1689, Catholics are barred from the throne and a constitutional form of government is established . With parliamentary consent becoming necessary for the king to levy taxes, suspend laws, or raise a peacetime army .
 When he eventually returns to Scotland in 1424, he proves a capable and enlightened monarch . When he finally returns, he proved a capable monarch .
 Scotland retains its separate legal system and Presbyterian Church, but the Scottish parliament is abolished . The Scottish parliament has been abolished, leaving Scotland with a separate parliament .
 A Jacobite rebellion in 1715 led by the son of James II is easily defeated . The rebellion was led by James II's son James II . The Jacobite revolt was easily defeated by the king's son .
 In 1811 his son was made Prince Regent to govern the country until his father dies . His son became the Prince of Wales in 1811 . He is now the heir to the throne .
 A Spanish garrison was withdrawn in 1811, leaving islands uninhabited . The islands were also left uninhabitants .
 UK dispatches a task force, forcing Argentinian surrender after six weeks of fighting . About 1,000 people were killed in the conflict .
 Horatio Nelson defeats the French at the naval battles of the Nile and Trafalgar . He loses his life in the battle of the Egyptian and the Great War .
 The Duke of Wellington was successful commander of forces in the Peninsular War of 1808-14 . He evicts the French from Spain and Portugal, finally defeats Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815 .
 Working-class men are enfranchised by the Reform Acts of 1867 and 1884 . Property qualification for all members of parliament is abolished in 1858 and the secret ballot introduced in 1872 .
 Victoria goes into mourning for 13 years, refusing to appear in public . Victoria went into mourning after the death of her husband .
 The 1911 Parliament Act drastically reduces the House of Lords' powers . To pay for this, it taxes the rich, causing a major constitutional crisis with the aristocratic Lords . The 1911 parliament Act drastically reduced its powers to pay for it .
 Clement Attlee transformed Britain by introducing the National Health Service and by nationalizing industries . Attlee was prime minister from 1945-51 . He introduced the NHS and nationalized industries .
 UK and France collude with Israel to invade Egypt but forced out under U.S. pressure . France and France were forced out of Egypt by the United States under pressure .
 The government is forced to nationalize the Northern Rock building society in February . HSBC and Lloyds TSB banks are taken under majority government control .
 The additional government expenditure sees Britain’s budget deficit rise to 11.5 percent of GDP by 2010 . The additional spending will see the deficit reach 11.6 percent of the UK's GDP by the end of 2010 .
 Northern Ireland consists of six counties in the north of Ireland that remained part of the UK when the 26 southern counties became independent . Northern Ireland is one of the largest parts of the United Kingdom .
 Ulster is one of the four ancient Irish kingdoms of Ireland . The province is often called Ulster, one of Ireland's four ancient kingdoms .
 By the 1175 Treaty of Windsor, the High King of Ireland recognizes the English King as his overlord . The Treaty of 1175 was signed by the English king of Ireland in Ireland .
 Scottish Presbyterian settlers move to Ulster, taking land from Irish Catholics . Scots Presbyterian settlers moved to Ulster .
 The Irish parliament is abolished and Ireland obtains representation at the Westminster parliament . The Irish Parliament was abolished and the Irish parliament was abolished . Ireland now has representation at Westminster .
 The British execute the leaders, increasing support for the Republican cause . The British executed the leaders in order to increase Republican support .
 They trade tin and other commodities up the Rhóne and into northern and western France with the Celts . The Celts and other peoples trade tin with other peoples .
 The new territory is divided into Gallia Lugdunensis in the north, Gallia Belgica in the northeast, and Aquitania in the west . The new territories will be divided into three Gallia provinces: Gallia, Galla Belgica, Aquitani, Gall
 He secures power by defending his Gallic Empire’s frontiers against barbarian attack . The Emperor defends his empire from barbarian attacks .
 Clovis's reign marks the foundation of the Frankish empire that soon covers western and northern France, except Brittany, and extends east into the Low Countries and Germany . The Frankish Empire covers western France and eastern France except Brittany .
 The Burgundians control the south and east, and the Visigoths the far southwest . Burgundian control the north and west, and Visigoth control the far west .
 This wins them the support of their Gallo-Roman subjects and of eastern Roman emperors . It also wins them support from their subjects and from eastern Roman .
 Frankish kingdom becomes the strongest power in Europe by 600 years . Frankish ruler becomes strongest in Europe in 600 years.
 This has the effect of weakening the kingdom, resulting in instability, civil war, and assassinations . The kingdom has been weakened by this weakening of the kingdom .
 Pope T4 Án ram uii. a pora ce e m sean 2E ae | E tW Y oy oy Hu Hu . In return for military help, Pope offered Pope's help in return for help in exchange for peace .
 As the ""parish church of the kings of France,"" it also saw the coronation of Henry VI of England, crowned king of France in 1431 . The church was also the site of Henry VII of England's coronation .
 Francis succeeded to the French crown in 1515 upon the death of his wife's father, Louis XII, since women were prohibited from inheriting the throne . He succeeded as the king of France .
 Francis was France's first Renaissance king . He surrounded himself with musicians and poets at his court . His court included Leonardo da Vina and Leonardo Da Vina .
 Francis's reign proved to be the catalyst for a flowering of the arts . Francis's political record was more mixed, with a mixed record .
 He was defeated by Habsburg emperor Charles V at the Battle of Pavia in 1525 . He was forced to surrender any daims in Italy after a period of imprisonment .
 Zacharias authorizes him to depose the Merovingian king and assume the kingship of the Franks himself as the first Carolingian king . The king deposed the king of Merovingia and assumed the title himself .
 The empire is briefly reunited under Charles the Fat but it finally breaks up into five kingdoms . Burgundy and Provence break away from each other as Burgundy breaks away .
 He defeats an Anglo-German invasion at Bouvines in 1214, recovering all English lands in France except Gascony . He makes France the strongest nation in Europe, making it the strongest in Europe .
 Under the 1420 Treaty of Troyes, he becomes regent of France and, by marrying King Charles VI's daughter, heir to the French throne . He becomes king of France by marrying Charles VII's daughter .
 French king Louis XI seizes French Burgundy while the rest becomes part of the Habsburg family lands . His successor, Charles the Bold, unites his territories, but the rest of his lands become part of his family . The rest of the French lands become the Spanish Habs
 In 1525 the capture of Francis I by Spanish troops at Pavia and imprisonment in Spain brings the wars to a climax . Francis I was captured in 1525 and imprisoned in Spain . The capture of the king brings the end of the war to an end .
 Francis renounces French claims in Italy, notably Milan, but hostilities are renewed and only settled at the Treaty of CateauCambrésis in 1559 . Francis' reign was the first of his reign in Italy .
 Huguenots granted freedom of worship in the 1598 Edict of Nantes . Huguensots were granted freedom to worship in 1598 .
 Louis XIII was succeeded by Louis XIII, whose first minister, Cardinal Richelieu, consolidates the monarchy's standing both at home and abroad . Louis XIII is succeeded by his successor, Louis XVIII .
 France defeats Spanish attacks and gains Roussillon from Spain in 1642 . France defeats Spain and gains the town of Rousesillon .
 In 1640 the French support Portuguese and Catalan revolts against Spanish rule, and they aid the Neapolitan revolt in 1647 . In 1647 the French aid Neapolitans in Italy .
 St. Louis on the Senegal River marks the start of France's colonial empire in West Africa . The city was the birthplace of the first French colony in Africa .
 During his reign, the absolutism of the ancien régime reaches its peak . During this period, he ruled the French state .
 France's borders pushed north into Flanders and east to the Rhine . Abroad he establishes French hegemony over much of Western Europe in series of victorious military campaigns .
 From 1700, as Europe unites in resistance, his position begins to be undermined . However, from 1700, he begins to see his position begin to be weakened .
 Philip is eventually recognized as Bourbon king of Spain, but renounces any future claim to the throne of France . Philip renounces all future claims to the French throne . Philip was eventually recognized by the Spanish government .
 Louis XV lacks interest in government and politics and is less successful in campaigns abroad and in countering growing opposition at home . His successor, Louis XV, lacks interest and politics .
 As a result of British success in the war, France is obliged to cede almost all of its possessions in North America, the West Indies, and India to Britain . France is left with little of its large American empire remaining after the war .
 As the nobles and clergy (the first and second estates) lose control to the “third estate” , a national assembly is formed by the third estate and demands reform of the monarchy . The third estate demands reform .
 Louis XVI's indecisive response sparks the storming of the Bastille on July 14 . The Bastille was stormed by the French army in France in the 17th century . Louis XVI was the first monarch to storm the French capital .
 The women of Paris march to Versailles in October to demand bread . They take the royal family to Paris as hostages . Louis XVI's hesitation prompts the women to march .
 Louis is forced to accept the new constitution and accept it . However, they are brought back as prisoners and are kept in prison . Louis is brought back to France as a prisoner .
 The Paris Commune led by Georges Danton seizes power . A national convention replaces the national assembly and abolishes the monarchy .
 Control of the country passes from the moderate Girondins to the extremist Jacobins . The ‘Reign of Terror’ begins with a series of mass executions .
 A new constitution in 1795 establishes the more moderate Directory which, however, becomes increasingly corrupt . The new constitution establishes a more moderate constitution .
 At home he introduces many reforms, including the legal “Code Napoléon""; abroad he defeats the Austrians and Russians at Austerlitz in 1805 and the Prussians at Jena in 1806 . In 1806 he introduces the legal "Code Nap
 The Bourbon monarchy is reinstalled, with Louis XVIII, younger brother of Louis XVII, as king . Louis XVIIII is the son of Louis XVI II, who was born in 1881 .
 The medal was awarded to a supporter of the short-lived Paris Commune of 1871 . The Commune was formed in the period of turmoil following the Franco-Prussian war .
 Charles-Louis Napoleon, nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte, elected president with more than 70 percent of the total vote . Charles Louis Napoleon is elected president of France with over 70 percent .
 He proclaims a Second Empire based on plebiscitary autocracy . He becomes involved in wars with Russia in the Crimea in 1854—56 and with Austria in 1859, gaining Savoy and Nice from Piedmont in 1860 .
 French armies quickly defeated at Metz and Sedan, where Napoleon was captured . Napoleon captured in Sedan . French armies were quickly defeated .
 The Third Republic is proclaimed and continues resistance until Prussian forces enter Paris in January 1871 . The French Republic was proclaimed by the Third Republic in 1871 after the fall of Napoleon III .
 Charles-Louis Napoleon twice tried to overthrow Louis-Philippe but was elected president of France in 1848 . He seized power in 1851 and became emperor the EN — following year . Napoleon III was Napoleon III Nephew of Napoleon Bonaparte . He was also the son of Napoleon
 The German advance toward Paris is stopped at the Marne, and by the end of 1914 a stalemate develops along the western front . The end of the 1914 war was a bloody year for the Germans .
 French Dependency off coast of Mexico, named after a pirate, John Clipperton 1855 Claimed by France . Claimed the island of France .
 Five groups of islands off the west coast of Madagascar and claimed by that country . The majority of these islands are claimed by the European Union .
 Islands in the south Indian Ocean plus the French Antarctic claim . French Antarctic claims .
 The man commonly referred to in France as Général de Gaulle was a French military leader and statesman . He was also known as the French President of the French Republic .
 After war broke out, he reached the rank of brigadier general, becoming leader of the Free French government in London and of the French Resistance . He became leader of Free French Government in London .
 Following liberation in 1944, he led the French provisional government in France . He was the first French leader of the French government .
 Called to form a government in 1958, de Gaulle was the Fifth Republic's first president, 1958—69 . Called to a government, he was the French president of the French Republic from 1958-69 .
 The Allies break through German lines in the summer of 1918 and force an armistice in November . The end of the war in 1940 was the end of World War II in France .
 By later agreements, France receives mandates over Lebanon and Syria, and territories in West Africa . France also gets mandates over Syria, Lebanon and West Africa, as well as over Lebanon .
 The Locarno Pact confirms the existing FrancoGerman border and promises better relations between the two powers . They withdraw in 1925 as they withdraw as a result .
 UK and France appease Germany at Munich in 1938, but offer support to Poland when Hitler occupies Czechoslovakia in 1939 . France and UK offer support for Poland in 1939, but not for the Czech Republic in 1940s .
 Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, Belgium and Luxembourg in 1952 . The first step on the road toward European union was the first step toward EU membership .
 France hands over its remaining possessions in the subcontinent to India . India was the last nation to leave France in control of the region .
 The Gaullists win the general election . The National Assembly is dissolved but the Gaullist win the National Assembly . Gaullers win the election .
 On March 18, 2006, some 700,000 protesters converged on Paris and clashed violently with riot police . The protests were the result of a student uprising in Paris .
 Demonstrators object to a controversial bill to deregulate the labor market . The bill would make it easier to fire people under 26-year-olds under 26 .
 The bill was perceived as grossly unfair because it made young people's jobs insecure . Young people were perceived as making young people feel insecure in their jobs .
 Giving in to the protesters was seen by many observers as a missed opportunity for France to implement badly needed economic reforms . France's labor market has been stifled by stifling regulation .
 Young protesters storm Place de la Nation in Paris and throw government into turmoil . De Gaulle resigns after defeat in referendum on regional reform . Georges Pompidou replaced as president by Georges .
 National Front leader Jean-Marie Le Pen’s strong showing in first round of voting sends shockwaves throughout France and leads to mass protests . National Front's strong showing sends shock waves throughout France . Le Pen leads the National Front party in the first round and leads the country to a
 These elections are first with presidential and parliamentary elections fought on the same five-year timetable, ending difficulties of cohabitation . These elections will be the first in the country to be held on same timetable .
 Unrest among deprived immigrant youths sparks riots that spread throughout cities . The riots were sparked by a lack of food and housing in immigrant communities .
 Tough new restrictions on immigration make it harder for unskilled migrants to settle in France . Tough new immigration restrictions mean it will be harder to find out if you want to settle here .
 President Sarkozy’s party suffers heavy losses in regional elections, losing in 20 out of 22 regions . Sarkozy's party loses in 20 of the 22 regions in the region .
 Monaco used as a tax haven by Europe's super-rich . Monaco is a tiny principality on the Mediterranean coast .
 A new succession law was passed to keep the Grimaldi family on the throne if Crown Prince Albert has no heir . A new law is designed to keep Prince Albert's family on top of the throne .
 The kingdom contines to grow at Muslim Spain's expense over the next century . The kingdom is expected to grow in size at the expense of Muslim Spain .
 By this time, Córdoba, the capital city of the Umayyad Emirate, is the largest and one of the most prosperous cities in Western Europe .
 Compostela is second only to Rome as a major pilgrim destination . Composterela is the birthplace of St. James the Apostle in Spain . The town becomes second most popular destination in Europe .
 Philip Il ordered the building of El Escorial, near Madrid, as a monastery and burial place for Spain's kings . Philip Il built the monastery near Madrid as a place of burial for Spanish kings .
 It was begun in 1563 by Juan Bautista de Toledo, a Renaissance Spanish architect . It was completed in 1584 and was begun by 1563 .
 Spain now consists of the kingdoms of León and Navarre in the north, Castile in the center, Aragon in the east, and the Almohad Caliphate in the south . Spain is now divided between Castile and Aragon .
 Muslim Spain also supports a thriving Jewish population that is tolerated by the Muslim authorities . Muslim Spain is tolerant of a growing Jewish population .
 The Spanish Inquisition was formed in 1478 to test the sincerity of Jewish converts to Christianity . Henry's heiress Juana la Beltraneja was the subject of the Inquisition . Her claim is contested by her husband, Ferdinand .
 It acquires a sinister reputation for its work . It is not officially abolished until 1834, and acquires sinister reputation .
 Moorish ceramic dish dates from the period of the emirate of Granada . Ceramics date back to the Granada period .
 Moorish arts and architecture achieved a high degree of sophistication during the 13th and 14th centuries . Moorish art and architecture was a high level of sophistication in Moorish culture during the period .
 In Cuba, the original indigenous peole are reduced from 50,000 to about 5,000 in 1550, due to deaths from European diseases against which they have no immunity . The original indigenous population in Cuba is reduced by European diseases, which they are immune to .
 CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS was involved in lengthy battles with Protestant princes in the empire, and in wars with France, to the neglect of Spain . He wrote that Spain was neglected by Protestants .
 His brother Ferdinand rules the Austrian Habsburg lands and becomes Holy Roman Emperor . His son Philip II rules Spain along with Sardinia, Naples and Sicily, the Duchy of Milan, Franch-Comté and the Netherlands .
 Tunis was first captured by the Ottomans in 1569, but recaptured by the Spanish in 1572, only to be lost again two years later . Tunis was also recaptured in 1570, but was lost again in 1583 .
 Philip II invades to enforce his claim, winning the Battle of Alcantara . Philip II was victorious in the battle .
 King Philip IV was an active patron of the arts during the Baroque era . He was a patron of art by Diego Velázquez, Spain's outstanding painter of the age .
 The French campaigns are directed by Cardinal Richelieu, chief minister to Louis XIII, who sets out to attack and dismember the Habsburg Empire .
 The subsequent French invasion of Catalonia leads to a long, inconclusive conflict in the region . The resulting French invasion led to an inconclusive war in Catalonia . The subsequent conflict was inconclusive .
 Louis XIV of France claims the throne for his grandson, Philip, Philip . Britain and others propose the Habsburg Archduke Charles of Austria . Charles is the son of France's Louis XIV .
 Spain and its European possessions become a battleground for competing Portuguese, British, French, and Austrian forces . Spain and Europe's European possessions were the focus of the war .
 The French Bourbon candidate becomes Philip V of Spain, but renounces any claim to the French throne . Philip renounces his claim to be king of Spain . Philip V renounces all claims to the throne .
 Spain loses southern Netherlands, Milan, Naples, and Sardinia to Austria; Britain keeps Gibraltar and Gibraltar . Britain also takes control of Italy, Italy, and Sicily .
 By ending the War of the Spanish Succession, the Peace was one of the great achievements of the 18th-century diplomacy .
 The treaties were signed by the representatives of Louis XIV of France and Philip V of Spain on the one hand, and of Queen Anne of Britain, the Duke of Savoy, and the United Provinces on the other .
 Savoy received Sicily and parts of the Duchy of Milan, while Charles VI received the Spanish Netherlands, the Kingdom of Naples, Menorca, and the right to supply slaves to Spain's American colonies .
 Spain is now a minor power in a Europe dominated by France, Britain, and Austria . Spain has been a major power in Europe for more than a decade .
 The conflict spreads to Spain the next year and Napoleon places his brother Joseph Bonaparte on the throne, thus provoking a Spanish rebellion and British intervention in the Peninsular War . Napoleon's brother Joseph was the son of Napoleon Napoleon .
 Sardinia and most of the Duchy of Milan were ruled by Britain and Spain . Sardinia was ruled by Spain, Italy and Italy, but most of its territory was occupied by Spain .
 By the treaty concluded between Spain and Britain on July 13, 1713 , Britain received Gibraltar and Menorca . The treaty was signed in 1713 .
 Under Spain's 1978 constitution King Juan Carlos had handed power to an elected legislature and became a nonruling monarch . Under the 1978 constitution he handed power over to the elected legislature .
 This caused animosity within the armed forces, which led to the attempted military coup . This led to an attempt to overthrow the government, which was overthrown .
 Within hours the coup collapsed when the king himself appeared on television, calling for public support for democratic government . The coup collapsed after the king appeared on TV calling for support for the democratic government.
 Colonel Antonio Tejero fires shots into the air as he announces the coup . Tells deputies to await the arrival of a ""competent military authority" who never came .
 Right-wing military uprising against the republic coordinated by General Francisco Franco, who invades from Morocco . Franco was subsequently appointed leader of the nationalists and invades .
 Germany and Italy support the Nationalists, while the USSR supports the Republicans . Individual socialists and communists from across Europe join the International Brigades .
 Opened to the public in 1997 and dedicated to modern and contemporary art . The Guggenheim Museum formed part of a large and successful regeneration plan for the city of Bilbao .
 He takes a hard line on Basque separatism and skilfully manages a rapidly improving economy . He takes on a tough line on the Basque separatistism .
 Aznar government loses general election three days later to the PSOE . Zapatero pulls Spanish troops out of Iraq, pulls them out . Aznar's government pulls troops from Iraq .
 The goverment offers peace talks to ETA about the future of the Basque region . ETA has been fighting for independence from Spain since 1968 .
 ETA declares a “permanent ceasefire“ in 2006 but it is broken the same year by a car bomb at Madrid airport . ETA declared a ceasefire in 2007 but it was broken by a bomb in Madrid airport in 2010 .
 The rights vested in the house of Foix pass by marriage to the Kings of Navarre and, in 1589, to the crown of France . In 1589 on the . accession of Henri of . Navarre as Henri IV, Henri IV of France, to Henri of Nav
 Portugal is an Atlantic-facing country with natural borders f and a long maritime and imperial history . Portugal is one of the world's most populous countries .
 By 1539 over 12,000 slaves are being sold in the city's markets each year . Over 12,500 slaves were being sold each year in 1539 . The slave trade is estimated to be the largest in Europe .
 Territories also acquired in Angola and Mozambique and the east Indies . Territories acquired in the 1920s and '60s .
 The tragedy of King Sebastião is one of the seminal events of Portuguese history . The Portuguese king's death was one of Portugal's most tragic moments .
 At the age of 24, he received permission from the pope to lead a crusade against the infidel in Morocco . At the same time, he was allowed to lead the crusade in Morocco.
 Battle of Alcazarquivir took place on August 4, 1578, in North Africa . The battle was fought by a well-equipped Muslim army in Morocco .
 Doubts over his fate gave rise to the legend of the king who would one day return . The king would return to his homeland, but his fate was never known .
 In 1822 his son and regent, Dom Pedro, declares independence as Emperor Pedro I of Brazil . Dom Pedro declares independence from Brazil in 1822 .
 Left-wing Armed Forces Movement overthrows Caetano in bloodless revolution . Left-left armed forces movement overthrows Cetano's government .
 The Servian Wall was built by the Romans during the reign of Rome . After they leave, the Romans rebuild their city and protect it with the Servian wall .
 In 23 BCE he is awarded the title Augustus (‘the deeply respected one’) by the Senate . In 23 CE he is given title Augustus, the title of the deeply respected .
 Emperor Constantine established a new eastern capital of the empire at Constantinople . Emperor Constantine also establishes a new Eastern capital of Constantinople .
 Many of the tribes that invaded the Roman Empire quickly absorbed Roman culture and beliefs . Roman culture quickly absorbed the tribes' belief system .
 Mausoleum was built in Ravenna by the Ostrogoths for their leader Theodoric . The Ostrogoth was the leader of the Roman Roman Empire .
 After they defeat and kill Emperor Valens at Adrianople in 378, they are allowed to settle in what is now Bulgaria . After they defeated and kill Valens, they settle in the region of Bulgaria .
 After the death of Theodosius I, the empire is now permanently split between eastern and western parts of the Roman Empire .
 By the time the Vandals cross to North Africa in 1429 and capture Carthage, the western Roman Empire is on the point of collapse . The Vandals captured Carthage on the way to the city of Carthage .
 Many of these invading tribes, however, are already Christian or soon convert to Christianity . They adopt Roman customs and culture and take over many of the institutions and practices of the empire .
 Byzantines retain control of parts of Italy from Ravenna . They never conquer the whole peninsula; they never conquer whole peninsula .
 Writers such as Boccaccio and Dante, artists and sculptors such as Giotto, Fra Angelico, Donatello, Raphael, and Michaelangelo, and architects such as Alberti and Brunelleschi received patronage from the various Italian princes and dukes . Italian cities
 The wars end in defeat for France and also mark the decline of the city-states . City-states suffer major devastation and are adversely affected by the new economic conditions created by the severance of traditional land and sea routes across the Mediterranean .
 Spain now controls Milan, Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia . Spain now dominates the Italian peninsula and the western Mediterranean . France gains some land .
 The Reformation has little effect in Italy, which remains staunchly Catholic . Italy is a staunchly Roman Catholic state .
 France threatens the Italian possessions of Habsburg Spain . Italy and Spain are caught up in the fighting as France threatens them .
 A revolt in Naples against Spanish rule in 1647 was actively supported by French troops . French troops supported the revolt in the city of Naples .
 After the War of the Spanish Succession its position is usurped by Habsburg Austria, which acquires Milan, Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia .
 Napoleon redraws the country’s map and absorbs Piedmont, Genoa, Tuscany, and the Papal States directly into France . He creates a kingdom of Italy in the north and Naples in the south . Napoleon redrews the map and absorbed Pied
 Sardinia—Piedmont and the Papal States remain independent, while the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies gains its independence . Sardinia, Piedmont, Sardinia and Papal states remain independent . The Kingdom of Italy gained independence in 1883 .
 Nationalist revolts or popular uprisings against Austrian, papal, or illiberal Italian rule break out in Turin, Milan, Genoa, Modena, Parma, Naples, and many other Italian cities from 1830 onwards . All were easily crushed by authoritarian powers .
 A Roman republic is established by radicals, including Guiseppe Garibaldi . The republic is crushed by French troops called in to restore Pope Pius IX to power . French troops are called in in order to restore the Pope to power.
 In the north, nationalist troops are defeated by Austrian troops at the battle of Novara . Austria regains control of its Italian possessions after the battle .
 Renaissance man Michelangelo was a painter, sculptor, architect, poet, poet and engineer . He was also an architect, painter and sculptor . Michelangelo's work includes works of art, sculpture, architecture, design, and architecture .
 Victor Emmanuel Il becomes king of Sardinia-Piedmont in 1849 . Count Camillo di Cavour appointed as prime minister . Count Cavour was the first Sardinia prime minister of the 18th century .
 They institute liberal domestic reforms and increasingly act as the leaders of the Italian nationalist and unification movement . They are increasingly active in Italy's nationalist movement and unification .
 The unification of Italy is achieved under the leadership of Victor Emmanuel II of Sardinia-Piedmont, Count Cavour, and the forces of Giuseppe Garibaldi . The unification is achieved in 1859-70 .
 Most of northern Italy is united by Sardinia-Piedmont after the War of Unification against Austria in 1859, won at the Battle of Magenta with the help of French troops . Sardinia and Piedmont were united after the war of unification in Italy .
 Venice ceded by Austria after a brief war in 1866, and Rome occupied by Italian troops in 1870 . Venice is ceded to Rome by Austria and Rome by Rome is occupied by Italy in 1870, and Venice by Austria .
 The national capital shifts from Turin to Florence in 1865 and then to Rome in 1870 . Rome was the capital of Italy until the end of the war .
 Italy remains more a union of provinces than a single country . Strong regional differences exist between the industrial and rich north and the agricultural and poor south .
 British and French troops rushed to Italy to save it from collapse . French and British troops are rushed to save the country from the collapse .
 Italy defeated Austria-Hungary at Vittorio Veneto in the closing months of World War II . Austria won the battle in the final months of the war .
 Libya gains land in Libya from British-held Egypt and from French-held Libya . Libya also gains land from Egypt and France-held France West Africa .
 Italy believes it has received insufficient land or prestige as a result of having fought on the winning side of the war . Italy, however, is dissatisfied with the peace settlement, believing it has not received enough land . Italy is unhappy with the settlement and believes it should not receive enough land or
 Giuseppe Garibaldi greeted Victor Emanuel II at Teano and hailed him king of Italy . Proclamation was made on October 26, 1860, at the Italian capital .
 Garibaldi sacrificed republican hopes for the sake of unity under a monarchy . He sacrificed republican hope for unity under the monarchy . The Italian revolutionary was assassinated in 1915 .
 On October 28, 1922, groups of Blackshirts began massing at locations outside Rome .
 Mussolini intended to seize power by marching on the capital, taking advantage of social discontent and the fear of a socialist revolution . Their leader, Mussolini, intended to take advantage of the social discontent . Mussolini wanted to take control of the country .
 Italy's prime minister, Luigi Facta, ordered a state of siege for the city, but the king refused to sign the order . Italy's king wished to avoid civil war, refusing to sign a state-of-siege order .
 Mussolini assumed power the following day . As a result, the army did not oppose the fascists and Mussolini took power .
 Mussolini becomes Il Duce, or leader, and heads a coalition of fascists and nationalists . Mussolini is the prime minister of Italy in the 1930s .
 Italy withdraws after international pressure, although it receives a large indemnity from Greece . Italy withdrew from the deal, although Greece receives an indemnity . After international pressure it withdraws from the treaty .
 Italy also joins the AntiComintern Pact with Germany and Japan . In 1937 Italy joins the antiComintern pact with Germany, Japan and Italy .
 In 1941 it takes part in the German invasion of the USSR, as well as acquiring control of parts of southeast France, western Yugoslavia and Croatia, the Adriatic coast, and much of Greece .
 It soon loses its empire in East Africa to Allied forces . Only holds out in Libya with German support until 1943, when it is evicted from North Africa . It only holds out of Libya until 1943 when it was evicted .
 Mussolini is imprisoned but is helped to escape to the north, where he sets up a republican, fascist government . Mussolini was imprisoned but escapes to set up a fascist government in the north .
 Italy declares war on Germany, which promptly occupies most of Italy . Germany continues to fight the Allies on Italian soil . Italy is occupied by the Allies .
 Amintore Fanfani is prime minister on five separate occasions between 1954 and 1987 . He is often for no more than a few months at a time, and also serves as interim president in 1978 . He was also interim president of Italy in 1978, and was prime minister in 1978
 At the signing of the Treaty of Rome on March 25, 1957, Italy became one of the founder members of the European Economic Community . The treaty of Rome gave rise to today's European Union . Italy is one of Italy's most populous countries .
 Italy has remained a fervent member of the European Economic Council . Italy's economy, industry, and infrastructure have all benefited massively from membership .
 Former prime minister Craxi is convicted, while another former prime minister Giulio Andreotti is brought to trial accused of dealing with the Sicilian Mafia . Craxi was convicted of corruption, while Andreotti was accused of a similar charge .
 When he leaves office, Berlusconi has been the longest-serving Italian prime minister since 1945 . He has been Italy's longest serving PM since 1945, when he will leave office .
 The new government has a working majority of 67 in the Chamber of Deputies but only 2 in the Senate . The government has 67 working-majority votes in the chamber of deputies but only two in Senate .
 The pope's summer residence at Castel Gandolfo is located in Rome . The Vatican is home to St. Peter’s Basilica, ten other buildings in Rome, and ten others . The pope is at the center of the world's most famous buildings, including St.
 Italy accepts the himself as a conservative i Vatican City as an independent state, in theological affairs . Vatican City is a state of independent state in the theological affairs of the Vatican .
 The basilica and its public square lie at the heart of the Vatican City . The Vatican City is home to the largest cathedral in the world .
 The mountainous republic of San Marino is dominated by Monte Titano, on which stands La Cesta fortress .
 A large community is resident in the country by the 400s and manages to retain its independence . The 400s are resident in a large community that manages to keep its own identity .
 In 1973 the Social Democrats are replaced by the Socialists and the tiny Movement for Statutory Liberties party . The Socialists are replaced with the tiny MSTL party .
 Malta withstands a lengthy Ottoman siege by the Habsburg Emperor Charles V in 1565 . Malta was defeated by the Ottoman Empire in the Battle of Malta .
 The Maltese rise in rebellion and the island is blockaded by the British . The island is blocked by British troops . The uprising is followed by a revolt against the British.
 Malta and its people were awarded the George Cross for their resistance in 1942 . Malta was awarded the highest civilian award for bravery in Europe for its resistance . Malta's resistance was the first to be awarded a George Cross .
 Malta is the only British colony where integration with the UK is seriously considered . Malta is currently a British colony in the UK and is considered to be part of the EU .
 His government favors a free-market approach to the economy, deregulating the banking, telecommunications, and trade sectors . His government has introduced much-needed economic and administrative reforms .
 Forced out of Rhodes by the Turks in 1522, the Knights of St. St. Louis were forced to leave Rhodes . The Knights were forced out of the island of Rhodes in 1526 . They fought the Turks for control of Rhodes .
 The assault then moved to the inner fortifications but was repulsed by savage fighting . The assault was repulsive but the assault was eventually stopped . It was the first attempt to break into the British capital's defences .
 The arrival of a relief force on September 7 convinced the Turks to cut their losses, which had mounted to 24,000 . Arrival of relief force convinced the Turkish army to cut losses .
 The foundation of the Red Cross in Geneva in 1863 by Swiss social activist Henri Dunant . The signing of the 1864 Geneva Convention on the conduct of war, made Geneva a center of international diplomacy . The Red Cross was founded in Geneva by social activist and social activist .
 She is aquitted in 1990, but the case reveals that the Public Prosecutor's office holds secret files on 200,000 people . The case was revealed in 1990 . She was aquitted, but prosecutors still have secret files of 200,00 people .
 In 1815 Liechtenstein joins the German Confederation, remaining a member until its dissolution in 1866 . A Rheinbund league of German princes, formed at the suggestion of Napoleon Bonaparte, does not outlast Napoleon .
 This lasts until the dismemberment of the AustroHungarian Empire in 1918 . This lasted until the dismembered Austrohungarian Empire was finished .
 Slovenia was the richest republic of the former Yugoslavia . Slovenia was also the first to declare independence from Yugoslavia .
 The Roman general Gaius Octavius founds a city on the site of Ljubljana . The city was found by the Roman general in the early 60s .
 Serbian rule merely increases Serbian domination, bureaucracy, and repression by the police . However his rule merely increased Serbian domination and repression .
 Slovenia seceded from Yugoslavia on June 25, 1991, and a 10-day war ensued . Slovenia was invaded by the federal army and the war lasted 10 days . Slovenians celebrate their independence from Yugoslavia in 1991 .
 In 1282 he declares the title of Duke of Austria to be hereditary, thus founding the Habsburg domination of Austria that is to last until 1918 . The title was made hereditary in 1282 . Austria was ruled out of Austria from 1282 to 1918 .
 Over the next two centuries, the Habsburgs steadily increase their lands through strategic marriages . They gained Burgundy, the Netherlands, and eventually Spain and southern Italy, as well as Hungary .
 It heralds the start of the Habsburgs' long decline in relation to France and Prussia . The French-Prussian defeat of the French in 17th century heralds a decline in relations .
 Austria takes the offensive against the Ottomans and steadily advances at their expense into the Balkans . Austria gained Hungary in 1699, gaining Hungary in 1799 .
 Silesia is ceded to Prussia . Maria Theresa is now ruler of the Habsburg lands . Maria theresa is the daughter of Maria Maria Maria .
 In 1795, Poland gains ""lesser Poland,"" including Cracow, in the third partition . In 1796, Poland gained the city of Cracogow .
 The end of Poland as an independent nation was confirmed by treaty in 1797 . Poland was confirmed as Poland by the end of the 1797 treaty .
 In 1806 Franz I of Austria is obliged to renounce his title as Holy Roman Emperor as the empire is dissolved by Napoleon . Franz I had declared himself emperor the year before the dissolution of the empire .
 In 1809-13 Austria is allied with France after a massive defeat at Wagram . But changes sides to defeat Napoleon at the Battle of the Nations at Leipzig in 1813 . Austria then wins the battle at the end of the war .
 Congress of Vienna of 1814-15 settles map of post-Napoleonic Europe . Austria gains territory in northern Italy and becomes titular head of the German Confederation .
 Only 23 when she came to the throne in 1740, Marie Theresa became one of the outstanding enlightened rulers of the 18th century . Marie Theresa is famed for her courage and determination .
 His fear of socialist revolt led him in March 1933 to suspend parliament and, in February 1934, to use the army against the socialists in Vienna . In March 1933, he suspended parliament and used the army to fight against the government .
 In May he introduced a fascist-style constitution, but he was an isolated figure . He was hated by the left and by the Nazis, who wanted a union with Germany .
 On July 25, 1934, he was shot dead by Nazi agents who had entered the Chancellery .
 Dollfuss's death weakened Austria, and opened the way to Hitler's takeover in 1928 . Dollsfuss died at the hands of the Nazis, who took over Austria in 1933 .
 Austria-Hungary invades Serbia, but is unsuccessful until the following year when its armies are supported by German troops . The following year, the Austrians were supported by Germany .
 Austria reduced to a rump state as a result of territorial concessions made to the new states of Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Yugoslavia . Austria's territorial concessions were made to new states including Czechsoslovakia and Hungary .
 Elections produce a stalemate and a return to the ‘grand coalition’ of the OVP and SPO in 1987 . The coalition lasts until 1999 . Elections produce an end to the "grand coalition"
 Roman rule over those tribes living west of the Rhine had already been accomplished by Julius Caesar in 56 acr. Julius Caesar had already ruled the tribes west of Rhine . Julius Caesar's rule over the tribes was already accomplished by Caesar in the 56th century .
 Romans make no serious attempts to conquer the Germans again . Romans send punitive expeditions across the Rhine against troublesome tribes . Romans do not attempt to conquer Germans again until the end of the war .
 Romans begin annexation of Agri Decumates, the triangle of land between the Rhine and Danube rivers, and fortify its frontier with the Germans along the Roman Limes .
 Frankish kingdom in the west and Burgundian kingdom in southwest of Germany are established in 476 . Roman Empire in west finally collapses in west after 476, ending in west Germany .
 Charlemagne's empire does not survive for long after his death in 814 . However, the empire does survive for a very long time . The empire did not survive long enough for the first time .
 Barbarossa was the German emperor who challenged papal authority and established German dominance over much of Europe . Frederick was the Holy Roman Roman Emperor of the Roman Empire .
 He was elected king in 1152 and immediately challenged the authority of the pope . The king challenged the pope's authority in a bid to become king . He challenged the Pope's authority and challenged his authority .
 Crowned emperor in 1155, he embarked on a series of six military campaigns against the Lombard leagues in northern Italy . He embarked on six campaigns in six years against Lombard league in Italy .
 Barbarossa recognized Alexander Ill as the true pope in 1177, and was reconciled to him . In 1177 he was finally recognized as the real pope, and reconciled with the pope .
 Barbarossa struggled violently with Henry the Lion, duke of Bavaria, who was eventually stripped of his possessions . Within the empire, the duke was stripped of all his possessions, including the possessions of the Bavaria .
 At the same time, Vikings from Scandinavia raid the north coasts and sail up the rivers searching for plunder . The Vikings are known to have raided north coasts of Scandinavia and north coasts .
 His kingdom includes most of western Germany and the Low Countries . Expansion eastward along the Baltic is only temporary, with the lands being lost again in 982 . His kingdom was lost in 983 .
 The German emperors have control over ecclesiastical appointments of bishops, abbots, and others . They grant lands as fiefs to these churchmen for them to administer . They retain control as the lands pass back to the crown on the death of the celibate churchmen .
 This system works as long as the emperor can keep control over ecclesiastical appointments . It acts as a balance against the powerful landholdings of the hereditary nobility . The emperor must keep control of the ecclesiastical appointment appointments .
 Frederick is challenged by powerful territorial princes, notably Henry the Lion of the Welf family . His attempt to tighten imperial control in Italy is defeated by the Lombard League of northern cities at Legarno in 1176 .
 Open warfare between Guelphs, led by Henry the Lion and allies of the pope, and the Ghibellines, the imperial party, erupts . Open warfare erupted between the Guelsphs and the . imperial party .
 Frederick’s death in 1190, the area covered by modern Germany is on the way to becoming a patchwork of nominally independent states . By the time of Frederick's death, modern Germany was on the verge of becoming an independent state . Frederick died at the age of 119
 An interregnum from 1254-73 sees great political instability as rivals fight it out for the imperial crown . Interregnum between 1254 and 73 sees great instability .
 Many new German cities are established in Poland during the 13th century as the empire continues to expand to the east . However, many new German towns and cities were established during the period .
 This marks the start of the Habsburg dynasty's domination of Austria and Germany . This is the first time the dynasty has ruled Austria or Germany since 1783 .
 Habsburg power is not restored until 1438, when Albert II is elected emperor . Albert II was elected emperor in 1438 . The reign reigns in 1441 .
 When he becomes emperor in 1493, Habsburg power in Europe grows considerably as more lands acquired by marriage and diplomacy . When he is emperor, he becomes king of Spain .
 On the death of Maximilian in 1519, he acquires the Habsburg lands and becomes Holy Roman Emperor . In 1519 he becomes the Holy Roman emperor . He acquires and becomes the next generation of monarchs .
 The League established a trading monopoly over most of northern Europe between the 13th and 17th centuries . The League, an alliance of city guilds, established a powertul trading monopoly in northern Europe . It was established by the League in 13th century .
 100,000 are slaughtered by Philip of Hesse, a Protestant who enjoys Luther's support . However, they are crushed by the army of the Protestant . Philip's army is defeated by the Protestant army of Philip of .
 Frederick William IV of Prussia refused what he called “a crown from the gutter"" part and Holy Roman Empire going to his brother, Ferdinand I . Ferdinand I; his Habsburg son Philip II inherits Spain . The role of king was offered to Frederick William .
 Calvinism was excluded from the tolerance extended by the Peace of Augsburg . Its main principle was allowing individual princes to decide their faith . Calvinism allowed it to take root .
 Catholic and Protestant states in Germany were involved in the 16th century conflict . Protestant defeat in 1623 led to the occupation of the Lower Palatinate by imperial and Spanish troops . The conflict was mainly between Protestant and Catholic states .
 Intervention by Denmark in 1625 and then by Sweden in 1630 tilts the balance back in favor of Protestant states . Intervention of France, a Catholic nation, against both imperial and Spanish Habsburgs in 1635 turns the conflict into a power struggle .
 By the end of the war, Germany is economically devastated, and divided into numerous small kingdoms, principalities, and bishoprics . Germany is now divided into several small kingdoms .
 It becomes a backwater within Europe, fought over by Habsburgs, the French, and others . It becomes an important part of the continent .
 The Habsburgs continue to rule the empire, which now exists in name only, as real power is with the numerous small states . Real power, such as it is, is in the hands of the small states, says the historian .
 During his reign he establishes Prussia as a major power in northern Germany . He gained Silesia during the War of the Austrian Succession in 1740-48 and Somerania and East Prussia in 1772 .
 Frederick II concedes full religious tolerance, abolishes torture, and liberates state serfs . A benevolent despot at home, Frederick II was a despot .
 By 1800, France's armies have pushed the French eastern border up to the Rhine . France's eastern border has been pushed up to 1800 .
 This comprises 16 princedoms and cities including Bavaria, Hesse, Saxony, Westphalia, and Württemberg . Bavaria is one of Germany's most populous states .
 The German confederation was replaced at the Congress of Vienna in 1814-15 . It was replaced by a new confederation of 39 substantially independent states .
 This abolishes the complicated system of intra-German tariffs and allows the relatively free trade of goods across much of northern Germany, promoting trade and industry .
 Austria remains in favor of protection and outside the union . It also consolidates Prussian power, as Austria remains outside of the union.
 By 1852 the Zollverein includes all German states except Austria, the two Mecklenburgs, and various Hanseatic cities . By that date all German states except Austria and various Hanseatic cities have been included .
 In Frankfurt a constituent assembly is elected and discusses the drafting of a national and liberal constitution for a united Germany . In Frankfurt, the assembly discusses the draft of a new constitution .
 The offer of the German imperial crown to King Frederick William IV of Prussia is rejected by him, and opposed by Austria, while nonGerman minorities and German radicals refuse to accept the parliament .
 By 1849 Austrian and Prussian forces have repressed the revolutions and the old order is restored . The old order was restored by 1849 .
 By the Treaty of Frankfurt, France surrenders its two eastern provinces of Alsace and Lorraine . By the end of the war, France surrendered its eastern provinces to the Germans .
 The new German empire has a federal constitution with many powers conceded to individual German states . Many powers have been conceded to the individual states .
 These states keep their own monarchies and institutions, which leads to conflict between them and the imperial crown and parliament . These states are states that have a monarchy and institutions that are independent of the crown .
 A second major congress in 1884-85 draws up the colonial map of Africa . By this stage, Germany is the diplomatic leader of Europe .
 Otto von Bismarck becomes Chancellor of Prussia, a post he holds until 1890 . He was the first German to hold the post in Prussia .
 First he gains Schleswig from Denmark in 1864 and then in the Seven Weeks War of 1866 defeats Austria at the Battle of Sadowa, forcing her out of German affairs . Then in 1866, he defeats Austria and forces her to leave Germany .
 The 1866 Peace of Prague gives Prussia control of most of Germany north of the Main River . This results in the 1866 peace of Prague which gives Prussian control of the region .
 In 1867 a North German Confederation is formed which unites all the north German states but excludes the southern states of Baden, Bavaria, Hesse-Darmstadt, Lichtenberg, Württemberg, and Austria .
 An artillery unit of the 400,000-strong French army is seen manning an outdated muzzle-loading cannon . Franco-Prussian war was fought between France and Germany .
 During the conflict this proved no match for the power and range of the new German breachloading cannon . During the war, the Germans were able to use the new cannon .
 It also gains Qingdao in China in 1897 and Samoa in the South Pacific in 1899 . It also gained Samoa in 1899, as well as islands in the western Pacific .
 A second crisis in 1911, when Germany sends a gunboat to Agadir, is resolved in France’s favor . The crisis was resolved in 1911 when Germany sent its gunboat . A second incident in 1911 was resolved by France in France's favor .
 Germany is obliged to retreat after the first Battle of the Marne in September 1914 . German troops become bogged down in trench warfare along the Western Front with great loss of life . Hopes for quick victory are not fulfilled when Germany is forced to retreat .
 Russia defeats for Russia precipitate two revolutions after which the new Bolshevik government withdraws from the war and accepts the degrading Peace of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918, surrendering much land .
 Kaiser Wilhelm II's abdication is announced on November 9 and he flees into exile in Holland . Facing a mutiny by military and naval forces and popular disillusionment with the war, he abdicated .
 Germany fought an effective U-boat campaign, sinking 50 British cruisers in the first 10 weeks of the war .
 Ebert is elected president and the constitution of the Weimar Republic is approved later in the same year . Ebert was the first president of the liberal democratic Weimar republic .
 It was forbidden Anschluss, or union, with Austria, and loses all its colonies to League of Nation mandates . It was also forbidden union with Austria and loses colonies .
 The Saarland was placed under the League of Nations, demilitarized, and occupied by Allied troops for 15 years . The Saerland was occupied by allied forces for the duration of the 15-year period .
 Germany is forced to accept its guilt in causing the war, pay financial reparations to the Allies, and limit the size of its armed forces . Germany also has to accept responsibility for the war and limit its military strength .
 The Weimar Republic proves too weak to weather the global economic recession that hits Germany after 1929 and soon causes mass unemployment . However, the Weimar republic fails to cope with the global recession that hit Germany in 1929 .
 The Reichstag finds itself unable to retain control of the situation as street violence escalates . Nazi supporters clash with communist, socialist, trade union opponents .
 Hitler secures passage of an Enabling Act granting him dictatorial powers for four years . Hitler blames the communists for an arson attack on the Reichstag in March, 1944 .
 By making himself the final arbiter between competing subordinates, Hitler increased his power . Hitler made himself an arbiter of power between subordinates and his subordinates .
 Jews are also removed from the armed services, the civil service, and, in 1938, all Jewish businesses are ""Aryanized" - that is, transferred to ""German"" ownership with minimal compensation paid . In 1938, Jewish businesses were transferred to German ownership .
 In March of the following year, in violation of the 1919 Treaty of Versailles, German troops reoccupy the demilitarized Rhineland . In March 1919, German forces occupied the area . German troops were forced to occupy the area after the war .
 At the Munich conference in September, UK and France agree to Hitler's occupation of the Sudetenland border region in Czechoslovakia . At the same time, the British and French agreed to accept Hitler's invasion .
 All of Czechoslovakia is under Nazi control, with Slovakia becoming a puppet state . By March 1939 all of the country is under control, and Slovakia becomes a puppet .
 By the end of the year Leningrad is under siege and German forces are just miles from Moscow . German forces were just miles away from Moscow when the war broke out in 1941 .
 Field Marshal Paulus is forced to surrender in February 1943 . 300,000 German soldiers die defending Stalingrad . Field marshal Paulus was forced to give up .
 The addition of United States forces on the Allied side eventually turns the tide in the Allies' favor . Hitler does not immediately appreciate the significance of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 .
 Allied forces land in Normandy, France, in June, liberating Paris in August, Brussels in September, and crossing the Rhine in March 1945 . In the East, Soviet forces advance through Eastern Europe toward Berlin .
 Germany loses part of East Prussia to the USSR and large parts of eastern Germany to Poland . The rest of the East Prussian part of the country was given to Poland by the Soviet Union .
 Around 6,000,000 Jews (half of whom died at Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp in Poland) have been massacred during the Holocaust .
 He integrated the nation into Western Europe and cultivated a friendship with France . The nation's first president was assassinated in 1968 .
 In December 1970 the West German chancellor Willy Brandt visited Poland; at the Warsaw Ghetto memorial, he expressed sorrow for Nazi war crimes . Brandt knelt in homage to the victims, which will become their future constitution .
 U.S. president John F Kennedy visited Berlin in June 1963 to give his famous Ich bin ein Berliner speech . Kennedy's visit further boosts morale in Berlin .
 For his work in promoting peace in Europe, Brandt is awarded the 1971 Nobel Peace Prize . For his policy of “Ostpolitik,” “east policy” or detente with Eastern Europe . Brandt was awarded the Nobel Prize .
 Agreements with the USSR about access to West Berlin reduce tensions in and around the city . West Berlin has long been a source of tension between the Soviet Union and West Berlin .
 East German government does not reduce its hardline rule, but it is told to change by Gorbachev . At first, East German authorities did not reduce their hardline rules . East German leaders were told to stop their hard line rule by the Soviet Union .
 Massive, peaceful protests break out across East Germany, notably in Dresden . The border is opened and Berliners begin dismantling the Berlin Wall .
 East and West Germany sign a treaty extending the West German currency and its economic, monetary, and social legislation to East Germany . The treaty extends the West's economic and monetary and social laws to East German .
 East German parliament votes for union as five lander lander join the Federal Republic . East German lander joins Federal Republic in the process of joining the new republic .
 First all-German elections held since 1933 result in Kohl-led government . First allGerman election since 1933 results in first allGerman government since 1933 .
 A people's assembly meeting in East Berlin in 1948—49 prepared a constitution for the new state . The new state came into being on October 7, 1949, as the German Democratic Republic . East Berlin was the birthplace of East Berlin .
 Industry was nationalized and agriculture collectivized, while reparations were made to the USSR for the cost of the war . The USSR made reparations to the Soviet Union .
 The resulting hardship led to riots and strikes in 1953, which were put down with Soviet troops and tanks . The resulting strikes and riots in 1953 led to the Soviet Union's intervention .
 EET RU pi n Ste i | 7 4 | j r ho d a, i $ 8 4 * E | L ; i i i j . iij leading many East Germans to flee through West Berlin in search of a better life .
 Berlin's outlet to the West was sealed in 1961 with the building of the Berlin Wall . The Berlin Wall was built in 1961 to stop the flow of refugees fleeing the city .
 The East German parliament removed all references to reunification of Germany from its constitution in 1974 . Relations between East and West Germany improved during the 1970s .
 East Germans through Hungary to the west as the Iron Curtain collapsed in 1989 threatened communist rule . However, a new exodus of East Germans from the west was not possible . East Germans began to leave Hungary in 1989 after the collapse of the communist regime .
 The fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe spelled the end of East Germany in 1990 . East Germany united with the west in 1990 after the fall of communism . Noncommunists entered the government .
 Germany has also been a leading light in the EU’s Rapid Reaction Force, providing almost half its personnel . Germany also provides almost half of the force's personnel, with almost half the personnel .
 The two main parties join a grand coalition led by Angela Merkel, the CDU leader and first woman to become German chancellor . Merkel is the first woman in Germany to become chancellor .
 Company develops a major maritime trading empire in the East Indies . Company develops major maritime empire in East Indies.
 Amsterdam's merchants' houses date from the 17th-century ""Golden Age,"" when the city was the wealthiest in the world . Amsterdam was the hub of international trade at the time of the Golden Age .
 William | of Orange-Nassau, also known as William the Silent, became Prince of Orange in 1544 . William was the Dutch leader of the 15th century .
 He was the main leader of the Dutch revolt against the Spanish that started the 80 Years War and ended with the independence of the United Provinces in 1648 . He was also a major figure in the Dutch revolution against Spain .
 Unhappy with the treatment of Dutch Protestants, William joined the Dutch uprising . William was unhappy with treatment of the Dutch Protestants .
 He was the most politically capable of the rebels, leading them to several military victories against the Spanish . He was also the most political and military leader of the Spanish-backed rebels .
 Declared an outlaw by Philip Il of Spain in 1580, he was murdered in Delft by a supporter of the king .
 United Kingdom of Netherlands formed that includes Belgium and Luxembourg . United Kingdom was formed from the Netherlands in 1960s .
 Dutch once had a major trading empire in Asia, South Africa, and the Americas . The Dutch once ruled over the Americas, Asia and South Africa .
 With Suriname's independence in 1975, that empire has now all but gone . Surinamesi's empire has been all but wiped out of the country .
 Island group consists of Curacao and Bonaire off Venezuela, and Saba, Sint Maarten, and St. Maarten . Island group also includes Saba and Sint Marten .
 Curacao and Sint Maarten become constituent countries of the Netherlands in the Netherlands after the war of the West Indies in the early 1900s . Curacoo and the island nation became part of the Dutch state of St. Maarten in the 1930s .
 The Flemish city of Antwerp rose to prominence in the 15th century as Bruges declined in importance . The city rose in prominence as the city of Brugs declined in prominence .
 The world's first stock exchange was opened here in 1460 . The city became Europe's chief commercial and financial center in the 1500s . It was helped by the arrival of Jewish diamond craftsmen expelled from Portugal .
 The towns of Flanders and Brabant are among the most prosperous in Europe . Wealth derived from the trade in wool .
 European powers decide to merge Belgium with the Netherlands under King William I of Orange . King William of Orange of the Netherlands was king of Belgium in 17th century . Belgium and the Netherlands were united under William's reign .
 1993 culmination of reforms creating a federal state with greater powers for regions and city governments . French, Flemish, and German were created in Belgium in 1993 .
 Four major battles were fought at Ypres, including the third, Passchendaele, in 1917, with disastrous loss of life . This railway station sign greeted hundreds of thousands of troops arriving at the front in Belgium .
 Claes Claes was found guilty of bribery in 1999 in connection with a defense contract . Claes is a former president of the United States. Claes has been convicted of bribery .
 Flemish separatists become the largest party in the subsequent general election . Flemisis won the election in a landslide .
 When Denmark becomes a constitutional monarchy in 1849, pressure grows for a constitution for Iceland . Pressure grows for Iceland to have a constitution .
 In 1980 Vigdís Finnbogadóttir became the world's first elected woman head of state . She was artistic director of the Reykjavíc Theater Company . o 2008 Financial crisis forces government to nationalize all three major banks .
 Central banks of Sweden, Norway, and Denmark put in place a 1.2 billion euro package to keep Icelandic economy from collapsing . Iceland's economy has been hit hard by recession in recent years .
 Norway is a mountainous country in Scandinavia that was ruled from Denmark for hundreds of years . The country was ruled by Denmark and ruled by Norway from Denmark .
 A brief rebellion led by Christian Frederik is ended by a Swedish invasion . The elderly Carl XIII of Sweden is elected king of Norway . Carl XIII was elected king .
 Center coalition government takes power with Lars Korvald as prime minister . Center coalition govt. takes over from the previous government of Denmark, which was formed in 2010 .
 Sweden and Denmark are joined in personal union under Queen Margrethe I of Denmark . The union was formed under the rule of the Danish monarchy . Denmark and Sweden were united under the Danish queen .
 Gustavus II Adolphus is mortally wounded at the battle of Lützen, near Leipzig, in 1632 . Sweden is victorious in the battle, but Sweden is defeated .
 His chancellor, Axel Oxenstierna, continues to manage affairs of state during her minority . His chancellor is also the prime minister .
 Swedish court attracts some of the best minds in Europe . She is an enthusiastic patron of the arts and is a patron of art .
 Having converted to Catholicism, she abdicates in 1654 and dies in Rome in 1689 .
 Gustavus Il Adolphus King of Sweden from 1611-32, led a formidably experienced and well-equipped army into Germany in 1630 . Gustavus turned the tide of the 50 Years War against the Catholic nations .
 C.980 Harald Bluetooth establishes unified Danish kingdom . 1000s Christianity is main religion .
 Unlike other occupied countries, Denmark's institutions continued to function as normal . Denmark was occupied by the Nazis during World War II, but was not occupied .
 The Nazis considered it a model occupation until a wave of strikes and protests prompted them to take full command . The Nazis were considered a model occupier until they took full command in 1940s .
 Baron Carl Gustav Emil Mannerheim was a Finnish field marshal . He was the Finnish leader of the Finnish World War II .
 Mannerheim rose to the rank of general in the czarist army of Russian-occupied Finland . He was born into a noble Swedish— Finnish family .
 In 1918 he led his forces against the Finnish Bolsheviks, and in the following year became regent of Finland . In 1918, he became the Finnish leader of the Finnish Revolution against the Bolsheviks . The following year he became Finland's regent .
 Defeated in the elections of 1919, he retired and became a philanthropist . He was defeated in the election of 1919 .
 In 1931 he returned to the fore as head of the Finnish defense council . He commanded the Finnish forces against the USSR in the Winter War of 1939—40 and again in 1941—44 .
 General Carl Gustav Mannerheim leads government to victory at Battle of Tampere . General Carl Gust Gust Gustaus led the Finnish government at the battle .
 Council moves to secede from Russia after the October Revolution when a Bolshevik government is imposed . Council secedes from Russia during October Revolution .
 Tallinn has always been an important center for Baltic Sea trade . Declares independence from Estonia in 1918 . Declared independence February 1918. Declares sovereignty February 1918 .
 During the 13th century it was the northernmost member of the Hanseatic League . It was the mercantile alliance of trading cities . During the 14th century, the city was northernmost in the league .
 Latvia is a Baltic nation with sizeable Russian and other minority populations . Latvia is one of the most populous countries in the Baltic Sea .
 The last Russian military installation in Latvia is dismantled . The Skrunda radar station is the last military installation to be dismantled in Latvia .
 Valdis Domrovskis of the center-right New Era party becomes prime minister . Valdis is the first Latvian politician to become a prime minister in Latvia .
 Poles and Lithuanians join the uprisings against Russian rule in 1831 and 1863 . Poles, Lithuanians and Poles join the uprising against Russia's rule .
 The marriage of Lithuanian Grand Prince Jagiello and Queen Jadwiga of Poland in 1586 united the two countries . The marriage was the result of a union between the two nations . The pagan prince converted to Catholicism, as did his people .
 The Jagiellonian domains, the largest in Europe, stretch from the Baltic to the Black Sea . In the 15th century the domains, which stretch from Baltic to Black Sea, were the largest domains in Europe .
 The two capitals of Cracow and Vilnius are replaced by a single capital city, Warsaw, in 1596 . Warsaw was the first capital city to have a capital city in Poland .
 Russian troops invade and take Warsaw and direct rule from Russia is imposed . Russian troops take over Warsaw and take over the city .
 The independent trade union Solidarity emerged out of a wave of strikes in the Gdansk shipyards in August 1980 . Solidarity was formed from a group of shipyards workers in the shipyards .
 Led by Lech Walesa, Poland soon became a vehide for Poles to demand widespread economic, social, and political changes and eventually to threaten communist rule itself . i EA 1.27 A Ua 1846 Austria annexes Cracow, established as a republic .
 Outlawed in 1982 after martial law imposed, Solidarity re-emerged in the late 1980s as communism collapsed . Solidarity movement forced into underground underground out of control in 1982 .
 Walesa was elected president of Poland in 1990 . Walesa became a political party in 1989, electing Walesa as president .
 Solidarity's success sparked 1989's anti-communist revolutions throughout eastern Europe . Solidarity helped spark the anti-Communist revolution in eastern Europe in 1989 . The success of Solidarity sparked the 1989's 'anti-communism' revolution in the region .
 Wg oe existence, and many of its leaders, including Lech Walesa, are interned . Many of the leaders of the Polish Republic, are in prison .
 His brother Jaroslaw loses presidential election to Bronislaw Komorowski of the center-right Civil Platform party . Jarosaw's sister Jarrozlaw was elected president of Poland in 2010 . Bronislawslaw Komorow is the current president of the Polish parliament .
 Prague is considered the third most important city in Europe, after Constantinople and Paris . Around this time, Prague was considered the most important in Europe .
 As leader of the ‘Prague Spring’ of 1968, he tried to introduce communism with a human face . He tried to relax its totalitarian grip on power without ending its rule . As leader, he introduced communism with the human face of communism .
 The policy failed when Warsaw Pact troops invaded in August and he was arrested . He was later expelled from the party .
 After the Velvet Revolution of 1989, he became speaker of the federal assembly . He was speaker of Russia's federal assembly in 1989 .
 The 1745 Treaty of Dresden confirms Prussian control over Silesia, except for a small part in the east known as Austrian Sileia .
 German is the sole administrative language of Bohemia and Moravia . German is decreed to be the sole official language of Czechoslovakia .
 The Diet of Bratislava declares Slovakian independence under the protection of the German Reich and the leadership of a former priest, Jozef Tiso . Tiso was the leader of the Slovakians during the Second World War .
 Gottwald, as leader of the largest party, is invited to lead an all-party coalition government . Gottwald is expected to lead a government of all parties in the country .
 Havel was president of Civic Forum with Havel as president . The "Velvet Revolution" achieves its aims and the free elections are won by Civic Forum . Havel's victory in the elections was achieved .
 Laws passed fining anyone using a minority language inside government buildings . Laws passed in 2012 banning anyone using minority language in government offices .
 The Magyars, a Finno-Ugric people from beyond the Ural mountains, move westward and conquer the region . So far, the Magyarans have been known to be the most powerful people in the world .
 Arpad, leader of the Magyars, founds a dynasty that lasts until 1301.900 .
 As part of the truce, Catholic missionaries arrive to convert Magyars . Catholic missionaries arrived to convert the Magyar .
 Mining of the country's gold, silver, and copper deposits makes it one of the richest countries in Europe . Success against the Turks brings it Bosnia, Moldavia and Wallachia, Moravia and Silesia by 1485 .
 Matthias, nicknamed “Corvinus” after the raven on his emblem, did much to centralize the state during his reign . Matthias increased taxes to pay for a standing army .
 He championed the arts and sciences, which flourished in his court . He also championed the sciences and the arts .
 Matthias successfully expanded Hungarian territory, taking many of Habsburg Frederick III's lands . Matthias took many of Frederick's lands, including Hungary and Austria .
 After his death in 1490, all these gains were quickly lost . King Louis II was killed in the battle of Mohacs, where he died .
 The Turks now control central Hungary, while the west of the country submits to the Austrian Habsburgs . The west of Hungary is now under the control of the Turks .
 Hungarian literature and sciences contribute to a growing Hungarian nationalism . Hungarian literature, science and science contribute to growing Hungarian nationalist .
 Ferdinand is persuaded to abdicate and is succeeded by his nephew, Franz-Josef . Ferdinand abdicates and succeeds him in the death of his nephew Franz Josef. Ferdinand is succeeded in the throne .
 Some 200,000 Russian troops crush the revolt and Kossuth flees the country . The revolt took place in Russia in 1881 .
 The two semi-independent states are held together by the emperor, who is king of Hungary, and his court, common armed forces, and common currency and customs union . But there is no single government and very different constitutions .
 Admiral Horthy acts as regent for the Hungarian claimant Charles, but refuses to hand over power to him when he returns to claim his throne in 1921 . Romania intervenes militarily and hands power to Horthy, who acts as a regent . Charles claims to have died in 1918
 When the Soviet Red Army enters in October, Horthy is forced to resign . The Red Army forces Horthy to resign as a result .
 When Nagy announces Hungary will leave the Warsaw Pact, Soviet forces enter the country . Nagy announced Hungary was leaving the Warsaw pact . Soviet forces entered the country after Nagy's announcement .
 The rebels seen climbing onto a Soviet tank would soon be rounded up and interned to socialism in order to liberalize communist rule gradually . The rebels were seen climbing on tanks to protest against Soviet rule .
 Hungary’s airspace is used in the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia during the Kosovo crisis . Hungary's airspace was used in NATO bombing during the Yugoslavia crisis .
 The Latinderived language and the country's name are hallmarks of lasting Roman influence . The country's language and its name have been heavily influenced by Roman influences .
 Wallachia pays tribute to the Ottoman Empire from 1417, Moldavia from 1456, and Transylvania from 1526 . Wallacia pays homage to the Ottomar Empire in 1417 and 1456 . Moldavia pays tribute from 1426 .
 By the end of the war, Romania has lost 335,700 men, or 44 percent of all its soldiers . Another 120,000, or 16 percent, were injured in the conflict .
 Coup by fascist Iron Guard as King Carol abdicates in favor of son, Michael . Coup by the Iron Guard led to the abdication of King Carol .
 Communist-led National Democratic Front wins majority in disputed elections . Communist-dominated National Socialist Party won majority of votes in disputed election .
 He stressed the sovereignty of his country against the USSR, although he kept Romania in both the Warsaw Pact and Comecon .
 His obsession with paying off the national debt impoverished the country . His cult of personality, repression of minorities, and grandiose public works programs made him unpopular .
 When Romania turned against the communists in 1989, he and his hated wife were summarily tried and executed on Christmas Day . He and his wife were executed when the communist government turned against them .
 Formerly part of Romania and then the USSR, y Moldova has decided to remain independent . Moldova was part of the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 In 1349 first independent Moldavian state emerges, but is soon a subject of Poland . First independent Moldovian state emerged, but was soon subject to Poland . Moldovia was first independent state in 1349 .
 By the end of the 16th century, Bessarabia is under Turkish control . Western Moldavia eventually becomes part of Romania .
 Transdniestria (on eastern bank of the Dniester) also declares sovereignty . Transniestria is located on the eastern side of the border with Ukraine .
 Gagauzia in the south declares independence in 1994, but accepts autonomy in 1994 . The south-eastern region of the country has been ruled out of independence since 1994 .
 In 2010, the Constitutional Court dissolves parliament and orders fresh elections to be held . In the revote a right-wing coalition is victorious, but in 2010 the court ordered fresh elections . In 2010 a right wing coalition was victorious in revote .
 Bulgaria is a mountainous Slav country on the Black Sea S that was once at the heart of the Byzantine Empire . The country is known for its mountainous Slav culture and culture .
 The Bulgarian Patriarchate is suppressed, and the church turns toward the Greek Orthodox Church . The church turns to the Orthodox Church of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church.
 It would have created a new, greater Bulgarian state stretching from the Danube to the Aegean . The state would have been created in order to create a greater state of Bulgaria . The country was ruled by the Roman Empire in the early 1900s .
 Balkan mountains; Eastern Rumelia south of the Balkan Mountains and under Turkish rule; and Macedonia and Eastern Thrace . Macedonia and Thrace are also under Turkey's rule . The Balkan region is known as the region of the Balkans .
 A dispute between Bulgaria and Russia results in the abdication of the Bulgarian ruler Alexander of Battenberg (elected in 1879) and the election in 1887 by the National Assembly of the pro-Austrian Ferdinand of Saxe-Coburg to the throne .
 Bulgaria lost Dobruja to Romania in the north, Thrace in the southeast to Turkey, and most of its gains in Macedonia to Greece and Serbia . In 1913, Bulgaria attacked its former allies, who are now joined by Romania and Turkey .
 A succession of coalition governments lasts until a military government seizes power in a coup . The U.S. has a long history of coups, coups and coalition governments .
 Bulgaria joins the Axis powers and takes part in the occupation of Yugoslavia, for which it is granted much of Macedonia . Bulgaria was granted a much of the territory of Yugoslavia in exchange for its part of the occupation .
 An antifascist Fatherland Front coalition, including the Agrarian and Bulgarian Communist parties, takes power in a bloodless coup . Agrarians and Bulgarian Communists take power in the coup .
 Bulgarians celebrate their national day on March 3. March 3 is March 4 . Bulgarians are the first Bulgarians to celebrate March 3, 1878 .
 On this day in 1878 the Treaty of Stefano was signed, ending the RussoTurkish War and granting independence to Ottoman-controlled Bulgaria . The treaty was signed by the Ottoman Empire and ended the Russo Turkish War .
 1946 The country is renamed the People's Republic of Bulgaria . The UK wanted to limit Russian influence in Bulgaria .
 A Soviet-style constitution is adopted and a one-party state established . A one-state state is established in the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 After he dies in 1950, he is replaced by “Little Stalin’s” Vulko Chervenkov, who begins a BCP purge and mass collectivization . He dies in 1952 .
 The Union of Democratic Forces is formed by propping up the failing Ottomans. in the Mediterranean . It is formed . in the . Mediterranean by supporting the failing Ottoman Empire .
 Austria-Hungary wished to extend its influence in the Balkans . The Austrians wanted to extend their influence in Balkans .
 As a result, Bulgaria was vastly reduced, losing Macedonia and Eastern Rumelia in the resulting Treaty of Berlin . The resulting treaty of Berlin saw Bulgaria lose both Macedonia and Rumelia .
 The aspirations of the peoples of the Balkans themselves were all but ignored in the new treaty, sowing the seeds for future crises in the region . The new treaty is a step in the right direction for the future of the region's future .
 A general election produces no overall result but Zhelyu Zhelev, UDF leader, becomes president, with the BSP in government . The BSP is in government but the UDF is in power .
 The country is renamed Republic of Bulgaria and communist symbols removed from the national flag . Communist symbols are removed from national flag and national symbol removed from flag .
 Presidential elections won by opposition UDF candidate, Peter Stoyanov . Presidential elections were held in 2008 in Moscow .
 A Croat duchy is formed, the Croats accepting rule by the Franks in the following century . The Croats accept rule from the Franks after the war, and the Croat accept it .
 A truce with the Byzantine Empire and its maritime successors, the Venetians, is followed by expansion down the coast in Dalmatia . A truce in the conflicts with the . Byzantine Empire was followed by the expansion of the Dalmatian coast .
 Croatia is conquered by Hungary, Zvonimir's widow being the sister of the Hungarian king . Croatia is captured by Hungary and Croatia is destroyed by the Hungarians .
 In 1102 Croatia unites with Hungary, although it retains some measure of autonomy . Croatia is one of the last monarchs to unite with Hungary in 1102 .
 Croatia is split between the Austro-Hungarian and the Ottoman Empires . Croatia is now part of Croatia . Croatia was ruled by the Ottoman Empire .
 Recolonization of Croatia with Christians takes place, including establishing pockets of Serbian population in Croatia . Croatia is now part of Croatia, part of the European Union .
 In 1849 Croatia becomes an Austrian crown land after a revolt in Austriancontrolled Hungary in 1848 is crushed, with the assistance of Croatian (and Russian) troops . Croatia becomes a crown land in 1849 after the revolt in Hungary is crushed .
 Suleyman the Magnificent rode to victory over the Hungarians at the Battle of Mohács in 1526 . The battle took place in Hungary at the end of the 15th century .
 In 1868 the Hungarians recognize the existence of the Croatian nation, albeit subordinate to Hungary, with its official language, parliament, and ruler, invoking the 12thcentury agreement to this effect . The Hungarians recognized the existence of Croatian nation in 1868 . The 12th century
 Croatian exiles in London help in 1915 to form the Yugoslav Committee . Croatian exile continues to demand union with Serbia .
 In December the Serbian prince, Alexander, proclaims the united kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes . In December, Alexander proclaimed the kingdom of Serbia, Croatia and Slovenia .
 A unitary constitution, promulgated in 1921, is opposed by Croat parliamentarians . Croatia's parliamentarians are opposed to the idea of a unitary state .
 The Ustase persecute the Serbs and others, killing several hundred thousand of them in Jasenovac and other concentration camps . Several hundred thousand Serbs were killed in the Ustases .
 Serb Chetnik resistance fighters retaliate by killing many Croats in Bosnia and elsewhere . Serb Croat resistance fighters kill many Croat in Bosnia, Croatia, Bosnia and beyond .
 Croatian fascists, the Ustase, summarily executed ethnic Serbs in Croatia during World War I . Up to 200,000 troops and civilians attempt to flee the country during the war .
 The Ustase were especially brutal, even by fascist standards, killing thousands and leaving a legacy of anti-Croat feeling . At least 110,000 were killed by Tito's troops in Serbia .
 Serbia is facing pressure from Croatia and Slovenia over greater republican autonomy . Serbia is opposed by hardliners in Serbia, who demand a strong centralized state .
 Communist parties of the six republics differ sharply over how to achieve reform . However, communist parties differ sharply on how they want to reform .
 Nationalist parties win elections in Slovenia, Macedonia, Bosnia and Bosnia-Herzegovina . Nationalists win election in Slovenia and Macedonia .
 The rebel Serb republic of Krajina, in the west of Croatia, is proclaimed . Serb forces invade Western Slavonia and other regions, while the rebel Serbs republic is declared .
 In 1377 he is crowned king of Serbia, Bosnia, Croatia, Croatia and the coast . However, he fails to prevent an Ottoman Turkish victory over the Serbs at Kosovo in 1389 .
 Under the Treaty of Karlowitz in 1699 Bosnia is divided between the Ottoman and Habsburg Empires . Bosnia was part of the Ottoman Empire until 1699 . Under the treaty, Bosnia is part of Bosnia and part of Austria .
 After occupying territory in Macedonia and Bulgaria, he was defeated and exiled . He occupied territory in both countries, but was eventually defeated .
 Serbia declares war on the Turks, but is swiftly defeated . Serbia had long aspired to unification with Bosnia, but was defeated by the Turks .
 AustriaHungary occupies Bosnia-Herzegovina and the Sandzak of Novi Pazar, a narrow strip of land separating Serbia from Montenegro, after Turkey's defeat in the Russo-Turkish war of 1877-78 . Austria occupied the area after the war of
 Without Russian support, can do nothing and the annexation is recognized by the major European powers in April 1909 . The annexation of Crimea in Crimea is recognized as an annexation in 1909 .
 Austrian ultimatum rejected by Serbia and the war between them spreads across Europe . Austria and Serbia have been at odds for years over the years . Serbia and Austria are at odds over the future of Serbia-Austria .
 Bosnia is united with Serbia in the kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes . The kingdom is also known as the Kingdom of Bosnia and the Republic of Croatia .
 In Bosnia—Herzegovina the local regime is characterized by corruption and authoritarianism . In Bosnia, the local government has been described as corrupt and authoritarian .
 Serbs declare “Republika Srpska’s” an independent Serbian republic, in Bosnia . Serbs declared an independent Serb Republic of Bosnia in June 2011 .
 Muslims defend themselves against both Croat and Serb forces . A three-sided civil war begins with Muslims defending themselves against Serb and Croat forces . Muslims defend them from both Serbs and Croatians .
 Bosnian Serb commander Dusko Tadic was sentenced to 20 years in prison for crimes against the Muslims in Omarska and other detention camps . Tadic is serving a 20-year prison term for his crimes against Muslims in the Bosnian war .
 The court has given a voice to thousands of victims who have testified as witnesses against defendants . and imposes sanctions. and imposes . sanctions .
 It also condemns ‘ethnic cleansing’ by Serbs of Muslims and Croats from parts of Bosnia . It also approves the use of force to restore peace . The Bosnian Serb ethnic cleansing is condemned by the UN .
 The agreement sets up two separate states within Bosnia . The Muslim-Croat Federation and Republika Srpska will operate under a rotating presidency .
 In 1993 the destruction by Bosnian Croats of the 16th-century bridge linking Croat and Muslim communities on either side of the River Neretva in Mostar symbolized the collapse of Bosnia .
 In Bosnia, nationalist parties win largest vote share in elections, cementing ethnic divisions . Nationalist parties cemented ethnic divisions in the country .
 The Western Roman Empire declines in the 4th century and the territory is conquered, in turn, by the Eastern Roman Empire . The Huns and Bulgars, and the Avars, bring Slavs to the area as vassals .
 Eastern Orthodox Serbs in the south and west become part of the Bulgarian Empire at the beginning of the 900s but gain some autonomy under Stephen Vojislav in the 1030s . 1101 civil war breaks out in Serbia after the death of King Constantin Bodin .
 Milos Obrenovic is recognized as hereditary prince of autonomous Serbia . Milos has been awarded the title of Serbia's first hereditary prince .
 He attempts to expand Serbia, before abdicating in 1839 in the face of opposition . He abdicated in the aftermath of an uprising against him in Serbia .
 A period of factional fighting is followed by a coup in 1842 that brings Alexander Karageorgevic to power . A coup was followed by the death of the king of Montenegro in 1841 .
 His son Michael succeeds him in attempting to modernize the Serbian government . He was assassinated in 1868 after being assassinated by his son .
 Serbian reaction to growing calls for independent Kosovo in the 1990s was brutal . Such nationalist sentiments explain the brutal Serbian reaction . Insurgentists. insurrectionists .
 Serbia becomes an independent principality under the Treaty of San Stefano . Russia declares war in support of Serbia in 1877 . Serbia becomes independent after the Turkish defeat .
 Serbia loses some territory back to Turkey under the 1878 Treaty of Berlin . Serbia gains land in the southeast from Bulgaria under the treaty . Serbia gained land from Turkey in 1878 .
 A period of nationalist and international conflict follows in the region . The region is now in the midst of a period of international conflict .
 King Peter's successor, King Peter, begins liberalization and allows parliamentary government . King Peter began liberalizing and allowing parliamentary government in his reign .
 Serbia protests but, without its Russian ally’s support, can do nothing . Serbia can't do nothing without Russia's support . Serbia protests, but can't take action without Russian backing .
 Serbia increases its territory to the south after the defeat of Turkey, and then gains more land from Bulgaria after its defeat in Second Balkan War of 1913 . Serbia increased its territory after defeating Turkey in the war of 1913, then gained more land .
 A unitary constitution, promulgated in 1921, is consistently opposed by Croat parliamentarians . Croatia's parliamentarians are consistently opposed to unitary constitutions . Croatia is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Kosovo and the Hungarianspeaking province of Vojvodina in the north are given the status of autonomous regions within Serbia . The majority Albanian region of Kosovo has the status as an autonomous region of Serbia .
 Serbia is opposed by hardliners in Serbia, who demand a strong centralized state . Pressure from Croatia and Slovenia for greater autonomy is also opposed by Serbia hardliners .
 Fighting in Slovenia as Serb-dominated Yugoslav National Army attempts to take control of the republic . Serbdominated Slovenian National Army is fighting in Slovenia .
 Elections in Kosovo declared illegal by Serbian authorities . Democratic Alliance of Kosovo leader Ibrahim Rugova elected president and proclaims independence . Serbian authorities declare Kosovo elections illegal .
 Opposition candidate Vojislav Kostunica sweeps to power after anti-Milosevic protests . Opposition candidate has been in power for more than a decade .
 Turkish rule leads to decline of Christian population through emigration . Turkish rule led to decline in Christian population .
 Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization formed in 1893 calls for ""Macedonia for the Macedonians" and a Balkan federation . Organization formed by 1893 called for an independent Macedonian Republic .
 Serbian-held Macedonia becomes part of Yugoslavia at the end of World War I in 1918 . Serbia-held Macedonia is part of the Yugoslav Republic of Yugoslavia .
 Milosevic agrees to withdraw military forces from Kosovo in June . UN-backed force, KFOR, enters Kosovo after Milosevi agrees to pull troops .
 Macedonians break ceasefire with Albanian rebels seeking greater autonomy . Macedonia broke ceasefire with rebels in June 2001, shelling alleged insurgent positions .
 Successive waves of invasions of the Balkans precipitate major population movements . SOOSCE: Successive invasions have precipitated major population movement . SoosCE: The Balkans has been a source of instability in recent years .
 Ottoman Turks subject local princes to their rule in 1380s . The country was divided into feuding principalities . Ottoman Turks ruled the country for centuries .
 A Turkish reconquest, completed in 1501, leads to a strong Islamization . The reconquest of 1501 led to the creation of Islam in the Ottoman Empire .
 Foreign travel is banned, and thousands are killed in political purges . Foreign travel bans are banned and thousands of people are killed . Thousands of people have been killed in the past decade .
 Albania now isolated from communist world and from western Europe . Albania is now completely isolated from the communist world . Albania now has a history of isolation from western European isolation .
 Since 1974, the island has been divided into the Greek south and the Turkish north . The island was divided into Greece and Turkey since 1974 .
 Richard marries Berengaria of Navarre on the island in 1191 and she is crowned Queen of England and Cyprus . Richard is Richard's first wife to be crowned queen of the island . Richard was Richard's second wife, Queen of the Kingdom of Cyprus .
 UK takes over administration of Cyprus under continued Turkish sovereignty . UK takes control of administration of Cyrovia under continued continued Turkish sovereign sovereignty .
 UN sends in troops to keep the peace in 1964 as fighting intensifies . UN troops sent in to help keep peace between the two communities .
 Turkey invades to protect the Turkish community, and partitions the island along what becomes the Green Line . 200,000 Greek Cypriots flee the Turkish north, while 65,000 Turkish Cypriot flee in the other direction .
 Opposition communist leader Demtris Christofias wins presidential elections . Demtras Christofia is a former communist leader of Greece . He was elected to the presidency of Greece in 2010 .
 Alexander overthrows the Persian Empire and extends Greek rule as far as India . Alexander's rule extends from Persian Empire to Indian Empire .
 Ottomans attempt to regain power, but the Greeks appeal for help from France, Britain, and Russia . The Greeks appeal to help from the French, British, and Russian forces .
 A mass migration of ethnic Turks into Turkey and ethnic Greeks into Greece ensues . Ethnic Turks and Greeks are a major factor in the migration of Turks to Turkey .
 After an inconclusive election in 1936, a right-wing dictatorship is established . General Joannis Metaxas is established in the 1930s . The country was ruled by a dictatorship under Metaxa .
 As the German army retreats in late 1944, the two groups fight for control of Greece . The two groups are seen fighting for control in Greece .
 The turning point in the war came with the destruction of a joint Ottoman—Egyptian fleet at Naravino Bay in 1827 by British, French, and Russian forces .
 On December 3, 1944, a bitter civil war erupted in Athens . The communist and royalist guerrilla groups had jointly resisted the Germans during the wartime occupation of Greece .
 ELAS guerrillas overran the whole of Greece except Athens and Salonika . After the German withdrawal an uneasy coalition existed between the two that soon broke as ELAS overran Greece .
 Greek Rally, now the National Radical Union, passes to Constantine Karamanlis . Greek Rally was founded by the Greek Rally in 1968 . The Greek Rally is the National Socialist Party of Greece .
 The “Colonels’ regime"" falls, having failed to help Cyprus . New Democracy wins elections with Constantine Karamanlis as premier . New democracy wins elections .
 For the Greeks the civil war left a deeper psychological scar than World War I. I. II . For the Greek civil war, the war was the first to leave a lasting psychological scar . The Greek Civil War left a deep psychological scar.
 Many resistance fighters who had played an honorable part in the defeat of Germany lost their lives . The left remained alienated and outside Greek politics until 1981, while many resistance fighters died .
 New Democracy narrowly wins reelection, despite criticism of its handling of the fires . The state's largest state-run government has been criticized for handling the fires in recent years .
 Varangians use the river routes of the Dnieper for trade as far afield as Constantinople, the Byzantine Empire and the Middle East . The Swedish Vikings used the river route to trade in Europe and Asia .
 The polity of Rus has disintegrated since its golden age under Prince Yaroslav the Wise . It has been ruled by members of the same dynasty since Yaroslav's reign .
 In 1326 the Metropolitan of Russia moves his seat to Moscow, after residing in Vladimir since the fall of Kiev . He had lived in Vladimir, Vladimir, since 1326, since Kiev fell in 1326 .
 Moscow comes to regard itself as Constantinople's successor, “the third Rome” and center of Orthodox Christianity . Moscow regards itself as the successor of Constantinople, "The third Rome"
 When Novgorod falls to Moscow in 1471, the Russian princedoms are united . When Novorod falls, Moscow becomes one of Russia's most powerful cities . The Russian Princedoms were united in the 14th century .
 Assault on palace by Bolshevik forces in 1917 was one of the seminal events of the Russian Revolution . The assault on the palace was a major event of the 1917 revolution .
 Ivan Ill Grand Prince of Moscow from 1462, lvan assumed the title Sovereign of all Russia in 1493, and, in marrying a Byzantine princess, acquired the emblem of the two-headed eagle of Byzantium . In 1501 ivan Ill invades Poland-Lith
 His reign effectively begins in 1547, when he becomes the first ruler to be crowned czar . He is also known as the first czar of Russia to have been crowned in the 1500s .
 He conquers the Khanates of Kazan in 1552 and of Astrakhan in 1556 . He steadily expands Russian territory south toward the Caspian and Black seas . He opened up trade routes down the Volga to Central Asia .
 He seizes the boyars' lands and hands them to a service nobility dependent on the czar . The boyars were given their lands to the service nobility, dependent on czar's orders . The czar seized their lands and handed them to service nobility .
 The second half of his rule is marked by repression of the boyars, many of whom are executed for treason . The boyars were executed for their crimes . Many of his reigns were marked with repression and executions .
 Fur trappers and traders establish a series of trading fairs in southern Siberia . The trade in furs is heavily regulated, and brings in great wealth .
 On his death in 1605, the “Time of Troubles” begins—a turbulent period resulting from the lack of a natural successor to the throne, a rise in social discontent, and war in Russia sparked by Swedish and Polish aggression . Russia .
 Russia abandons vast region north of the Amur river to Manchu China . By 1689 Treaty of Nerchinsk, Russia abandoned vast part of the region .
 Uprisings by Don and Dnieper Cossacks against Polish rule allow Russia to extend its territories south to the Ottoman client state of the Crimea and west to Kiev .
 Initially he is joint czar with his mentally challenged half-brother Ivan V under the regency of their elder sister Sophia . He is initially co-crowned with Ivan V, Ivan V . He was born in 1918 .
 Peter introduces, by force where necessary, Western culture, customs, education, economy, and government to Russia . St. Peter introduces Western culture to Russia by force .
 War with Sweden prompts Peter to create Russia’s first navy and its first modern army . Peter created Russia's first modern navy and modern army after war with Sweden . Peter's first navy was created in 18th century Russia .
 He dies in 1725, having had his son executed and established the right of the sovereign to choose a successor .
 Defeat by the Ottomans at Prut in the Balkans in 1711 ends plans to expand into the Balkans . Russia is forced to hand Azov back, only regaining it in 1736 .
 Russia defeated by Sweden at Narva in 1700 but defeats the Swedish king, Charles XII, at Poltava in Ukraine in 1709 . Russia defeated Sweden in 1700, 1709, but defeated Sweden again in 1717 .
 The treaties that end the war in 1720-21 give Russia control over Estonia, Ingria, and part of Karelia . The treaties give Russia access to the Baltic Sea, giving it control of Estonia and Ingria .
 Her reign extends Russian territory at the expense of Poland and Turkey . Although initially the ideas of the Enlightenment are welcomed in the Russian state, they are suppressed after the French Revolution of 1789 . The Enlightenment is suppressed in Russia after the revolution .
 The second partition in 1793 brings west Ukraine; the third in 1795 brings Lithuania and most of Belarussia . The third partition of 1795 brought Lithuania, most of the Belarussian region, into Ukraine .
 He is assassinated in 1801, after a conspiracy is hatched among sections of the increasingly alienated nobility . The assassination takes place in the wake of his assassination .
 The Orthodox Christian kingdom of Georgia voluntarily unites with Russia . He is succeeded by his son Alexander I 1801 . He was succeeded by Alexander I .
 Czar Alexander I refuses to surrender; the French are forced to retreat through the Russian winter, pursued by the Russian army . The French are cut off from their supply lines, and the Czar is forced to abandon his army .
 Congress of Vienna of 1815 redraws the political map of Europe . Russia gave Poland control over the whole of Poland and established Russia as a major force in European affairs .
 Antiautocratic ideas gained popularity among the young nobility during the military campaigns in the west . Antiautsocratic ideas gain popularity during military campaigns .
 These czarist bank notes date from the time of the 1917 Revolution . The paper ruble dates back to the czarist regime .
 Communist dreams of abolishing money were short-lived even though hyperinflation during the civil war left the paper ruble worthless . The Soviet Union was defeated by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 Russian troops are sent at Austria’s request to put down the revolution in Hungary . Russian troops were sent to Hungary at the request of Austria's request .
 The conflict was prompted by Nicholas’s decision to occupy the Balkan provinces of Moldavia and Wallachia in 1853 . Russian threats to British interests in the Mediterranean and to the sovereignty of the Ottoman Empire were also cited .
 By 1875 it has gained the whole of the large offshore island of Sakhalin . By the end of the 18th century it had gained control of the island .
 The failure of the Populists' crusade to win the hearts of Russia's peasants leads some factions to turn to terrorism . In 1874-77 the failure of a Populist' crusade led to some factions turning to terrorism.
 Serfs have to pay redemption fees for the land they tilled . Massive discontent remains, however, as the serfs have been forced to pay for land .
 The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was created after the adoption of its founding treaty by the Congress of Soviets in Moscow on December 30, 1922 . The Union was created in 1922 .
 Delegates came from four republics -- Russia, Ukraine, Belorussia, and Transcaucasia . Delegates from Russia and Ukraine attended the event .
 By 1941, there were 15 constituent republics in the union, each with their own rights but subject to direction from the governing body of the Union .
 The 1936 constitution set up various councils and an assembly of deputies . All policy from 1923 was determined by the general secretary of the party, Joseph Stalin .
 Narodnaya Volya is an offshoot of the Populist movement . The group was formed by the terrorist group Narodniknikniknya . The terrorist group is based in St. Petersburg, Russia .
 Alexander III establishes a period of reaction, russification, and militant Orthodoxy . Alexander III established a period for reaction to the rise of Russian Orthodoxy in Russia .
 Russian industry grows by an average of 8 percent a year, creating a significant and highly localized working class . In the 1890s, Russian industry grew by an estimated 8 percent per year .
 Marxism begins to attract considerable strength among intellectuals and radicals . Marxism is considered a form of radicalism in Russia .
 A mutiny on the battleship Potemkin in the Black Sea fleet spreads to other units in the army and navy, and there is a general strike, forcing Czar Nicholas to grant a constitution, a legislative Duma, and a prime minister . The general strike is forcing C
 In the October Revolution, the Bolsheviks seize power with Lenin as leader . Lenin was Lenin's first Bolshevik leader in Russia .
 Russia loses Finland, the Baltic States, Poland, Belorussia, Ukraine, and states in the Caucasus . Russia also loses Finland and the Baltic states .
 Up to 7 million were arrested and 3 million killed through execution or internment . Up to 3 million were killed in the process of arrest and internment in China .
 Russia supplied one-third of Europe's oil and 40 percent of its gas in 2006 . In 2006 Russia supplied 1.3 percent of the continent's oil, 40 percent its gas .
 Russia has occasionally used these resources for political ends, cutting off supplies to Georgia and Ukraine . Russia has also cut supplies to Ukraine and Georgia and Georgia .
 Under the Yalta and Potsdam agreements between the USSR, US, and UK, eastern and most of southeastern Europe fall within the Soviet zone of influence . Under the agreements, eastern Europe fell within the USSR zone of power .
 Stalin, fearing the penetration of Western capitalist values, persecutes returning soldiers . Stalin believed to have persecured his soldiers from the Soviet Union . Stalin feared the spread of Western capitalism in Russia .
 On November 1, 1991, Chechnya declared its independence as the USSR collapsed . Chechenya, a Soviet republic, declared independence in 1991 .
 Fighting resumed in 1999 and has continued ever since, with great brutality from Russian forces . Chechens now identify the Chechens as Muslim terrorists rather than as a people seeking to rule themselves .
 Russia and the other republics leave the USSR and set up the Commonwealth of Independent States . The USSR collapses as Russia joins the other Soviet republics leaving .
 Russia takes up the seat of the former USSR on the UN Security Council . Russia will be the first member of the Security Council since the Soviet Union was founded .
 Yeltsin resigns and the prime minister, Vladimir Putin, becomes acting president . Vladimir Putin is acting president of Russia . Yeltsins resigns as president . Putin is the first Russian president to step down from power .
 In renewed military offensive against Chechnya, Chechen capital Grozny falls to Russian forces . Russian forces have taken control of the region since April . Chechen rebels have been fighting for years in the region .
 He attacks the ‘oligarchs’ who made fortunes in privatizations of former state enterprises . He attacks them for their role in privatizing former state firms .
 Russia and NATO establish a council to cooperate on countering terrorism . Russia, NATO establish council to coordinate efforts to counter terrorism . NATO and Russia have a history of cooperation .
 Two years later, hundreds of children die in the Beslan school massacre . Hundreds of children were killed in the massacre in Beslan, Russia .
 Kremlin says this is an economic decision, while Kiev claims political motives . Kremlin says it is economic decision; Kiev says it has political reasons .
 Relations with Georgia deteriorate after Russian officers arrested on suspicion of spying . Russian officers are accused of spying in Georgia . Georgia has been hit hard by the arrests of Russian officers .
 Tensions with Georgia over the separatist South Ossetia region lead to war . Tensions between Georgia and Georgia over a separatist region led to war in 2008 .
 Russian forces pull back from positions in Georgia, but retain a strong presence in South Ossetia . Russian forces withdraw from positions but retain strong presence there . Russian troops pull back, but remain in control of the region .
 Russia threatens to deploy missiles in its Kaliningrad enclave in response to U.S. intentions to establish a missile shield in Europe . Russia says it will deploy missiles to its Kalinedrad enclave . The move would be in retaliation for the United States plans to establish missile shield .
 Ukrainian peasant was photographed starving Ukrainian peasant in 1933 . Ukrainian famine was a major famine in Ukraine .
 Stalin's decision to requisition all grain for export led to the worst man-made famine in history . Stalin ordered the requisition of grain to export, leading to a famine in the Soviet Union . The famine was the worst in history, with millions starving in Russia .
 The following year, Austrian Ukraine proclaims itself a republic and is federated with its Russian counterpart . Austrian Ukraine proclaimed itself itself itself an Austrian republic . Austria and Austria are federated by Russia .
 Stalin collectivizes agriculture, inducing famine to eliminate Ukraine as source of opposition; seven million die . Seven million die in famine in Soviet-controlled Ukraine . Stalin's death was the result of Soviet collectivization .
 The accord allows the use of Ukrainian ports by Russia and division of the Black Sea fleet . It also allows Russia to use of Ukraine ports by Russian forces . The accord was reached in December .
 Kuchma replaces the reformist government of Viktor Yushchenko after parliamentary defeat . The new government replaces the former PM's government of the year .
 Victor Yushchenko falls seriously ill and it is confirmed that he has been poisoned with dioxin . Victor is the first Ukrainian to fall seriously ill after falling seriously ill . He was later confirmed to have been poisoned .
 Mass protests in Kiev during the Orange Revolution lead to a revote in December and victory for Yushchenko . Mass protests during the protests led to the revote and victory in December .
 The Ukrainian parliament ratifies a 25-year extension of the Russian lease on the Black Sea bases . The agreement was reached by the Ukrainian parliament in March .
 Belorussia, as it was then known, participated in wars against the Teutonic Order, the Russians, the Tatars, and the Turks . It was then part of the LithuanianPolish commonwealth .
 Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine later establish the Commonwealth of Independent States . Belarus and Russia later established the Commonwealth, which later became a confederation of nations .
 The Carthaginians controlled most of the trading ports from Libya to Lixus and Mogador in Morocco . By the 500s sce their descendants, their descendants had control of many of the world's largest ports .
 By the time of his death in 1106, he also holds sway over Muslim Spain . He also held sway over Muslims in Spain .
 At Alcazarquivir in 1578 Portugal made an ill-fated attempt to suppress resistance to Portuguese rule in Morocco . The battle took place at the end of the 1578 battle .
 Since the 16th century, it has been ravaged successively by European imperialists, the slave trade, post-colonial dictators, civil wars, and poverty . The country has been plagued by civil wars and civil wars .
 When he dies in 1672 disorder reigns and it is only in 1677 that his son Moulay Ismail regains control of the region .
 A large slave army wins back all Spanish coastal enclaves except Ceuta and Melilla . The Spanish coastal enclave of Melilla and Ceuta is taken back by a slave army . Melilla is the last Spanish enclave to be taken into control of the Spanish capital .
 Germany recognizes France's rights in Morocco in return for ceding territory in Congo . Negotiations lead to Germany recognizing France's right in Morocco . Germany also ceded territory in the Congo to Morocco .
 Abd-el-Krim sets up a Berber republic in the Rif mountains and is eventually defeated by a vast French and Spanish army in 1926 . A guerrilla campaign continues until 1933, with a guerrilla campaign until 1933 .
 Protesters brandish weapons in a demonstration against French rule on August 19, 1955, in Khenifra . Protesters brandished weapons in the demonstration .
 Moroccan and Algerian nationalists clashed with French troops here and in 13 other strategically important towns . Morocco and Algeria nationalists clashed over French troops in the towns of Algeria and Morocco .
 After parties refuse his invitation, king appoints a nonparty government . King appoints government after parties refuse to invite him to his party-lessened state .
 French forces numbering 450,000 are deployed in an attempt to retain control of the country . French forces are deployed around the world to fight the Syrian rebels .
 After a referendum in metropolitan France and its colonies, the Fifth French Republic is established with de Gaulle as president . Muslim women are allowed to vote for the first time in Algeria .
 FLN sets up ‘free Algerian’ government in Cairo with Ferhat Abbas as prime minister . Meanwhile, the FLN set up a ‘Free Algerian government’ in Cairo, Egypt .
 Ahmed Ben Bella is elected prime minister and first president of Algeria . After the approval by referendum of a constitution, he is elected first president . He was elected by referendum to become prime minister .
 President Boumedienne continues with land reform, national health service, and “socialist” management . Boumedien: Land reform and national health services are key issues in Algeria .
 France gives incentives for the return home of 800,000 Algerian immigrants . France is offering incentives to return home to 800,00 Algerians .
 The FIS wins most seats in elections to the National People's Assembly . The party wins the majority of the seats in the assembly . FIS won the most votes in the first election to the assembly in 2007 .
 Pirates operating out of ports on the Barbary coast terrorized the Mediterranean for centuries . Pirates operating from ports in the Mediterranean terrorized by centuries .
 The French tried to suppress them with battleships in 1688 , but it was not until 1815 that the threat was lifted . The threat was finally lifted in 1815 .
 Phoenician traders establish a port at Utica and gain control of the coastal region from the Berbers . C.C. C. 1100 BCE Phoenicians established a port in Utica .
 Carthage controls the coastal trading ports from Leptis to Lixus and Mogador in Morocco . By the sixth century acr Carthage has a population of 400,000 . Carthage controlled the coastal trade routes between Leptes and LIXus .
 Ben Ali takes over the presidency after doctors certify Bourguiba senile . Ben Ali becomes first president of the country to take charge of the presidency . Doctors certify Ben Ali as a senior citizen .
 Phoenician traders establish settlements in Tripolitania, in the northwest, while Cyrenaica in the northeast is settled by Greeks . C.700 BCE Phoenicians establish settlements near Tripolitani, in Tripolani .
 Governororship of Tripoli becomes hereditary office of the Karamanli family . Governorship of Libya is hereditary office .
 Within a few years a militant Muslim sect known as the Sanusi or Senussi is founded . Within a decade, the militant sect is founded in the city of Malawi .
 In 1912 the Ottoman Empire yields control of Libya to Italy in the Treaty of Ouchy . The treaty was signed by the Italian Empire in 1912 .
 British forces finally capture Tripoli in 1943 . British forces set up a military administration in the country .
 Gaddafi launches the ‘Cultural Revolution’; occupies Aozou Strip in Chad . Gaddafi launched the “Cultural revolution’s” in 1968 . Gaddafi was killed in the fall of the Arab Spring in Algeria .
 A new constitution in 1999 leads to multi-party elections in Mali . Mamadou Tandja was elected to power in 1999 .
 By the 11th century sce, Egyptian control of Nubia is weakened and a separate kingdom is established in Kush, farther to the south, which between 770—716 BcE conquers Egypt . By 770 to 716, Egypt conquers .
 Former rebel leader John Garang becomes vice president, but dies in helicopter crash . Garang was killed in a helicopter crash in 2009 .
 The fertile lands of Upper and Lower Egypt along the Nile are united for the first time . With the foundation of the Old Kingdom, the fertile lands were united . C.C. C.
 The New Kingdom resumes expansion of Egypt's frontiers to the south and into Mesopotamia . C.1580-1050 BCE .
 Egypt's president, Gamal Abdel Nasser, nationalized the Suez Canal on July 26, 1956 . After her suicide DECISIVE MOMENT SUEZ CRISIS, 1956, Egyptian president Gamal Nasser committed suicide . Egypt's then-president Nasser nationalized
 Fearful that Egypt's assertion of sovereignty would result in an Arab attack, Israel invaded Sinai . The Israeli invasion of Sinai was feared to lead to a possible Arab attack .
 UK and French forces attacked Port Said on October 6 in order to seize the canal . When both sides refused to halt military action, both sides attacked the port . The incident occurred in the early months of October .
 Pressure from UN and United States forced a humiliating ceasefire on the UK and France . Pressure from the UN and U.S. forced the British and French governments to agree a ceasefire .
 The crisis marked the end of British influence in the region . Egypt becomes part of the Roman and successor Byzantine empires . Byzantine Empire loses Egypt to Muslim invaders from Arabia .
 Egypt effectively under British rule, although still part of the Ottoman Empire . Egypt was ruled by the British Empire in the early 1900s .
 Sultan Ahmed Fuad becomes King Fuad and rules until his death in 1936, when he is succeeded by his son King Farouk . He rules until the death of his son Farouk, who ruled until 1936 .
 Axis forces were repulsed at El Alamein in November 1942 . During World War II Britain defended Egypt . Axis forces repulseed by British forces in Egypt in 1942 .
 Mali is part of the empire of Ghana . Formerly French Sudan . Named after the great medieval empire of the region . Mali is now named after the medieval empire .
 Former French colony a in the Sahel that is threatened by desertification . Burkina Faso is a former French colony in the region that has been threatened by the desertification of the region .
 Maurice Yameogo becomes the first president and bans opposition parties . He is the first African president to take office in the country's history .
 Cape Verde has been democratic and stable since 1991 . A former Portuguese archipelago, it is now a Democratic and stable state .
 Slaves brought from mainland to work the small parcels of arable land . Slaves are brought in to work small plots of land. Slaves were brought in from mainland .
 Senegal is an ethnically diverse x state with a strong economy based around the port of Dakar . Senegal is a nation that has a strong and diverse economy .
 2002 1,800 passengers were killed in Joola ferry disaster . Referendum approves new democratic constitution . 2002 1-800 people died in the disaster in the Joola disaster .
 Gambia is a narrow ribbon of land E along the river Gambia heavily dependent on peanut exports . First southward migration of significant numbers of Fula in 1200s .
 Guinea-Bissau is an impoverished, lowx | lying country that has suffered frequent military coups and rebellions . Four main ethnic groups -- the Balante, Fulani, Manydyako, and Molinke .
 In subsequent presidential election, police shoot and kill one of the other candidates . Malam Bacai Sanha won the election, but police shot and killed another candidate . Police killed the other candidate in subsequent election .
 Guinea is a former one-party state 5 whose transition to democracy has often been disrupted . Guinea is one of the most populous countries in the world and has a long history of violence .
 The first U.S. freed slaves bound for Monrovia, Liberia, were bound for the city founded by the American Colonization Society . The society had purchased part of British Sierra Leone, which was part of Sierra Leone .
 Efforts to send freed slaves back to Africa had begun in the American colonies in the 1770s . Efforts for freed slaves to be sent home to Africa began in 17th century . Effort to send free slaves to Africa was started in the early 17th Century .
 Some proslavers wanted to send freed slaves back in order to preserve an exclusively slave-owning white society . Some Christians hoped they would act as missionaries. Others wanted them to be missionaries .
 ECOMOG peacekeeping force backed by Nigeria and Ghana sent to restore order in Nigeria . Peacekeeping force was deployed in the country's capital, Abu-Abu . Nigeria is the only African nation to have ever been involved in peacekeeping operations .
 After Germany’s defeat in World War I, the country is divided between France and Britain . After Germany's defeat in WWI, it is now divided between Britain and France .
 He was replaced by his son Faure, who wins elections widely condemned as rigged . Faure's son was also elected president of France in 2008 .
 Benin is a former slave-trading state wedged between Togo and Nigeria . It was a French colony of the same name . The kingdom was established under the Obas .
 President Kerekou is beaten by Nicephore Soglo in 1991 and respects the result . President K Derekou was elected president of Cameroon in 1991 . President was defeated in the presidential elections of 1991 .
 Lieutenant Colonel Ojukwu calls for secession of oil-rich east under its new name, Biafra . He calls for the secession of the oil rich east under the new name . The former president of Nigeria's northern part of the Igbo region calls for independence .
 Over one million Nigerians die before secessionists are defeated by federal forces . Federal forces defeat secessionists by defeating them .
 The kingdom of Benin flourished in southern Nigeria from the 1200s to the 1600s . Benin was the center of the country's history .
 Its craftworkers used the lost-wax process to cast beautiful portrait heads like this one in bronze .
 Military tribunal convicts former head of state General Olusegun Obasanjo and 39 others for plotting coup . Obas an ex-head of state was convicted of plotting coup against Nigeria's President in 2007 .
 Vice President Goodluck Jonathan becomes president after Umar Yar’Adua dies following a long illness and prolonged absence in Saudi Arabia . Vice President Jonathan takes over from Yar'Aduas as president . Jonathan becomes first president of Nigeria since Yar'Asdua died in Saudi
 Spain develops trading post on islands off the coast of Rio Muni . Spain later develops a trading post in the area .
 Forestry concessions and oil palm plantations are developed in Rio Muni . Small cocoa and coffee plantations are also planned for the area .
 The Fang, moving south from the savannah lands of Cameroon, expel the indigenous peoples . The Fang is moving south of Cameroon to expel indigenous peoples.
 His son Ali Ben Bongo wins presidential election amidst allegations of fraud . His son was elected president of the country in 2009 .
 Dictator of the Central African Republic from 1966, Jean-Bédel Bokassa crowned himself emperor in 1977 . Dictators of the country from 1966 to 1977, Bokassasa ruled the country .
 He was overthrown in 1979 and put on trial for the brutal excesses of his regime . The former dictator was ousted in 1979 after a decade of repression .
 Congo an oiland timber-rich country appallingly governed in the years since independence .
 Loango in the south, Makoko farther inland; the northern forest regions are home of Binga pygmies . Loango is located in the southern part of the country . Makoko is also home to the Binga Pygmies; Loango and Makoko are located in
 He establishes a treaty with Makoko, chief of Teke, which he claims gives rights to the region . Makoko also claims to be the chief of the Teke people .
 In 2002, the Belgian government admits that it killed him and apologizes . Belgium's government has since apologized for his death .
 Eritrea passed under the control of Arabs, Ottomans, and Egyptians . In the centuries before this Eritrea was under control of Arab rulers . Eritrea has been in Eritrea's capital for centuries .
 Djibouti is little more than a port with a desert hinterland . The country has historically depended heavily on shipping . The capital city has a long history of shipping .
 Ethiopia was the cradle of an ancient civilization . The only African state to avoid colonization, Ethiopia was founded in 18th century . It was the only African nation to avoid colonisation .
 In 1868 he commits suicide rather than surrender to British expeditionary force . He commits suicide instead of surrendering to British forces .
 In 1916 his son, Lij Iyasu, is deposed for converting to Islam and proposing alliance with Turkey . In 1916 he was deposed . His son was killed in 1916 .
 Menelik's daughter, Zauditu, becomes empress with Ras Tafari as regent . Ras TAFari becomes regent with Ras Menalik as empress . Menaliki's daughter Zaudita is empress, and Ras Al-Tafari
 EPRDF wins landslide in multi-party elections and sets up first democratic government . EPRD wins landslide election landslide . It was the first democratic election in the country .
 Haile Selassie was the emperor of Ethiopia . The throne supposedly descended from » King Solomon . He ruled Ethiopia .
 When Italy invaded Ethiopia in 1935, he led his troops in the field, but in 1936 was forced to flee . He twice appealed in vain to the League of Nations for action against Italy .
 In 1940, Haile Selassie returned to Africa with British aid, and in 1941 regained his throne . In 1941, he returned to the throne with British help, and regained power .
 In the 1960s and 1970s he worked for pan-African aims, particularly through the Organization of African Unity . In 1974 the army seized control and arrested him . He was arrested in 1974 .
 nine-state federation is formed as Eritrea gains its independence . He was killed in prison on the orders of the coup leaders in 1975 .
 Ethiopian troops and U.S. gunships intervene to attack Islamists, who flee in 2007 . Ethiopian troops, United States gunships attack Islamists in Somalia .
 Kenya is a diverse nation of 70 different people . Kenya has had a difficult postcolonial history .
 2005 violent protesters in Nairobi reject proposed new constitution . Corruption worsens as corruption in Kenya continues .
 President Mwai Kibaki and Raile Odinga signed a power-sharing deal . The deal was signed by the president of Kenya and the vice president of the country .
 After he invades Tanzania in 1978 to claim new territory, Tanzania invades Uganda in 1979 and ends his brutal rule . Tanzania invaded Uganda in 1978 and ended its brutal rule in 1979 .
 Rwanda was the scene of an appalling act of genocide in 1994 . Hutu farmers arrived in the 1000s and Tutsi cattle-owners in the 1400s .
 Hutu extremists unleashed by Hutu extremist against Tutsis and moderate Hutus . Genocidal violence killing 800,000 people was then unleashed by Tutsi extremists . Hutus and moderates are moderates, moderates and Hutus are moderates .
 Burundi is a small nation torn between its Hutu majority and dominant Tutsi minority peoples . It is also torn between the Hutu minority and the minority of its own ethnic groups .
 Led by Agostinho Neto, it later receives support from Soviet bloc countries . The Brazilian government was later overthrown by the Soviet Union .
 It receives substantial assistance from the United States and South Africa . The U.S. government is providing substantial assistance to the South African government .
 Independence is scheduled for 1975, and a transitional government is formed by the three nationalist movements . Independence is set to take place in 1975, with independence set for 1975 .
 The MPLA proclaims the People’s Republic of Angola with Neto as president . 1975 MPLA proclaimed the People's Republic of Angolan with Netos .
 Portuguese attempts to colonize the interior of Angola brought them into conflict with the strongly independent Ndongo kingdom . The Portuguese attempt to establish a colony in the Ndong kingdom ended up in war with the Nongo .
 A peace deal was struck in 1621 when King Ngola Mbande sent his sister Njinga to negotiate with the Portuguese . A peace agreement was struck between the two sides of the warring kingdom .
 She continued to fight the Portuguese, but when they overran her kingdom in 1629, she fled to neighboring Mtamba . She captured its ruler, Queen Mwongo, and took control of her kingdom .
 She ruled her new country successfully and independently until her death in 1663 .
 The first Portuguese trading center at Quelimane becomes a center for slave trading to Brazil . Almost half a century later the first Portuguese center becomes a slave trading center in Brazil .
 Changamire of the Rozvi kingdom conquer the Mwene Matapa and push the Portuguese south of the Zambezi River . Later the Changamires conquer the Zebra and push them further south of Zambezari .
 The Portuguese introduce a system of forced labor when slavery is ended in the late 19th century . The Portuguese introduced the system when slavery was ended by the end of the century .
 South Africa agrees to cease funding Renamo if Mozambique stops aid to the ANC . However, fighting continues between Renamo and the ANC in the country .
 Portuguese legacy in Quelimane is a relic of Portuguese colonial rule . The cathedral was built in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Madagascar is one of the world's poorest countries . It won independence from France in 1960 . It is the poorest country in the world .
 The Merina monarchy that rules the interior of the island is abolished as the French subdue the island . Merina was abolished as a result of the French .
 A new constitution sets up a ""Democratic Republic"" in which only a single party is permitted from 1977 . Only a single political party is allowed in the country .
 The incumbent president sets up a rival government in the port city of Tamatave . In response, the incumbent president, Didier Ratsiraka, sets up an anti-government government .
 High Court rules in Ravalomanana’s favor and Ratsiraka goes into exile . As fighting breaks out, the High Court ruled in Ratsirka's favor and he went to exile .
 The government dismisses Andry Rajoelina, mayor of Antananarivo, and the military mutiny in favor of him . The mayor is dismissed after the mutiny by the government . The military mutineers turn their guns on him .
 After a standoff, President Ravalomana resigns and is replaced by Rajoelina . After a stand-off, the president is replaced with a new government .
 Ex-president Ravolomana is sentenced to life imprisonment for the shooting of protesters . Ravolomsana was sentenced to a life sentence for his role in the deaths of demonstrators .
 Comoros an archipelago republic off the east coast with a chaotic political system and frequent coups . Comoros is a nation of Comoros, an island nation off the coast of the Comoros . The Comoros has a history of coups, coups and political instability .
 Mauritius is an island republic in the Indian Ocean and one of the world's most densely populated countries . It is one of Mauritius' most densely-populated countries .
 German colonists take best farming land and displace the indigenous people . German colonists displace indigenous people from indigenous communities .
 South Africa extends the German policy of reserves for the indigenous population . 17 of which were established by 1939 .
 Two further ICJ rulings, in 1955 and 1956, uphold the UN's right to supervise the administration . The ICJ ruled that the UN should supervise its administration .
 SWAPO is based on the Ovamboland People's Organization, formed earlier with the aim of ending the contract labor system . It seeks to mobilize all the people of Namibia against South African rule .
 He is only allowed to return six years later on condition that he renounces the chieftainship of the Bamangwato . He was only allowed back six years after his return .
 Zimbabwe African National Union formed by the Reverend Sithole and Robert Mugabe . Mugabe is the president of Zimbabwe's ruling party .
 Ian Smith declares unilateral independence from the UK, which imposes economic sanctions . Ian Smith then declares independence from Britain, which is imposed by the UK .
 Opposition Movement for Democratic Change was founded the following year . Opposition was founded by the opposition party . Opposition Movement was founded in 1968 .
 Tsvangirai boycotts the second round, alleging intimidation and Mugabe is declared the winner . Mugabe was declared the president of Zimbabwe in the 1980s . Tsvangsirai was forced to quit the election . Tswangiria was replaced by Robert Mugabe
 Subsequent negotiations between the two lead to a power-sharing agreement . Subsequent talks led to the two countries agreeing to a deal .
 Despite fierce battles with the Zulus and others, they expand white occupation into what is now the Transvaal, Natal, and Orange Free State . The Zulus, others, expanded white occupation to what is known as Natal and the Orange Free state .
 Natal (proclaimed a colony in 1843) remains under British rule and is populated by British settlers . Natal was declared a colony of Brazil in 1842 .
 This was followed in 1877 by the annexation of the Transvaal with its gold fields . This is followed in . 1877 . This was the first annexation of South Africa's gold fields.
 The British also fight and defeat the Zulus, but suffer a huge defeat at Isandlwana in 1879 . The Zulus also defeat the British in the same battle .
 After initial Boer successes the Boer capital, Pretoria, captured in June 1900, Boer guerrilla resistance is broken down . The Boers captured Pretoria in 1900 and the Boers capital was captured .
 Descendants of Dutch colonists, the Boers were hardy farmers and tough fighters . The Boers maintained their independence until overcome by the British in 1902 .
 This picture, taken in 1910, shows the wagons they used for defense if attacked . The wagons were used to defend themselves if attacked by the Germans .
 Court orders government to provide anti-AIDS drugs at all hospitals . Court orders the government to . provide anti .AIDS drugs . Court ordered the government . to provide the drugs at hospitals .
 Thabo Mbeki forced to resign as president over claims he interfered in corruption case against Jacob Zuma . Mbeki was forced to step down as president after claims he meddled in case against him .
 The colonists at first set up a provisioning station for Dutch East India Company ships . The colonists subsequently ventured inland to farm the rich pastures .
 Cape Colony was home to the largest concentration of Europeans in Africa . By the end of the 18th century, Cape Colony had the largest population of Europeans . Cape Colony is now the largest colony of African Europeans .
 The arrival of the British in 1795, however, changed the situation . The Dutch were now the colonized and felt their Presbyterian culture to be under threat .
 Power struggle between modernists and traditionalists in royal Dlamini clan . Traditionalists clash with modernists in the royal family of South African royals .
 The leader of the Pudemo party is detained after an attempted bomb attack is blamed on them . An attempt to bomb attack on them is blamed for the attack .
 Lesotho is a mountainous and landlocked monarchy entirely surrounded [4 — by South Africa] A mountainous landlocked kingdom entirely surrounded by South African .
 After administration by Cape Colony between 1871-83, Britain resumes direct responsibility . Cape Colony was taken over by Britain in 1871 . Cape colony was administered by Britain from 1871 to 1983 .
 South Africa intervenes after coup attempt, and reconciles king and parties . South Africa intervened in coup attempt and reconciled King and parties.
 Mustafa Kemal forged a secular state from the ashes of the Ottoman Empire . He led the fight against the post-World War settlement imposed by the Allies and overthrowing the sultan . Kemal was the father of the modern Republic of Turkey .
 As president, Kemal introduced a European-style legal system and disestablished Islam as the state religion . Kemal was president of Turkey from 1981 to 1989 . He introduced a new legal system, disestablishing Islam .
 Many Turks are still revered by many Turks as the man who restored pride to a shattered nation . He is still revered as the hero of the Turkish revolution .
 Asia extends from the Arctic to the equator and from the Mediterranean to the Pacific . Asia is the world’s largest continent, and is the most populous continent in the world .
 The first complex civilization arose in Asia, in ancient Mesopotamia . All the world’s major religions came from Asia, as did all the world's major religions .
 Treaty of Lausanne ends war with Allies, replacing the Treaty of Sevres . Treaty was replaced by Treaty of Seres, ending the war with the Allies . Treaty ended World War II in 1918 . Treaty signed in 1918, ending World War I with the League of Nations .
 Under a forced exchange, 1. million Greeks leave Turkey and 400,000 Turks leave Greece . 1 million Greeks and 1 million Turks leave Turkey under the forced exchange . Under the deal, 1 million people from Turkey and 1.million from Greece leave Turkey .
 Prisoners and their relatives die in hunger strikes over conditions in high-security prisons . Prisoners have been protesting conditions in prisons for more than a decade .
 AK leader Recep Tayyip Erdogan becomes prime minister after entering parliament through a by-election . AK leader Erdogan enters parliament through parliament through by-elections in Turkey . Erdogan's AK party won the vote in Istanbul's second parliamentary election .
 In a referendum, voters back reforms to give the government increased power over army and judiciary . Voters back reforms giving the government more power over the army and courts .
 Eduard Shevardnadze was the last foreign minister of the USSR and president of Georgia 1995-2003 . He forged his reputation fighting corruption, yet was forced out in the Rose Revolution for vote-rigging .
 Its army occupies South Ossetia and parts of Georgia itself, and advances close to Tbilisi, Georgia . The Russian-controlled Georgian capital is capital of the capital of Tbilis .
 President Medvedev withdraws troops from Georgia, but leaves them in South Ossetia . Medvedeva withdraws from Georgia but leaves troops in the region . Russian president: "It's time for Russia to withdraw from Georgia"
 Tigranes II, Armenia becomes a powerful state, establishing an empire for itself . Ist century BCE Under Tigranas II, Armenians establish a state of power in Armenia .
 Armenia became the first state to adopt Christianity as its official religion in 301c . Saint Gregory the Illuminator founded this cathedral at Echmiadzin, Armenia's holiest city .
 Armenian population of NagornoKarabakh vote to secede from Azerbaijan, leading to civil conflict . Armenians voted to break away from Azerbaijan in a referendum on April 24, 1994 .
 After San Remo Conference awards Syria to France, he is ousted by French forces who proclaim new state of Greater Lebanon . French forces proclaim new Lebanese state of greater Lebanon .
 With peacekeeping mandate from Arab League, Syria intervenes to quell fighting in Lebanon . Syrian intervention came in 1980-81 1976 . Syria intervened in the Lebanese civil war .
 Damascus Declaration, aid and defense pact with Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, UAE, Qatar, Bahrain, and Oman, signed . The Damascus Declaration is a defense pact signed by six Arab nations .
 It eventually fell to the Arab leader Baibars after a short siege in 1271 . It was eventually taken over by Baibar's Arab leader and fell to him after a siege .
 Once a refuge for persecuted religious and political groups, Lebanon was shattered by civil war . Lebanon was once a refuge .
 Pro-Western party led by Saad Hariri wins most seats in general election . Pro-Pro-Western parties led by Hariri win majority of seats in parliament .
 Thousands of Palestinians flee Arab-Israeli fighting to the West Bank and Jordan . Thousands of Palestinian refugees are now in Jordan and the West West .
 Hussein publicly backs the Palestinian uprising, or intifada, against Israeli rule . Hussein publicly backed the uprising, which he publicly backed .
 C.990 BCE Jerusalem captured by King David; Israel unified as one nation . Israel unified in Israel; Israel became one nation in Israel .
 Golda Meir was one of the founders of the State of Israel . She was born in Kiev, Russia . Meir is one of Israel's most famous women .
 Poverty forced her family to emigrate to Wisconsin in 1906, where she became a Zionist . Golda became an American Zionist in 1906 .
 She became active trade union politics before being elected to the knesset . She served as Minister of Labor 1949—56 and Foreign Minister 1956—66 .
 On the sudden death of Levi Eshkol in 1969, she succeeded him as prime minister at age 70 . She succeeded him in 1969 . She was prime minister of Israel from 1969 to 1969 .
 Despite victory in the Yom Kippur War , she faced internal political squabbles and decided to resign in 1974 . Despite victory, she decided to step down in 1974 after internal squabbling .
 The Arabs refuse to accept it; clashes follow, and clashes follow . 1,700 people are killed in clashes between Arabs and Arabs .
 A provisional Jewish government was established with Ben-Gurion as prime minister . A provisional government was set up in Israel . A new government was formed in the aftermath of the collapse of Israel's collapse .
 Israel invades Sinai and Anglo-French forces invade Port Said in Egypt . Israeli forces invade Sinai in Sinai and French forces invade Egypt .
 First Palestinian suicide bombing against Israeli civilians is carried out in response to a massacre of Palestinians at Hebron by an Israeli settler . The first Palestinian suicide attack was carried out by a Palestinian suicide bomber . The attack took place in a response to an Israeli attack on Palestinians in Hebron .
 The Oslo agreement was signed in Norway in September 1993 and tantalizingly offered the promise of a lasting peace . It set up a Palestine National Authority and gave the Palestinians control over a limited portion of Gaza and West Bank .
 Arab states in 1964 established the Palestine Liberation Organization as a force to help liberate the Occupied Territories . With little progress made toward reclaiming the territory lost to Israel in 1948, the Arab states established the organization .
 The PLO came to act as a proxy government-inexile for the Palestinians . Some of its fighters are depicted here .
 The PLO entered unprecedented talks with Yitzhak Rabin's moderate Labor government in an attempt to negotiate a ""land for peace"" deal . Despite a history of violent opposition to Israel, the PLO had a violent relationship with Israel .
 Mecca becomes the center of Islam, but the Arabian peninsula is otherwise sidelined under the Umayyad and Abbasid Caliphates and the Ottoman Sultanate . The Arabian peninsula was ruled by the Ottomans and the Arabian Peninsula .
 In 1921 he takes the title Sultan of Najd, and in 1926 he is named King of the Hijaz . In 1926, he was named Sultan of the Najd .
 Ibn Saud established the Ikhwan in 1912 as an elite fighting unit educated in the Wahhabi tradition of Islam . Ibn Saud had established an elite unit in 1912 .
 As he swept to victory against Ottoman rule, Ibn Saud began to cooperate with foreign powers . Ibn Saud cooperated with the British during his reign in Saudi Arabia .
 His defeat of the Ikhwan crushed all opposition and established the rule of the House of Saud . He defeated all opposition, establishing the rule .
 Ikhwan were ferocious Bedouin soldiers driven by an Islamic fundamentalist zeal . Riding camels with banners flying, they were fierce Bedouins driven by Islamic fundamentalism .
 Yemen is the poorest country in the Middle East . It was unified in 1990, unified in the north and south of the country .
 The interior is ruled by the Ibadite imams, while the sultan controls the coast . The sultan also controls the interior and the interior of the country .
 The vote was previously limited to tribal leaders, chosen intellectuals, and businessmen . The vote had previously been limited to Tribal leaders, intellectuals, businessmen .
 Construction of prestige highrise developments continues to boom . As service industries develop, construction of prestige buildings continues to rise .
 The oil-rich Emirates have developed rapidly over [5i the past 30 years, but remain autocratic regimes . The UAE has developed rapidly but remains autocratic .
 They elect half the members of the Federal National Council, a body of advisory body . The council is an advisory body that elects half of its members .
 The following year, it announces its intention to close all bases ‘east of Suez’ by 1971 . It follows the announcement of the closure of all bases east of the continent .
 Bahrain becomes a constitutional monarchy with an elected lower chamber of parliament . Bahrain becomes an elected parliament in 2011 . Bahrain is the first country to have a constitution .
 Post-war, oil quickly replaces pearling and fishing as Qatar's main source of income . Oil is now Qatar's biggest source of revenue .
 Funded by the emir, it broadcasts to much of the Arab world, providing an Arab perspective on world affairs . Funded to provide a unique perspective on the world .
3000 BCE Sumerian civilization flourishes in Mesopotamia, the area of modern Iraq . Sumerians were first known to have lived in the region .
 Iraq becomes political and cultural center of the Abbasid caliphate . 900s-1000S Baghdad falls to the Shi'ite Buwaihids . Iraq becomes center of Abbasid state .
 Iraq is under Ottoman control for four centuries, save for a brief Safavid Persian occupation in the 1600s . The country has been under the Ottoman rule for more than four centuries .
 Baghdad claims sovereignty over Kuwait on the eve of Kuwait's independence . Baghdad claims to have held sovereignty over the country since it was formed in 1991 .
 The Iranians seek to topple the Sunni Saddam Hussein, who they see as oppressing Iraq’s Shia majority . The Iranians want to topple Saddam, who is perceived to be a Sunni dictator .
 Iraqi forces use chemical weapons in attack on Kurdish village of Halabja . Iraqi government forces use such weapons in the attack on the village . The attack is the first chemical weapons attack in Iraq since 2003 .
 US-led military coalition launches massive air and ground offensives, which drive the Iraqis out of Kuwait . U.S.-led coalition launched massive air, ground and ground offensive in Kuwait .
 UN supervises limited sales of Iraq oil to purchase humanitarian supplies . UN says limited sales will be used to pay for humanitarian aid in Iraq .
 Iraqi forces launch offensive into Kurdish safe haven, capturing Irbil . Iraqi forces capture Irbil, capture Kurdish city of Mosul, Iraq . Iraqi military says it has captured the city .
 United States expands southern air exclusion zone to just south of Baghdad . U.S. expanding southern air zone to include parts of Baghdad, Iraq .
 Grand Ayatollah Muhammad Sadiq al-Sadr, leader of Iraq’s Shias, is assassinated in Najaf . Al Sadr was assassinated in 1999 . Iraq's President Saddam HUSSEIN was the prime minister of Iraq in 1991 .
 A US-led administration is installed in Baghdad, the Ba’ath party is made illegal, and the armed forces are dissolved . The Ba'ath party was made illegal in Iraq .
 United States restores Iraqi sovereignty to government under Iyad Allawi . U.S. restored Iraqi sovereignty under Allawi's government . United States restored sovereignty to Iraqi government under al-Assad .
 Parliamentary elections leave Shia-led United Iraqi Alliance as largest party . Shia-dominated Iraqi parliamentarians vote for the first time in more than 30 years . U.A. coalition is largest party in the country .
 Leader of Al-Qaeda in Irag, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, killed in U.S. air strike . Leader of al-Qaeda . in Iag killed in United States air strike, U.N. officials say . Al-Arqawi was
 The Iraqi parliament approves a security pact by which all American forces are to leave Iraq by the end of 2011 . The pact was approved by the Iraqi parliament by which U.S. forces will leave Iraq . Iraqi parliament also approves the agreement .
 President Obama announces withdrawal of most U.S. forces by late August 2010 . President Obama withdraws most of most United States forces from the U.N. forces .
 Legislative elections produce no clear outcome and allegations of fraud . It takes seven months for al-Maliki to be reappointed as prime minister .
 Iran blends theocratic government with modern nationalism . Known as Persia until 1935, Iran blends religious beliefs with modernism .
 In 1921 he supported a coup that reduced the last Qajar shah to a puppet . He rose to be the Brigade's leader and supported the overthrow of the shah .
 The royal capital of Isfahan is adorned with mosques and new public buildings . The capital of Iran's capital Tehran is the capital of the country's largest city .
 He embarks on a major reform program of modernization and Westernization . But he becomes increasingly reliant on Germany for support . He becomes increasingly dependent on the support of Germany .
 The Shah returns with Anglo-American backing. spectacular series of celebrations at the ancient Achaemenid capital of Persepolis. spectacular .
 Anti-Shah demonstrations break out during the funeral and subsequent mourning of the Shah .
 Ayatollah Khomeini returns from exile and declares an Islamic republic . Ayatullah Khomini declares Islamic republic after returning from exile from exile . He was assassinated in September 1981 .
 Ruhollah Khomeini's death in 1989 deprived the Iranian revolution of the spiritual leadership he had exercised for more than a decade . The Iranian revolution was overthrown by the Ayatollahollahollah in November 1989 .
 His passing has opened the way for more liberal movements to shape Iran's future . Iran's new regime is expected to be the most powerful in the country .
 In 1925, Reza was declared the first shah of the new Pahlavi dynasty . Reza consolidated his power, suppressed all opposition .
 He introduced a series of economic reforms that required external finance . The reforms required external financial support .
 He actively promoted social reform, forbidding traditional dress and the wearing of the veil by women . He actively banned traditional dress .
 By the 1930s, Reza's government had become increasingly despotic and unpopular . Iran's government was extremely unpopular in Iran's capital .
 His pro-Axis stance during World War II led the UK and USSR to occupy Iran in 1941, depose him, and install his son Mohammad Reza Pahlavi as shah .
 Conservative Society for Combatant Clergy loses ground to more liberal factions . Conservative society for combatant clergy loses ground with more liberal groups . Conservative Society of Combatant clergy lost ground to liberal groups in recent years .
 Mohammad Khatami elected president, and begins to implement reformist agenda . Mohammad Jhatami was elected president of Iran in 1979 . He was the first Iranian president to take office in Iran since then .
 President Khatami visits Italy— first Iranian leader to be received by a Western government since 1979 . Iran's president was first Iranian president to visit Italy in 1979 . He is the first Iranian to visit a Western country since then .
 Conservatives control many of the levers of power and there is a crackdown on reformist press . Despite this, conservatives control much of power in the UK .
 Violent protests allege election fraud and a major crackdown on protesters ensues . Violent protests alleging election fraud led to major crackdowns on protesters . Demonstrators accuse President Obama of election fraud .
 Russian settlement intensifies after 1917 as Kazakhstan subjected to industrial and agricultural development . Russian settlement intensified after 1917 .
 Yuri Gagarin became the first man in space on April 12, 1961 . He became the Soviet Union's first man to be in space in 1961 .
 His flight began on top of a 4. ton Vostok rocket launched from the Soviet space center at Baikonur in Kazakhstan . His orbit of the Earth lasted 1 hour, 48 minutes .
 Russia negotiated an agreement to continue to use the center until 2050 . After Kazakhstan became independent in 1991, Russia negotiated a deal to continue using it until 2050.
 Shaybani Uzbeks rule an unstable region, from Bukhara and Samarkand . D rA Cities of the Silk Road 1500S were cities of the Middle Ages .
 Initially it was written in Arabic, but later it was changed to the Roman alphabet and finally to Cyrillic . The Cyrillian alphabet was used to write in Arabic .
 The spectacular Shirdar Madrasa at Samarkhand is one of the great Islamic schools of the world .
 Uzbekistan lies on the ancient Silk Road connecting China with Central Asia and the Mediterranean . Uzbekistan is one of the most important countries in the world's history .
 His anticorruption purge results in the emergence of a new generation of Central Asian officials . Heavily corrupt officials have emerged in Central Asian countries in recent years .
 A new postSoviet constitution is adopted along Western democratic lines, but all religious and nationalist parties are banned . The new post-Soviet constitution was adopted along democratic lines but banned from religious and nationalists .
 Uzbekistan sends troops to Tajikistan to suppress violence and strengthen border . Uzbekistan has sent troops to the border with the country's neighbor, Uzbekistan says . Tajikstan has been hit by violence in recent years, but has not been hit hard by Uzbekistan .
 The invasion takes Russian forces to the borders of Afghanistan and Persia by 1900, resulting in Turkmen tribes fleeing to Persia . The invasion, which took place in 1900, was the first Russian invasion of Afghanistan .
 In power from 1990 to 2006, he fostered an extreme personality cult in his country . He enacted a number of highly eccentric laws, including a cult of his own .
 His portrait adorns buildings, while towns, streets, and even months of the year have been renamed in his honor . His portrait is now adorned in buildings across the country .
 His spiritual guide to living, Ruhnama, was adopted as the national guidebook to be studied by all students . The book has been adopted as a national guide book to students .
 Most dramatically, a giant gold statue of him stands in the center of the capital, Ashgabat, revolving every 24 hours so that the Sun always shines on his face . The statue of the king is in the heart of the country's capital, the capital city of Ashg
 A coup attempt later in the year is blamed on the group, leading to mass repression and imprisonment of opponents . The group is blamed for mass repression, imprisonment, and mass repression .
 He is at first deposed but restored after a major Afghan revolt in Kabul, Kabul, the capital . He is restored after major revolt in the Afghan capital .
 Yaqub Ali Khan is later exiled and a new treaty is signed in 1893 with Emir Abdul Rahman . The Durand Line is a contentious boundary between Afghanistan and British India that splits Pashtun lands in two .
 A third Afghan War breaks out that ends when the British bomb Kabul and Jalalabad . A third, brief Afghan War, ends with the British Bombing of Kabul .
 By the Treaty of Rawalpindi, the British recognize Afghanistan’s full independence . The British recognize the Afghan government's full independence from the Afghan people .
 Later that year, Amanullah’s cousin, Nadir Khan, seizes power and becomes king . Amanullah's cousin, later becomes king, becomes king of Iran .
 “We will not accept a government of wrong-doers.” Afghan President Hamid Karzai says . ‘We are not going to accept the Afghan government,’ he says .
 Amin is then killed in a coup backed by the USSR that sends in 80,000 troops to support the new moderate Parcham PDPA government of Babrak Karmal . Amin was then overthrown in the coup by the Soviet Union .
 Mujahideen rebellion stepped up into full-scale guerrilla war with U.S. backing . The Mujahineen rebellion is stepped up . The United States has backed the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 British troops are seen mobilizing in Kabul during the second Afghan War of 1878-81 . British troops were mobilized in the Afghan capital during the Afghan War .
 Britain fought three wars in Afghanistan to protect British India and keep the Russians at bay . But failed to subdue the rebellious Afghans . The Afghans are still a major problem for the British government .
 Hamid Karzai is reelected president amidst allegations of ballot rigging . Karzai was reelected in Afghanistan's second election in 18 years .
 President Obama announces plans to increase U.S. troop levels by 30,000 . Obama also announces plans for increased troop numbers in Iraq .
 The Ghaznavid Empire rules the region until 1186, when the empire is overthrown by Muhammad of Ghur . Muhammad conquers northern India . The empire was overthrown in 1186 .
 During the 13th century, the region falls under the control of the Muslim Sultanate of Delhi and, by 1600, the Mughal Empire . The region was under control of both the Sultanate and the Muslim ruler of Delhi .
 In 1940 he led calls for the partition of India and the creation of the Muslim state of Pakistan . In 1940, he called for the formation of Pakistan, which was later partitioned .
 He cleverly aligned the League with Britain during World War II . But he lost British support when he adopted direct action in 1946 .
 He failed to achieve the six-province state he had wanted, but oversaw the independence of Pakistan when the British partitioned India on its independence in 1947 .
 He served as first governor general of Pakistan, but died 13 months later . He was evenly divided between Muslim and Hindu .
 Jinnah calls a direct action day in support of his demands, causing riots in Calcutta and elsewhere with at least 5,000 dead . On August 16 Jinnah called the day of action, causing rioting in India's capital .
 Jinnah was the first governor general of Pakistan at independence . Jinnah became the first president of Pakistan after independence .
 Muslim tribesmen backed by Pakistan invade the state to force it to join Pakistan, prompting India to intervene . Indian tribesmen back Pakistan's invasion of the state, prompting Indian intervention .
 The proposed liberal constitution is opposed by orthodox Muslims, and the prime minister is assassinated in 1951 .
 In 1962 he introduces a new constitution creating an Islamic republic with two provinces, West and East Pakistan . The constitution created two languages, Urdu and Bengali, and two provinces .
 First direct elections won by Awami League . West Pakistani parties reject results, leading to a military crackdown in East Pakistan . East Pakistan saw first direct elections held in direct elections since independence .
 The two nations have gone to war twice over Kashmir, and once over Bangladesh . India and the U.S. have been at odds with each other over Kashmir .
 The Pakistani Taliban leader Baitullah Mehsud was killed by a United States drone attack . Mehsuds was killed in a U.S. drone attack in Pakistan .
 After the fall of the Harsha Empire, Kannauj becomes capital of the Pratihara Empire . After the end of the Harsha Etragic empire, the city became capital of Pratihar Empire .
 By the 11th century, it includes the Maldives, parts of Burma, Malaya, and Sumatra . It includes parts of Malaya and parts of parts of Sumatra, and Burma, as well .
 Bronze Chola bronze depicts the Hindu god Rama . 11th-century bronze depicts Rama in Chola Bronze .
 Hinduism was the religion of the Chola Empire . Its kings were thought to be descendants of the god Shiva . The Chola empire was the birthplace of Hinduism .
 Muslim sultans of Delhi attack southern India, extending their kingdom . C.C. C. C.'s C. J. B. H. A. H.'s was the first sultan of Delhi to attack the city .
 Maratha Empire was established by Shivaji Bhonsle in central and nothern India . Maratha empire was established in 18th century . Shivaji Bhonsle was the founder of the Maratha dynasty .
 The Sepoy Rebellion was a revolt against British rule in 1857-58 . It began among Indian soldiers in the East India Company . It was a widespread revolt against the British government .
 It was sparked by the introduction of the Enfield rifle, for which troops had to bite the ends off cartridges that were allegedly greased with pig and cow lard . Contact with which was regarded as an insult to Muslims and Hindus alike .
 The rebellion stemmed from discontent with insensitive British attempts to Westernize India . More generally, however, the rebellion was centered on discontent with the British .
 Troops in Meerut who refused the 1947 End of British rule and partition into a Hindu-majority India and a Muslim-dominated Pakistan .
 The larger faction is led by Indira Gandhi . rifles in April 1857 were severely punished for their role in India's war of 1857 . rifles .
 In response their comrades shot their British officers and marched on Delhi, where the local Indian garrison joined a spreading revolt . The revolt was not suppressed until nearly a year later .
 After the rebellion, the British stepped back from imposing measures and began a process of consultation with Indians over policy . Many in India now consider the rebellion to have been a first war of independence .
 Indira Gandhi assassinated by her Sikh bodyguards; her son Rajiv becomes prime minister and C leader . Rajiv was assassinated by his Sikh bodyguard; his son became prime minister . Indira was assassinated in her assassination by her bodyguards .
 Rajiv Gandhi assassinated during the ensuing election campaign by a suicide bomber connected to Sri Lankan Tamil Tigers . Narasimha Rao becomes prime minister of Congress minority government .
 Talks with China are held in New Delhi aimed at reducing tensions at the border . Talks between China and India aim to reduce border tensions at border .
 Hindu nationalist BJP is the largest party but fails to win confidence vote of confidence . Leftist United Front coalition government takes office . BJP is largest party in the country .
 Gandhi was convicted of electoral offenses relating to the 1971 election in 1971 . Gandhi began an ambitious program of modernization but was convicted in 1975 .
 She responded by damping down on her opposition and the conviction was later overturned . She responded to her opposition by dampening down her opposition .
 She lost the 1977 election and was out of office until reelected in 1980 . She was elected to office in 1977 and was reelected until 1980 .
 In 1984 she used the military to suppress Sikh rebels; a few months later, Gandhi was murdered by her Sikh bodyguards . Gandhi was assassinated by the Sikh government government .
 India detonates a nuclear bomb to widespread international condemnation . Sonia Gandhi, widow of Rajiv Gandhi, becomes president of C.C. Sonia Gandhi becomes president .
 BJP returned to power in elections triggered by a vote of no confidence vote . BJP returns to power after a series of defeats in recent months .
 BJP government implicated in major bribery scandal connected to illegal arms sales . BJP government has been implicated in several bribery scandals connected to arms deals .
 A forested Himalayan kingdom isolated from the outside world for most of its history .
 Sri Lanka 1949 Indian Tamil workers were stripped of suffrage and citizenship rights . Sri Lankan Tamil workers stripped of rights to vote and citizenship .
 An ancient civilization ravaged by civil war as Tamil population attempts to secede . The Tamil population is trying to break away from the Tamil state of Tamil Nadu .
 He is succeeded by his widow, Sirimavo, the world’s first woman prime minister . He will be succeeded by the world's first woman leader .
 The 8th-century gilded figure of the Buddhist goddess Tara is a superb example of Sri Lankan bronze casting .
 Peace of Amiens formalized British control of areas occupied in 1796 . British crown colony by Peace of . Amiens . British Crown colony by 1796.
 Civilian flights to Jaffna in Tamil north resume and road links reopen . Civilian flight to Tamil north resumes and road link links resume .
 Unprecedented demonstration broke out among school children in Valachchenai in the east of Sri Lanka .
 The students sat in the roads and blocked traffic in protest at the abduction of 23 of their classmates by the Tamil Tigers . Despite fears of violent reprisals, the students were not afraid of violence . The Tamil Tigers abducted 23 classmates from their homes in Tamil Nadu .
 The abduction took place just hours after the Tigers agreed to return child soldiers to their families . The Tigers had agreed a program with the children's charity Unicef to return them to their homes .
 The demonstration drew world attention to the plight of children forced to fight as soldiers by the Tiger rebels .
 President Mahinda Rajapaksa's government finally wins a parliamentary majority . 25 opposition MPs defect to its side . President's government wins majority after 25 defections from opposition .
 Tamil Tiger leader Velupillai Prabhakaran was killed in the fighting . The Tamil Tiger was the leader of the Tamil Tigers in the 1970s .
 Maldives is making a difficult transition to democracy after years of colonial rule . Maldives has been ruled by the Maldives since 1883 .
 Prodemocracy demonstration turns violent and a state of emergency is declared . State of emergency has been declared in response to a violent demonstration .
 Bangladesh is a young, flood-prone country that surrounds the confluence of the Ganges and Jamuna rivers . Flood-prone Bangladesh is one of the world's most flood-plagued countries .
 Rioting and guerrilla warfare follow Yahya Khan's refusal to convene assembly . Rioting follows the refusal of the assembly to meet the opposition .
 The year ends with the worst recorded storms in Bangladesh's history . Between 200,000 and 500,000 are killed in the worst storms in the country's history.
 Pakistani troops are defeated in 12 days by Mukhti Bahini—the Bengal Liberation Army . Pakistani troops were defeated by the Bengali Liberation Army in the 12 days .
 Fifteen former army officers are sentenced to death for involvement in assassination of President Mujib in 1975 . Fifteen ex-army officers were arrested in 1975 for their involvement in the assassination .
 Supreme Court declares issuing of religious decrees to be a criminal offense . Supreme Court declared issuing religious orders to be an offense by state of state .
 Awami League leader Hasina steps down, becoming first prime minister to complete a five-year term . Hasina becomes first PM in Bangladesh to complete five-term term in office .
 President Ahmed assumes caretaker role as prime minister Zia completes her term and steps down . Amid violent antigovernment demonstrations, President Ahmed assumed caretaker post . President Ahmed takes charge of caretaker presidency .
 Sheikh Hasina is charged with conspiring to murder a political rival . Khaleda Zia is put under house arrest . Sheikh has been charged with conspiracy to murder political rival; Khaled a Zia has been placed under house .
 Myanmar is a former British colony ruled by the military since 1962 . The country was renamed Myanmar in 1989 .
 Aung San Suu Kyi was released from house arrest a week after the election . A week after her election, she was freed from a week of house arrest . She is seen as a symbol of Myanmar's democracy .
 She has refused the military's offer to free her if she leaves Burma . Placed under long periods of house arrest she has refused to leave the country .
 In 1990, the military ignored the 80 percent of parliamentary seats that her party won in that year's election . The military ignored her party's 80 percent parliamentary seats . Her party won the election in 1990, but the military did not accept her victory .
 5th century BCE Confucius passes teachings down to his disciples to be recorded in the Analects . S 7 5/8 The world's most populous country, and for centuries the most advanced civilization, China .
 Confucian thought is supplemented by the teachings of Mencius in the 4th century sce . Mencius is the founder of the Confucan movement .
 Lao Zu (possibly mythical) creates the philosophy later set down in the Dao De Jing as Taoist thought . The philosophy was later set up in the . Dao .
 The first emperor, Shi Huangdi, is credited with instigation of the Great Wall . He is infamous for his hardline suppression of subversion and mass execution of intellectuals . The Great Wall was instigated by the first emperor .
 Stability allows major advances to be made in political thought, economics, invention, and administration . Chinese territory is enlarged through several successful military campaigns .
 During this period northern China is ruled by six different dynasties and the south by three . Northern China was ruled by a number of different dynasts during this period . During the period, the south was ruled more than three times .
 The political institutions of the Sui are reformed along less repressive lines and the empire consolidated . The Sui empire is consolidated and the political institutions are reformed . The empire was consolidated in China .
 Tang is referred to in Chinese history as a golden age, mostly for its arts (especially poetry and painting) and for unprecedented territorial expansion . The Tang is known for its political and religious tolerance, especially for its tolerance .
 In spite of rigorous attempts at centralizing control and defending itself against external attack, the Song never achieves the unity of the Tang . The Song's attempts to centralize control and defend itself from external attack fail to achieve unity .
 Neo-Confucian thought draws from ideas in both Confucian traditions and Buddhism . Political instability breeds philosophical and religious ferment, including the development of neo-confucian thinking .
 Mongol armies under Ghengis Khan begin their gradual conquest of China . Mongol armies began to conquer China in the 13th century .
 Under the Mongols, agriculture, communications, and local administration are strengthened, drama flourishes, and advances are made in science and technology .
 Like many dynasties before it, the Mongol dynasty deteriorates through corruption and overthrown by peasant rebellions . The Mongol dynasty was overthrown in 17th century .
 Indiscriminate executions and the establishment of a secret service ensure the unoppopposed rule of the emperor . Heavy censorship and editing of texts is instigated .
 The novel is introduced as a new form of literature . The Water Margin and Journey to the West achieve particular acclaim . The novel introduces the novel as a novel .
 The dynasty is consistently shaken by peasant uprisings, and weakened by the excessive power of the eunuchs in the court . The dynasty has been shaken by peasants revolting against the government .
 Manchu invaders bring about the fall of the Ming Dynasty . It is, however, Manchu invasion who bring about fall of Ming Dynasty.
 They allow the Han to participate in government, while holding on to power . They allow them to participate, while still holding on power, while they hold on to it .
 Wearing of the hair in a queue is made compulsory as is neo-Confucianism . Most of the emperors are also Buddhist adherents .
 European merchants arrive by sea along the south coast and establish trade links with China . While czarist Russia encroaches on Chinese territory in the north, European merchants begin to arrive in China .
 During his reign, he opened China up to foreign trade and encouraged Western ideas . He opened the country's doors to the West and encouraged foreign trade .
 Alarmed at the rise in opium use, the Chinese government attempts to limit its import . The Chinese government is attempting to limit the amount of the drug .
 China defeated by British in 1842, forced to open ports to foreigners . China is defeated by the British in the same year .
 China is again defeated in 1860, this time by a combined Anglo-French force . China was defeated by the combined Anglo and French forces .
 With restrictions lifted, the opium trade thrives and the number of users grows rapidly . The number of people who use the drug is growing rapidly .
 Nanjing is recaptured by the Manchu government in 1864 after a conflict that leaves about 20 million dead . With the help of the UK and U.S. forces, Nanjing was recaptured . Nanjing's recapture is captured by the Chinese government after a war that
 Although victorious, the Manchus’ authority is undermined in many parts of China . Although victorious in China, many areas of China have seen their authority undermined .
 Foreign troops are now stationed at every important junction between Beijing and Shanghai as the Manchu government is fatally weakened . Foreign troops will be stationed at all important junctions between the two cities .
 Sun became the first president of the Republic of China in 1912 . He returned from 16 years of exile to overthrow the failing Manchu dynasty . Sun returned to China after 16 years in exile .
 He died from cancer before he was able to consolidate his power and reunify China .
 Sun became the symbol of Chinese modernization after his death . Sun was known for his unrivaled knowledge of the West and determination to develop China .
 Start of the 7,450-mile Long March as the Red Armies of the CCP retreat . CCP Red Army will take part in the Long March, which will cover 7,000 miles .
 Farming is collectivized and this contributes to millions of deaths during the 1959-61 famine . Millions of deaths were caused by the collectivization of farming .
 China conducts its first test of a nuclear weapon in the Lop Nur desert desert . China conducted its first nuclear test of its own nuclear weapon .
 Schools are shut down and the youthful Red Guards are encouraged to attack all authority and bourgeois ideas . Red Guards will attack authority, bourgeois ideas and take aim at all authority .
 The cult of personality surrounding Mao is intensified and the Red Guards splinter into factions . Each claiming to represent the will of Mao, each claiming to have been Mao's will .
 Temples are ransacked, books are burned, and intellectuals are persecuted . Temples were ransacks, books were burned and intellectuals persecuted .
 By 1968, industrial production has dipped to barely 12 percent of the levels of 1966 . Industrial production in 1966 was barely 12% of that year's levels .
 President Nixon visits China and meets Mao, as a more open foreign policy is initiated by Zhou Enlai . Nixon's visit comes as China opens up its own foreign policy . Nixon visited China in 1968 and 1969 .
 On his death, the Gang of Four attempt to seize power, but are thwarted by supporters of Deng . Deng's death is the first of a series of attempts to take power in China .
 A massive earthquake at Tangshan in Hebei province leaves at least 250,000 dead . The quake was the largest quake in China's history, killing more than 300,000 people .
 Criticism of the Gang of Four and acknowledged past mistakes is encouraged, but when the present system is criticized, the Wall is closed . Criticism is encouraged by past mistakes, but criticism of the system is closed, he says .
 Pinyin is adopted as the official system of transcribing Chinese into Latin alphabets . It is used to transcribe Chinese words into Latin letters . It has been adopted as an official system for Chinese language writing .
 Economic reform gathers pace, but hopes for political change suppressed . Economic reform gathering pace in China .
 The uprising is ordered to be crushed by the army, with the loss of 1,000—5,000 lives . After initial hesitation by the government, the government orders the army to crush the uprising .
 Beijing placed under martial law and China briefly faces international isolation . Beijing is placed under emergency law and faces isolation from international community . Beijing placed on martial law .
 On March 10, 1959, simmering tension between Tibetans and their Chinese rulers exploded in an uprising in the Tibetan capital, Lhasa . The uprising was the first Tibetan uprising since 1959 .
 Thousands took to the streets surrounding the Potala Palace to protest against the influx of Chinese settlers . The protests had begun when Chinese troops entered eastern Tibet in October 1950 . Thousands of people protested against the Chinese settlers in the streets .
 Tibet declared its independence in 1911 when the Manchu had fallen, and governed itself for 40 years . But its poorly equipped army had been no match for the invading Chinese in 1950 . Tibet had declared independence from Manchu in 1911 .
 This proved true again and the uprising was crushed, leaving thousands dead . Thousands of people were killed in the uprising, including thousands of children .
 Dalai Lama was forced to flee across the Himalayas on foot . The Dalai Lama, spiritual leader of Tibet, was forced into exile in Tibet .
 Tibet leader set up governmentin-exile in India and has campaigned for an independent Tibet ever since . He set up a government in exile in India but is now living in exile .
 China began a crackdown on Tibetan religion and culture after the uprising . The Chinese government recognizes Tibet as an autonomous region, but has begun a crackdown .
 The five-yearly party congress confirms Jiang’s leadership and backs his reformist policies . The party congress is the first in China's history to hold a party congress in five years .
 China avoids significant capital flight or currency devaluation . The East Asian economic crisis leads to a sharp downturn in growth, but China avoids capital flight . China's economic crisis in 2008 saw a sharp slowdown in growth .
 NATO accidentally bombs Chinese embassy in Belgrade leading to international crisis . NATO accidentally bombed the Chinese embassy leading to an international crisis. NATO accidentally bombarded the Chinese Embassy with bombs .
 The quasi-religious Falun Gong sect is declared a threat to stability and outlawed in China . It was declared a 'threat to stability' and outlawed by the Communist Party of China .
 A former deputy chairman of the National People’s Congress is executed for accepting a bribe . As part of an official clampdown on corruption, the execution took place in China .
 China joins the World Trade Organization after a 15-year campaign to secure its entry to the world trading body . China joined the world trade body after 15 years of efforts to secure entry .
 President George W Bush visits China on the 30th anniversary of the visit by his predecessor Richard Nixon . Richard Nixon's visit to China was 30 years ago today .
 China’s first manned spacecraft is launched, with astronaut Yang Liwei on board . China's first manned space vessel was launched in March 2013 .
 HONG KONG ISLAND was ceded to Britain in 1842 .
 It grants China sovereignty over Hong Kong after 1997 . It guarantees a high degree of autonomy in economic affairs . It also guarantees the continuation of the present legal and capitalist economic systems .
 Violent anti-Japanese protests break out in Chinese cities over the coverage of Japan’s occupation of China in a Japanese school textbook . Protests break out over the use of Japanese textbooks in China .
 Lien Chian, chairman of the Kuomintang party of Taiwan, visits mainland China and meets CCP leader Hu Jintao . It is the highestlevel meeting between Beijing and Taipei politicians since 1949 . The meeting was the highest level of political relations between China and Taiwan since
 The highly pathogenic H5N1 strain of avian flu was detected in migratory birds in Qinghai, China . The highly-pathogenic strain was found in the region of Qinghai .
 China and Russia sign an agreement settling a long-running dispute over their common eastern border . The two countries have been involved in a dispute for decades over their eastern borders .
 MACAO occupies a narrow peninsula on the opposite side of the Pearl River estuary from Hong Kong . MACAo occupies a . narrow peninsula . It is located in the opposite of the . Pearl River .
 The last European colony in Asia, Macao was handed back to China by Portugal in 1999 . Macao is China's last remaining European colony of Asia .
 1800s Hong Kong replaces Macau as the major trading port of the region . International merchant community establishes itself .
 In 1949, Chiang Kai-shek's Kuomintang established the Republic of China on the island . The island was established by the communists in 1949, when they ousted the Kuomintsang from power .
 The KMT's grip was shaken by defeat in the 2000 presidential election . De facto military rule has been democratized progressively since 1986 .
 Mainland China still considers Taiwan a renegade province, and only a few countries officially recognize the regime there . Taiwan is still considered a rogue province by China .
 Former reformist leader Zhao Ziyang dies after years of house arrest following the Tiananmen Square massacre . Zhao had been under house arrest for years following the massacre . He was arrested in 1989 after the massacre in which he was killed by soldiers .
 Prime Minister Wen Jiabao addresses the Japanese parliament, the first Chinese head of government to do so . The two countries agree to a process of reconciliation as the two countries reach an agreement .
 50,000 Chinese children fall ill after drinking tainted milk . 2009 china and Russia sign a 20-year deal to supply oil to China . China and Russia signed an oil deal in 2009 .
 The island remains a center of international finance and trade . Under the policy of ""one country, two systems,"" the island remains an international center .
 Mongolia is a remote, sparsely -. populated country that once ruled the largestever Asian empire . Mongolia was once the world's most populous and most populous country .
 Towards the end of the 700s, the kingdom begins to break apart as a result of uprisings and conflicts within the aristocracy . The kingdom began to break up in the late 700s due to internal conflicts .
 UN forces beat a hasty retreat across the 38th parallel, the border between North and South Korea, 1904-05 . Following the Russo-Japanese invasion of Korea, Japan conquers Korea .
 North Koreans take much of the south, before United States intervention drives them back . U.S. intervention drives the North Koreans back .
 A limited number of North Koreans meet relatives from the south, separated since 1950-53, in a reunion . North Koreans have been separated from each other since then . North and South Korea have been at odds for decades .
 North Korea says it is slowing down the dismantling of its nuclear program . North Korea said it was slowing down dismantling of the North Korean nuke program .
 The North Korean Army bombards a South Korean island near Seoul, the worst attack since the Korean War . North Korea bombards the island in a worst attack on Korean soil since the war .
 The US, with UN backing, enters on the South's side; China unofficially assists the North . UN backing: North Korea, South Korea, North Korea and South Korea .
 Strong manufacturing base and exports drive massive economic development . Strong industrial base is key to economic growth in South Africa .
 North Korean army shells South Korean Yeonpyeong island, leading to dangerous rise in tension . North Korea army shells the island, which is located in South Korea's eastern region .
 The samurai resist the Yuan army, which is made up of Mongol, Chinese, and Korean soldiers . The samurai resisted the Yuan's invasion of Japan in Japan .
 Samurai fortress Himeji Castle, begun in 1333, has all the defensive and architectural features of a Japanese medieval fortress, including gun emplacements and stone-dropping holes .
 The second Mongol invasion is repulsed after a typhoon wipes out the Mongol armada . The Tokugawa Shogunate implemented a series of anti-Christian measures, culminating in Samurai katana .
 This typhoon is called a kamikaze, or divine wind, sent by the gods to save Japan from the invaders . This storm is called the "divine wind" and is believed to have saved Japan from invasion .
 It is a period of devastating civil wars and the breakdown of central government, but also of growth in the arts and commerce . It is also the period of economic growth and the rise of the arts .
 The Portuguese land in Japan, probably the first Europeans to do so . C.1542 The Portuguese landed in Japan in 1542 .
 Hideyoshi Toyotomi orders execution by crucifixion of nine Catholic missionaries and 17 Japanese converts . Hideyoshim Toyotom orders execution of nine missionaries and three converts . Toyotomo orders the execution of 17 converts and nine missionaries .
 Edict forbade Japanese ships to leave for foreign countries, and ordered the execution by sword of anyone returning from abroad . Addressed to two commissioners in the southern port Nagasaki, a stronghold of Christianity, the Edict .
 He is now officially the man authorized to keep the peace in the emperor’s name . He is authorized to act as a peacekeeper .
 The period of sakoku begins, with trade restricted to limited dealings with the Dutch and Chinese through Nagasaki . The period is known as 'sakoku' and 'saka' during the period .
 He renounces his warrior status to devote himself to poetry . Perfecting the ‘new style’ in the 17-syllable haiku form .
 This is a direct challenge to the authority of the Tokugawa administration, the bafuku . This is the first time the Japanese government has taken action against the government . It is not the first instance of this type of action in Japan .
 Angry at the idea of a conscript army, they march on Kumamoto Castle and the whole army is sent in to crush them . The whole army was sent to crush the rebels .
 400 are left alive out of 20,000 out of the Satsuma . Armed only with swords and a few Enfield rifles, they are slaughtered . The Satsum are slaughtered using swords and rifles .
 Only 1 percent of the population qualifies for office in Japan . 1894-95 war with China ends in Japanese victory . Only 1 per cent of population qualify for office .
 China is forced to withdraw from Korea, and cede the Liaotung Peninsula to Japan . China withdraws from Korea and cedes its territory to Japan, resulting in a humiliating defeat to China .
 1904-05 war with Russia ends in Japanese victory . Large-scale heavy industry developed and foreign trade increased sharply . Heavy industry developed .
 The country soon embarked on a rapid process of Westernization with the US . It replaced an agreement with the UK and marked a shift in power in the Pacific .
 This is interpreted in the United States as a threat to its Pacific interests . The U.S. is concerned about the situation in the region .
 Japan responds in December by launching an attack on the United States fleet at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii, and invading US, UK, and Dutch possessions in the Pacific . Japan responds by launching a strike on the U.S. and invading the Pacific in December .
 Douglas MacArthur installed as Supreme Commander in Japan . Japan placed under the control of a United States military government . General Douglas MacArthur is Supreme Commander .
 In the subsequent election, the LDP remains in power but loses its outright majority . The LDP is still in power despite losing its majority in Japan's first election .
 The Recruit-Cosmos bribery scandal leads to the resignation of prime minister Noburo Takeshita . Noburo Takeshita resigns as prime minister after Recruit Cosmos scandal .
 He is replaced by Sosuke Uno, who is in turn forced to resign over a sexual scandal . Uno was replaced by Uno himself, who was forced to quit after a sex scandal .
 Pacifism is written into the constitution, as Japan renounces the use of force to resolve international disputes . The constitution is written in Japan's constitution, renouncing the use .
 High executives of the largest industrial firms are removed from their positions . High executives have been removed from the positions of some of the biggest industrial firms .
 Morihiro Hosokawa becomes prime minister at the head of a sevenparty coalition . He is the first Japanese prime minister to become a leader in Japan .
 The first Shinkansen service linking Tokyo to Osaka is opened to coincide with the Olympics . The first service will link the capital and Osaka, Japan, from Tokyo .
 It is decided to concentrate investment in high-tech industries to reduce the country's dependence on oil imports .
 Emperor of Japan from 1926 until his death in 1989, Hirohito was worshipped as a living god until 1946 . He was the myopic emperor of Japan until he died .
 His broadcast on August 15, 1945, signaled Japan's surrender in World War I . His broadcast was broadcast that signaled the surrender of Japan in 1945 .
 Members of the religious group Aum Shinrikyo attack the Tokyo subway with deadly gas . 12 people were killed and hundreds injured in the gas attack . The religious group was behind the attack .
 As the major creditor country of the region, Japan suffers. 1998 crisis over reform of the banking and financial system . 1998 crisis led to the collapse of the Japanese economy . Japan is now the largest economy in the world .
 Nuclear power plant at Fukushima suffers serious damage and radiation leaks . Nuclear power station at Fukushima suffered serious damage at Fukushima .
 Following demonstrations, the king forces him to step down and reinstalls Anand . The king forces Anand Anand's resignation .
 People’s Alliance for Democracy protesters occupy government buildings in Bangkok and block flights from Bangkok airport . They are protesting against the government's policies in Thailand . Protesters occupy government offices and airports in Bangkok .
 The army suspended the constitution and declared martial law, but pledged to restore democracy . The army has been in charge of the country since 2007 .
 Since 1975 Laos has been a communist state but 3 market-oriented reforms are under way . Laos is one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 Premier Kaysone Phomvihane adopts policies for a “socialist transformation” of the economy . PhomVihane: “Socialist transformation is the future of the country’s economy .
 Exiled Sihanouk forms Royal Government of National Union of Cambodia backed by communist Khmer Rouge . Exiled ex-Cambodian leader now heads government of Cambodia in exile . Ex-Khmer Rouge leader ruled Cambodia in Cambodia in 1970s .
 During World War II, he led the Viet Minh guerrillas and established a government in Hanoi in 1945 . During the war he established an independent government in the city .
 When the French tried to regain control he proclaimed independence and led the resistance that forced the French to withdraw . He proclaimed independence from the French and fought for independence against them .
 President of North Vietnam from 1955, he successfully countered U.S. involvement in Vietnam in the 1960s, by which time he was in failing health . In failing health, he was forced to step down in Vietnam .
 He died six years before the U.S. finally withdrew from South Vietnam .
 New prime minister, Tun Abdul Razak, creates the National Front coalition . Tun Razak becomes the first prime minister of Malaysia to become a leader .
 After the war the U.S. and Philippine authorities try to suppress the movement . The United States and Philippines tried to suppress it after the war . The movement is still active today .
 Opposition leaders arrested; National Assembly suspended; press censored . Opposition leaders arrest; National assembly suspended . National Assembly suspends National Assembly . Opposition leader arrested; opposition leaders arrested .
 Marcos is thought to have plundered a personal fortune of $10 billion while in office . Marcos is believed to have amassed a fortune worth $10billion during his time in power .
 Indonesia is the fourth most populous ***^ country in the world . A Muslim nation of 17,500 islands, Indonesia is home to the world's largest population .
 The peoples of the Indonesian archipelago first come into contact with the Hindu-Buddhist culture of India . The Buddhist, Sumatrabased Sri-Vijaya Empire emerges as the earliest known Indonesian kingdom . Islam begins its penetration of Indonesia.
 Indonesia and Australia sign an agreement over the exploitation of resources in the seas between the two countries . The agreement was signed in a joint effort to stop the spread of oil in the region .
 Five students killed in violent clashes with anti-insurrection forces . Five students were killed in clashes between students and anti-government forces .
 At the end of World War II, the Portuguese regain sovereignty over the East .
 Trip is canceled after Indonesia objects to a member of the delegation . Trip is called off after Indonesia objectes to member of a delegation .
 Australia and Indonesia conclude an agreement over the Timor Gap, an area of rich oil deposits . The two countries agreed a deal over the area, which has rich oil reserves . The agreement is expected to last for more than a decade .
 Prime minister Alkatin resigns over his handling of the unrest . Jose Ramos-Horta takes over as prime minister after Alkat resigns .
 The joint Indonesian-East Timorese Truth Commission report blames Indonesia for human rights violations on East Timor in 1999 . The report was published by the joint Indonesian and East Timoreese Truth Commission .
 Four out of every five East Timorese voters chose independence from Indonesia in 1999 . 99 percent turnout was the highest in a vote with a 99 percent turn out .
 The vote dramatically marked the end of Indonesia's 23-year occupation of the country . The vote was the result of a referendum on Indonesia's sovereignty .
 Euphoric crowds took to the streets of Dili to celebrate but violent clashes broke out soon afterward . Violent clashes instigated by the Indonesian military broke out shortly afterward .
 An Australian-led peacekeeping force restored order and international outrage soon led Indonesia withdrawing its troops . International outrage led Indonesia to withdraw its troops from the country .
 He raises the British flag on an island off Cape York, claiming the territory for Britain . The British flag was raised on the island of Cape York .
 The widely scattered territories of Oceania stretch across the Pacific Ocean but are home to only 0.0 percent of the world's population . Oceaniats are scattered around the world and home to just 0.3 percent of their population .
 Robert O'Hara Burke and William Wills set out from Melbourne in 1860 . They almost reach the north coast, but turn back and die on the way home in 1861 .
 As a Japanese invasion of Australia seems imminent, the government turns to the United States for help . The U.S. joins forces with Australia in the fight against the Japanese invasion .
 Australia committed to participate in the Vietnam War in the 1960s . Under the treaty, Australia is committed to participating in the war in Vietnam .
 AUSTRALIA EXTERNAL TERRITORIES was set up under imperial order in 1933 . 1933 set up by imperial order. 1933 set-up under imperial orders .
 The shooting of 35 people by a gunman in Port Arthur, Tasmania, prompts tightening of gun control laws . 35 people were killed in the Port Arthur shooting in Tasmania .
 The Senate passes a no-confidence motion against Howard for his handling of the Iraq crisis . Howard is accused of mishandling the crisis in Iraq . Howard was forced to resign from the cabinet .
 Rudd signs the Kyoto Protocol, reversing the policy of the previous Liberal PM John Howard . Rudd is the first Australian Prime Minister to sign a Kyoto Protocol . Rudd was also the first PM to sign the agreement .
 Julia Gillard becomes first female prime minister and narrowly wins subsequent election, forming a minority government . Gillard's government is the first since 1942, forming the first minority government since 1942 .
 South Pacific islands first settled 1,000 years ago by > . the Maori, who call the country Aotearoa . Maori .
 The first settlers in New Zealand were the Maori from Polynesia . Maori make up about one-eighth of New Zealand's 3.9-million residents .
 New Zealand is an unwilling colonial power and has no wish to keep overseas territories . New Zealand's colonial power is unwilling to give up its overseas territories and wants to keep them .
 Their economic weakness forces New Zealand to take responsibility for their foreign policy and defense . New Zealand's economic weakness means New Zealand is taking responsibility for its foreign policy .
 Cook Islands are a group of atolls and volcanic islands in the South Pacific . They are self-governing and self-governed by their own government .
 Maori reject government 10-year land claims settlement of NZ$1 billion . Maori rejected government 10 year land claim settlement . Government says Maori will receive NZ$2 billion in compensation .
 Crown apologizes to Maori and signs Waikato Raupatu Claims Settlement Act . Crown apologises to the Maori for their actions . Crown also signs a Waikatatu Claims settlement Act .
 Waitangi Tribunal orders the government to return to the Maori NZ$6.million-worth of confiscated land . Maori Maori land will be returned to Maori . Tribunal orders return of NZ$7.5 million-worth worth of land .
 Fiji and New Zealand expel each other's top diplomats in a row over Fiji's postponement of elections . Fiji and NZ have been at odds for years over the postponing of the country's elections .
 2011 city of Christchurch on South Island hit by major eathquake . Full diplomatic ties were restored only in 2010 .
 Nauru’s offshore banks are closed after U.S. allegations of money laundering . Naurus’ offshore banks closed after United States allegations of laundering . The country's offshore banks were closed after the allegations .
 Everyone lives on the narrow coastal strip, as the interior is uninhabitable former mining land . The interior of the strip of land was uninhabited by mining . Everyone lives in the strip, with the interior of land being largely abandoned .
 Marshall Islands are a collection of 34 widely scattered atolls in the central Pacific, of which 24 are inhabited . Marshall Islands is one of the most widely scattered islands in the world .
 Tarawa Atoll is the site of a fierce battle between U.S. and Japanese troops . The battle took place in the early 1940s .
 In 2000 Malaita rebels stage an unsuccessful coup and hold the prime minister at gunpoint for two days . In 2000 the rebels stage a failed coup in the country's capital, capital city .
 The chiefs of the islands sign treaties with various European powers in 1838-39 . The chiefs signed treaties with European powers .
 Between 1879 and 1916, the British brought in laborers from India to work on the copra and sugar cane plantations . Island immigrants were brought in by the British from India .
 By 1945 Indians like this farmer outnumbered ethnic Melanesian Fijians . By 1945 ethnic Fijian Indians were outnumbered by ethnic ethnic Fians . Indians and Melanesians were living in Fiji .
 President Ilolo repeals the constitution, dismisses all judges, appoints himself head of state, and reappoints Frank Bainimarama as prime minister . The new president replaces the prime minister and replaces all judges in the country .
 A state of emergency is declared after riots protesting the lack of democracy . State of emergency declared after protests against lack of democratic rights .
 Richard Beatty and Sarah Levete for proof reading . John Breen, Michael Brett, Amy-Sue Bix, Howard Hotson, Rosamond MckKitterick, and Chris Scarre for advice on content .
 Romaine Werblow at DK Images, Sonia Harder at AKG Images, Everyone at The Art Archive, Jenny Page at The Bridgeman Art Library and Nejla Burnazoglu at the Art Archive .
 Archaeological Receipts Fund ; D'Ephorate of Prehistoric and Classical Antiquities . Archaeological receipts funds Funds receive treasurers . Fund is the Archaeological Fund for Archaeological Archaeological Research .
 National Geographic has a new set of photos of the world's most famous animals .