 Anatolia College Model United Nations 2012 CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS Historical Committee . Elinda Staikopoulou is the student representative of the Historical Committee.
 Anatolia College MUN Conference Director is Director of the Historical Committee .
 I have been attending the Conference for the past 4 years and have been a chair once already . I have attended the conference for the last 4 years . I've been chair chairing the Conference once .
 The Historical Committee is a special committee and an extremely demanding one . It is a very special committee, and it is extremely demanding .
 You need to be fully aware of the background of the situation in Cuba, the Cold War and Berlin . The situation in Berlin is important to understand, says CNN's John Sutter .
 "We expect all of you to actively participate in the debates, deeply identify with your personalities and contribute in the formation of history," says the director .
 "It is inevitable that we will face pressure, disputes, as well as funny and unforgettable moments," says David Cameron . "It's inevitable that it will be inevitable," he says .
 "We are looking forward to cooperating with you and engage in three days of hardship and amusement," says CNN.com.com .
 The term “Cold War” is referred to a period characterized by political, military conflicts, proxy wars and economic competition . The Cold War was between 1946 and 1991 .
 The word "Cold" is due to the fact that no major military conflict took place and to the nuclear deterrent . The word “Cold” is due . It's due to fact that there were no major conflicts and no major nuclear war took place .
 The tactic of détente was implemented, so that political tensions were reduced and that no direct political attack was provoked . The tactic was implemented to reduce political tensions in the country .
 The great importance of the Cold War is related to the fact that nuclear weapons were used and the world came to the closest stage towards a nuclear war . The Cold War came to a close point towards a possible nuclear war, the author says .
 USA and USSR appeared to be the two most dominant superpowers on a global scale . They had some major economic, but also political differences . The Cold War began at the end of World War II .
 This provoked this competition between these two countries that led to this series of conflicts of various types . This provoked competition between the two countries, which was later led to conflicts, the author says .
 The Soviet Union created the Eastern Block, which included the Eastern European countries it occupied, by either annexing some parts of them or by preserving some as satellite states .
 The Soviet Union also launched the COMECON and the Warsaw Pact in 1955, so that it ensured that it had enough allies by its side. Concerning now the Soviet Union, it also launched a COMECon and the . Warsaw Pact, which was launched in 1955 .
 There were also some countries that belonged to the Non-Aligned Movement, which means they were more or less neutral .
 There were also some member-states called “satellite states” which had actually been set free by the Nazis and later occupied by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union occupied some of the most of the world's most populated countries .
 Eastern Germany, Poland, Bulgaria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia Socialist Republic, Romania and Romania were the PR of Albania . The PR of Eastern Germany was Eastern Germany .
 NATO or North Atlantic Treaty Organization is an intergovernmental alliance that was established in 1949 . Western Block NATO NATO was established by 1949 according to the North Atlantic treaty . NATO NATO is an international alliance that is based in the United States and Europe .
 The most essential objective of the organization is considered to be the collective defense . The number of its member-states reaches the 28.5 per cent .
 Albania, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Turkey, the United Kingdom,
 The Cold War was quite essential for the NATO organization, given that the Korean War that broke out in 1950 was proven out to be of great importance for NATO .
 It is unquestionable that it elevated the urgency of the treaty and the planning, as well as the exercise of concrete military plans took place . The treaty was 'emphatic' and 'enormous' for the U.S. It is 'unquestionable' that it
 The USSR asked for its entrance into NATO alliance, but this notion was rejected, given that the Western countries perceived that as an attempt aiming the destruction of the organization of it or the weakening of it, at least .
 Germany’s entrance in 1955 was what completed its anti-Communist character, since it implied that then there was enough opposition against Soviet Russia . Germany's entrance to the Soviet Union in 1955 implied there would be enough opposition to Soviet Russia, the author says .
 Nikita Khrushchev shared his idea with Fidel Castro of installing medium range missiles in Cuba . The idea was discussed in April 1962 . The crisis was the first time the U.S. had a direct threat to Cuba .
 Initially, Castro was not willing to accept such a proposal, but later agreed with Khrushchev and the installation began . The installation began in the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 The two leaders had some conflicts, related to the secrecy that the Soviet side wanted to retain . Cuba wanted to let the others know what was on with the missiles, given that no clause of any International Law was omitted or surpassed . The two sides wanted to keep the secrecy .
 On 29 September, U2 boats begin launching flights over Cuban territory . U.2 boats will launch flights over Cuba .
 Photos reveal the presence of medium range, nuclear missiles in Cuba, placed 90 miles away from the United States coast were about to be brought to light .
 Kennedy’s response came on 22 October, where he announced the event during his speech on TV and he claimed that a naval blockade would be imposed to Cuba from then on . Kennedy announced the blockade during his TV speech and claimed that he would impose a blockade on Cuba .
 He made clear that any attack launched by Cuba to the USA would be received as an attack from the USSR . He ordered the removal of all the Soviet arms from Cuba, while Soviet commanders were told to use all their arms in case of emergency .
 In addition, he created a council of twelve ministers, especially for this event that would be in charge of handling the negotiations related to the crisis . In addition to the council, he also created a group of 12 ministers .
 Kennedy ordered low-level reconnaissance missions to take place every two hours . Kennedy also ordered low level reconnaissance missions for the CIA .
 Nikita Khrushchev visited Jerome Hines at the Bolshoi Theater, who was an American singer . Hines was a popular singer in Russia .
 Kennedy was determined to do anything, in order to manage to pull out these missiles from Cuba, both in diplomatic and military means . From the other hand, he was determined .
 Nikita Khrushchev was a Russian politician, who was the one in charge of Russia’s foreign affairs, when the crisis in Cuba broke out . He was one of the leaders of the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 After Stalin’s death his actions proved quite the opposite thing and he is considered to be quite responsible for the de-Stalinization that was followed by Stalin's death . However, after his death Stalin's actions proved to be the opposite .
 He was the first one to back the Soviet Space Program . He was also the first to support the Soviet program .
 In terms of prestige, Khrushchev was accepted and revered by the majority, since for many he was nothing more than an incapable politician, who speaks a lot . In the 1960s and '60s, the Soviet Union was the most powerful in Russia .
 The sayings of Harold Macmillan could be used as a great example related to that . Harold MacMillan's sayings could be an example of that .
 Nikita Khrushchev was removed by his own colleagues in 1964 and died in 1971 . He was removed from the Soviet Union in 1964 by his colleagues . He died a year later in 1971 in Moscow .
 According to many, the Soviet side was the one to blame for, but it would be quite simplistic if one stayed only to that . The Soviet side is the one that was responsible for the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 U.S. arms had surpassed impressively the Russian ones, says Vladimir Putin . Russia's arms were a great threat towards the Russian side, he says . Putin's actions provoked the crisis, says Putin .
 If Russia had fifty bombers that could hit the USA, the second would have five hundred . So the crisis was nothing, but a cheap way for Russia to defend itself . Russia has 50 bombers that can hit the U.S. and five hundred could hit each other .
 American actions implied a Cuban Invasion that was more than possible, before the Crisis . In addition, the U.S. actions also implied a possible invasion of Cuba before the crisis .
 Sabotage against the factories, attempts of assassination against Cuban politicians and especially Fidel Castro and civilians’ suffrage were the most prominent examples of the American policy towards Cuba .
 The past, including the Bay of Pigs Invasion invasion made the things even worse and the threat became greater . The past has made the situation even worse .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion was an attempt by forces of Cuban exiles trained by CIA to enter the southern part of Cuba . The invasion was a failed attempt to enter Cuba .
 The U.S. government was aware of that action and encouraged that attempt to destroy the government in Cuba under Fidel Castro . The United States government was "completely aware" of the action, the president says .
 Playa Giron is a beach placed at the mouth of the bay . In April 1961, the invasion took place and the main territory, where it got developed, was the Playa .
 Kennedy was aware of the presence of the missiles even from the first of October, but he did not react . Kennedy was not reacting to the missile threat, but was aware it existed .
 The photos of the 16 th of October were nothing, but a final, typical confirmation . The photos were taken on October 16th .
 At his speech Kennedy announced the event shocked and anxious, something that was not the case, given that he had known about that two weeks beforehand and no actions had been initiated for the solution of the crisis .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy served as the 35th President of the US, from 1961 till 1963, the year of his assassination . Anatolia College Model United Nations 2012 .
 Kennedy represented Massachusetts’s 11 th congressional district in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1947 to 1953 . Kennedy was elected to the Massachusetts Senate in 1953 .
 Kennedy's incumbency was promising and some may claim advantageous . Being elected at the age of 43 the youngest at the office and the second youngest President of America, Kennedy was elected at 43 .
 It is remarkable that he was the only Catholic president and the only president being awarded a Pulizer Prize . He was awarded the prize for his role in the country .
 ExComm was called the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, also known as ExComm . ExComm is a group of people who work for the White House and the CIA . The committee is now known as the "ExComm"
 Members of the ExComm were the participants of the National Security Council meetings, the brother of President Kennedy, the attorney general Robert Kennedy, and Theodore Sorensen, the President’s speechwriter and White House counsel .
 Kennedy acknowledged the impact of the crisis on the political aspects domestically . The contribution of these two people helped Kennedy acknowledge the impact, he said .
 Llewellyn Thompson was a former ambassador of the Soviet Union and well acquainted with Nikita Khrushchev . Thompson was also a well-known figure in the ExComm . The ExComm was formed in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Kennedy blamed himself for publicly warning Khrushchev about the missiles in Cuba . Kennedy blames himself for not publicly telling the Soviet Union about the threat .
 He explained to the rest of the members of the ExComm that the crisis was not a matter of personal affront and public denunciation . He said: "He explained thoroughly to the other of the . members of . the . ExComm"
 An Anglo-American airlift frustrated the blockade of the Soviets, but ten years later, in 1958, Khrushchev revived the threat and continued the same direction .
 Khrushchev in cooperation with the East Germans decided in 1961 on building a wall around West Berlin . The wall was built to hinder the exit of East Berliners to Soviet-controlled areas .
 Khrushchev had shared his intentions of invading Berlin with Kennedy as soon as the U.S. congressional elections were over . The invasion of Berlin began in 1962 .
 Kennedy considered implementation of missile sites in Cuba as the preparation of a showdown regarding Berlin . Kennedy considered the implementation of the missile sites as preparation for a showdown .
 U.S. policy was to protect and secure the population of West Berlin, approximately 1. million people, but lacked the physical means to achieve that . The United States lacked physical means of protecting West Berlin .
 Kennedy announced the measure of a naval blockade around the island of Cuba . Kennedy was advised by members of the ExComm to do so .
 The aim of this action was to guard the island and prevent the entry of further missiles . The aim was to protect the island from further attacks .
 As a result, the Soviets would be forced to withdraw the already installed missiles . The missiles would be removed from the Soviet Union .
 1959 Jan 1 Fidel Castro assumes power after the Cuban Revolution . 1960 Dec 19 Cuba openly aligns itself with the Soviet Union and their policies . 1959 Dec 19 Fidel Castro assumed power in Cuba .
 Andrei Gromyko warns that U.S. attack on Cuba could mean war with the Soviet Union . Soviet Foreign Minister: U.K. could be at risk of war with Russia .
 A U-2 flying over western Cuba obtains photographs of missile sites . The U.S. military says it has no intention of intercepting missile missiles .
 Adlai Ewing Stevenson is the Ambassador of the United States of America to the UN . Stevenson has been Ambassador to the U.S. since 1961 . He has been in charge of the UN since 1961. Stevenson is known for his work in New York .
 Kennedy defeated Stevenson for the third time for the position of president, but after his nomination, he chose Stevenson to be Ambassador to the United Nations . Stevenson has been working hard to promote United States Foreign Policy .
 Maxwell Taylor was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the Kennedy Administration . He was also involved in a committee charged with overthrowing Fidel Castro, Operation Mongoose .
 He held managerial positions in the Moscow City Committee and in the Central Committee of the Komsomol till 1932 . He also served in the Soviet Union's Central Committee .
 From 1941 since 1944, he was an employer of the People’s Commissariat for Foreign Affairs . From 1941 to 1944 he was employed as a diplomat in the Soviet Union .
 He was Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union . Thereafter, he became a representative at UN Security Council on behalf of his country . He was also a representative of the United Nations .
 A descendant of a Belarusian family, Gromyko was inspired by the Bolshevik Revolution . He was a descendant of Belarusian low class Belarusian .
 Sir Patrick Dean was born in 1909 and is the Permanent Representative of the UK to the UN since 1960 . He is the current Permanent Representative to the U.N.
 He started his career as a lawyer, however, when the World War II broke out, he quitted the field of law and entered the British Foreign Office . He also served in the Foreign Office during the Second World War .
 Sir Patrick Dean was knighted by Her Majesty, the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in 1957 .
 Alex QuaisonSacky is the Ghanaian diplomat representing his country in the Security Council . He is also a key figure in the country's governing body .
 He has been holding the position of the permanent Representative of Ghana in the Security Council since 1959 . He has held the position since 1959 and has been in charge of Ghana's Security Council .
 Armand Berard is the French delegate to U.N. Security Council since 1959 . Berard has been in charge of the UN Security Council . He has been a member of the French delegation to the United Nations .
 Although he studied History and Geography, he chose to follow a diplomat’s career . He chose to be a diplomat rather than a politician .
 In 1931 he joined the French Foreign Office . Fluent in German, Spanish, Italian and English . His first post was in Berlin during the first five years of the Third Reich .
 In the 1940s he managed to escape to Algiers, through Spain, and join the De Gaulle’s Free France movement . In the 1950s he joined the Free France and became a member of the French army .
 Armand Berard served as First Counselor of the French Embassy in Washington DC . He also assisted Henry Bonnet, the French delegate to the U.N. Armand first visited the USA in 1938 .
 From 1949 to 1955, he served as the High Commissioner of the French Occupied Zone in Germany, primarily dealing with Berlin . He served as a French High Commissioner in Germany from 1949 until 1955 .
 In 1959, he become the Representative of France in the Security Council . In 1959 he became the Representative . of France . in 1959 . He was the first French representative of France to be in the Council .
 Mihail Haseganu is the Romanian Representative to the United Nations Security Council . He has been the Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary since 1961 .
 In 1959 he become Director in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . He was a former rector of the Institute of Economic Sciences and Planning and in 1959 he became Director .
 Ambassador of Romania to the United Nations was recalled in August of 1961 to assume the position of Ambassador to the U.N. 1959 . He was Ambassador to Romania from 1961 to 1961 .
 Turkish politician and one of the founding fathers of Modern Turkey . ISMET İNÖNÜ İsmet İnönü was a Turkish politician . He was a founding father of modern Turkey .
 He kept his country neutral during the Second World War . He improved its diplomatic relations with the West as well as with the Soviet Union . He also improved relations with Russia and the West .
 Cuban revolution initiator and politician, was in power since 1959 in the position of the Prime Minister of Cuba . He was a Cuban revolution leader, being in power from 1959 .
 His political views adhere to those of Marx and Lenin, converting the Republic of Cuba into a one-party socialist state, he says .
 His plan aimed at the nationalization of private businesses and enterprises, while, at the same time, he implemented all sorts of socialist reforms within the society, he says .