 Students study in new second floor study area in Coram, which will open 8:00m. to 11 a.m. starting Monday . Students study on second floor of Coram's second floor, starting Monday.
 Coram Library will be open from 8 to 11 daily except Sunday, when the hours will be 2 to 11 . Head Librarian Iva W Foster describes the renovated second floor reading area .
 The new section will be open during the additional hours without the services of the library staff . The library proper will be maintained on the same y basis as last year, open from 8:30 m. to 12:15m., 1:00m. to 5:30m.
 Glass wall completely encloses the entire area and eliminates noise from the front entrance and stairwell . This glass wall completely closes in on the front and back entrances to the building .
 Additional coat racks have been installed for student use when the major part of the library is closed . On the stairwell and in the large unit of the reading area, additional coat racks were installed . The library is located in the middle of the school's main library .
 Interest counts as much as experience through the circulation desk . Wednesday, September 26. at 4:30 .
 The present seating arrangements are less crowded than before* and are more comfortable due to padded chairs . The new seating arrangement is less crowded and more comfortable .
 Modern lighting fixtures have replaced the old and rather dim globes in the large room and the Stanton Room . Modern lighting has been replaced by modern lighting fixtures .
 Other changes at Coram include a slotted book return, now in the ""experimental stage,"" which should help the librarians handle reserve books more rapidly .
 A badly-needed elevator has been installed in the library . Library staff will no longer have to carry armloads of heavy books from floor to floor .
 A Library Committee composed entirely of students investigated the study opportunities at Bates . Last year a Library Committee suggested the adoption of longer library hours . The committee is a group of students .
 This year a study area with greatly improved facilities is open 15 hours daily, the responsibility for which will rest solely on the students themselves . This year's students will be responsible for their own study area .
 James Curtis of the class of 1963 and a member of the Deansmen then took the floor to lead the group in singing some of the Bates songs . James Curtis then led the group to sing the songs .
 Debbie Peterson '63, a member of the Merrimanders, added her voice to Jim's, and both sang the songs so that the Freshmen could become familiar with the tunes . The Freshmen were asked to learn the songs from the songs .
 The Bates Fight Song rang throughout the Gym. The Freshmen added their enthusiasm, and The Fight Song .
 Dean Lindholm then introduced President Charles F Phillips who turned his attention to the assembly . The assembly was then adjourned for the first time .
 President Phillips welcomed students and their parents to campus for a weekend . He explained that he and other administration members had decided that many parents might enjoy an opportunity to visit a college campus .
 Parents part of the opening weekend, so that they could be more than porters for their child's bags . Thus it was arranged to make parents part of opening weekend .
 The Library calls the attention of the student body to the new fine schedule on overdue reserve books . He recalled the great expense of financing a person's education and Stu-C And StU-G .
 Beginning at 1:00m., an additional fine of 25 cents per hour or fraction thereof will be charged for each overdue reserve book . An additional fine will be added to each overdue book .
 This action has become necessary to encourage prompt return of reserve books in order that the books may be readily available at the Reserve Desk for the use of other students doing class assignments .
 Yesterday you were introduced to the specific functions of these respective bodies . Yesterday we were given a look at some of the functions of each body .
 The day to day duties of Stu-G entail dorm management under the Honor System, proctor selection, and freshman orientation . In brief, the day-to-day duties include dorm management, proctors selection and orientation .
 Stu-C is concerned with selection of proctors, freshman orientation, intramurals, and dorm induction . It is also concerned with selecting proctors and freshman orientation .
 The scope of the Governments extends to representing the student body on various faculty and administration committees . The scope also extends to represent the students on faculty and administrative committees .
 These committees integrate the faculty, administration, and student effors in social-academic fields . Committee members include faculty and administration members .
 Student Conduct Committee is concerned not only with disciplinary problems, but also with attempts to clarify campus policies . For example, the committee is concerned with not only disciplinary problems but also trying to clarify policies .
 The Extra curricular Committee deals with scheduling all campus activities to avoid conflicts . The committee is responsible for scheduling all school activities .
 Concert and Lecture Committee selects events for the many cultural programs at the school . Committee selects the events for cultural programs .
 Committee meets with the LewistonAuburn Lecture Committee to plan the series for the area . Committee also meets to plan a series of lectures .
 Campus Relations Committee is made up of members of all the major campus organizations . Committee discusses topics of interest to the whole campus . Committee is comprised of members from all major campus groups .
 Topics of general campus interest, including many of the above named activities, are handled by the Intergovernment Committee . Topics of interest, such as many of these activities, will be handled by this committee .
 Intergovernment Committee worked to expand library facilities, improve co-ed dining and draft a constitution for the proposed Student Senate . This past year the committee also drafted a constitution .
 The constitution for the Student Senate w^s overwhelmingly approved by the Student Body last spring . The Intergovernment Committee will now present it to the faculty and administration for consideration .
 It is hoped that a Student Senate will be formally esablished next spring . The Student Senate is hoped to be formally established next year .
 The Senate constitution provides for separate dormitory management and problems related to either men or women . The constitution provides separate dorms for both men and women .
 The services pertaining to the campus-at-large will be handled by the Student Senate . The services are currently performed by the separated governments .
 An area that holds great promise for more varied activities on related the story of the father who had sacrificed new clothes for himself for many years to be present at his son's graduation .
 President Phillips stated that because more and more people are now attending college, Bates may have to adopt a plan whereby classes would be held twelve months of the year .
 One third more students could be educated in the same amount of time as now, but the student-professor ration would not be sacrificed . Students could also be educated more quickly, but not more quickly .
 He emphasized that there is still a way of life for the men and a separate way for the women . He emphasized, however, that there are still ways of life in the United States .
 Each student was encouraged to keep up the academic standing of Bates College by working his best . Yet still he was to try to join some of the campus organizations in order to make best use of his abilities .
 President Phillips closed his welcome by encouraging each student to be proud of his school . President Phillips also encouraged students to become an alumni .
 In closing, Jim Curtis led all Bates students and alumni in singing the Alma Mater . Jim Curtis leads all Bates alumni to sing the Alma .
 All stood and sang out proudly, and the Freshmen were officially part of Bates College . The Freshmen stood proudly and proudly .
 The Robinson Players invite the freshman class to a showing of "Kind Hearts and Coronets" with Alec Guiness free of charge . Thursday at 4:00 in the Little Theater .
 September 29 — ""The Mouse That Roared"" British October 13 — ""Panther Panchali"" Indian October 27 — ""Asphalt Jungle"" American November 22 — ""I'm All Right Jack"" British December 1 — ""Smiles of a Summer Night"" Swedish January 5
 The debt to Bacon is obvious, and if he were alive he might well echo the same advice . Bacon's advice: "Don't be afraid to call it a day of your life."
 Taste the many different clubs, organizations, etc. etc., but commit yourselves to nothing at first . Taste the various clubs and organizations, but commit yourself to nothing first .
 After a semester you will be in a much better position to judge the merits of the activities surrounding you, to know your college self .
 Admittedly, one should observe Aristotle's Golden Mean, but few err on the side of too much study . "Aristotle's Golden mean" is a good example of the Golden Age, but it's not always good enough .
 College is nothing if it does not provide a forum for your intellectual expansion . College should be a great place for students to explore their own ideas, says John Sutter .
 Consider the classroom, the teacher, the activity, not as ends, but as means to an ever expanding intellectual horizon . Consider it as a means to expand your own intellectual horizon. Consider it in the classroom and the teacher as a way of learning .
 Thus, commit yourselves to that one goal immediately; taste, and perhaps swallow, the others . Thus, committing yourselves to the one goal is the one you want .
 The students who last year labored over the library report should be praised, for their work has borne fruit . The library report was published last year by students in the library .
 The success of the library committee is just one example of the effectiveness of student opinion, thoughtfully considered, carefully prepared, and presented in a forthright but mature manner .
 If all requests were tendered in a manner similar to the library report's, the percentage might be higher . Not every request is met, nor should be; but if all requests are tendered, it might be more .
 The accumulation of many seemingly insignificant changes at Bates often goes unnoticed . Bates has been in the news for more than a decade .
 There have been advances, of less physical prominence than Carnegie's, but equally as significant . Carnegie's advances have been less physical but equally significant .
 Peter Reich '65, Editor, Norman Gillespie '64, Assistant, Diane John son '65 . James Kiernan '63, Richard Dow '64 and Malcolm Mills '63 . Peter d'Errico '65 and Marty Stiles '65; . Nina Jewell '65
 Stephen Barron '64, Business Manager; Robert Lanz '65, Advertis ing Manager; Katherine Mincher '64 - Make-up . Sandra Parker '63, Make-Up, Sandra Parker, '63 .
 Bates Christian Association. Presents Purpose, Schedule And Goal For Coming Session . Bates Christian Academy. presents purpose, Schedule and Goal for coming session .
 This article attempts to clarify some of these misconceptions and to present this year's CA program . CA program is a free program that aims to educate people about the importance of CA .
 At present the C in our title is probably more confusing and undefined than the C of the YM and YW organizations . At present, the C is more confused and undefined . The C in the YW organization's title is more confusing than that in the current organizations .
 Bates Christian Association attempts to be an inter-faitfy commission . The Bates Christian Christian Association is an interfaith commission .
 It seems that judgments made about the BCA will have to be based on what we do, not on our title . The decision was made by the British Cricket Council .
 "This year these activities will not constitute the core of our program. However, this year this year they will not be a core of the program. This year's program will focus on activities that will be limited to activities in the summer .
 The basic aim of the future is to give the individual as many opportunities as possible to further hs personal development, spiritually as well as intellectually . The aim of this article is to encourage people to develop as much as possible .
 CA is planning to intensify its ""thought provoking" presentations . CA plans to increase its presentations .
 The Wednesday evening Vesper Services from 9:30 to 10:00 will be continued . Vesper services will continue from Wednesday evening .
 A special service of this nature is planned for one Sunday afternoon a month . The service will be held at a special service every month .
 The CA will continue to support its Thursday evening Bible Discussion Group in the Women's Union . The CA continues to support the group .
 New to the program this year is the three-day religious convocation planned for early February . The convocation will be held in early February at the University of Columbia .
 Speakers representing different religions of the world will present the respective relationships of the individual to his God . Speakers from different religions will present their respective relationships with God .
 After each presentation there will be an opportunity for students to talk with the speaker . Students will also be able to talk to the speaker after each presentation .
 Since the CA would be classified as ""filthy rich" monetarily, if not spiritually, "we have decided to attend to this asset by spending, spending, spend, spending"
 To the small fund available for chapel speakers we have decided to add our two cents . In the hopes that at least a few compulsory chapels might be more bearable .
 CA hopes that this year it may bring before you something well worth looking into this year's holiday season .
 Deans Discuss Challenge Bates Offers To Students . Published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, during college year .
 Bob Hope in a commencement address last June told college seniors, "You have been preparing for four years to go out into the world" Bob Hope: "You've been preparing ... for four . years, prepare for the world."
 "I presume, however, that everyone has been encouraging you toward a college education and accepting the four year challenge at Bates," she says . "I hope you will accept the challenge," she writes .
 I, too, would encourage you to go and enter into this experience wholeheartedly, but not without being aware of several important things . "I'm not going to go to this experience, but it's important to be aware of what you're going to do," says author .
 I will just hope you are aware of two other very important ideas . Perhaps you know all this, so I will tell you all this . But I'm not sure if you're aware of all the important things .
 One of the most difficult aspects of your eager preparation and pursuit of . excellence in . contribution is getting so bogged down with the details of today that you fail to develop a sense of the future . Don't forget that you have a vision for the future.
 It is necessary that you be able to see the relationship of what you are now and what you will be in the future . It is quite necessary to see what you're doing now and now .
 Too many of us are prone to satisfy our whims of the moment without taking time to correlate the relationship of what we do now and its impact on our future . Too many people don't take time to understand the relationship between what we are doing now and what we will do now .
 It is often difficult to associate poor judgment today with the possible pattern of tomorrow . It is difficult to link poor judgement today with possible patterns of tomorrow, says CNN.com .
 A fairly common dictionary definition of the word ""advice"" is that it is an opinion recommending a course of action . A common definition of "advice" is that a person's opinion recommends a particular action . "Advice" should be an opinion, not an opinion .
 In the past few days, I am sure that every first year man at Bates has been given more advice than he can be expected to assimilate in what can be an extremely confusing adjustment period . I'm sure every first-year man has had a lot of advice to him .
 "I do not wish to take advantage of this opportunity to express myself by adding more words of advice, regardless of how good my intentions may be," says the author of the book .
 I would, however, point out that everyone who has already offered advice, or who will do so in the future, does so with a sincere desire to help . I would also say everyone who offers advice to help is sincere .
 The fact that advice on the same subject may prove to be contradictory simply points up the differences between the advisors as well as those of the advisees . The fact of the contradictory advice is simply a matter of fact that the advice is contradictory .
 These contraditions should act as agents to sharpen a college man's ability to make his own decisions and then to stand whatever criticisms will obviously come from those who differ in their thinkng .
 As an undergraduate, each man has, among many others, the task of learning to distinguish good counsel from bad, or helpful advice from the cynical remarks of the opinionated. The task of an undergraduate is to distinguish between good advice and bad advice, or good advice from bad .
 As in all aspects of college life, a high premium is placed upon a respect for truth and the development of sound judgment . The college experience is described as a college experience .
 There are few, if any, men who can provide a text, the mastery of which will provide an infallible way of attaining these goals . The text is a text that will provide a way to achieve the goals of your goals .
 I certainly have no intention of trying to . supply short cuts to the insights that must come from personal experience, although I am sure that in the course of the year I shall offer advice to many men in the class of 1966 .
 I would like to close by expressing the hope that each man in the first year class will take full advantage of the educational opportunity that will be his for the next four years . I would also like to thank each other for their efforts .
 Failure to do this will show up in many ways, but regardless of the variation, it will still be a failure . Failure to solve the problem will still show up as a failure, but it will be a success .
 "I hope that even at this early point of the college year each freshman understands that we set high standards and we expect them to be attained," says President Obama . "We expect high standards," says Obama. "Even in this early period of college year, we expect standards to be
 Freshmen fill up on chicken and soda pop at annual Twin-City Barbecue following traditional Thorncrag hike . Freshmen filled up with chicken, soda pop following traditional hike .
 THREE Freshmen Describe First Week As As(2ollege Students)
 Co-eds and eds find plenty of time for ogling at our first freshman assembly . The speakers wrench our attention to the business at hand .
 Our parents are more worried about our ability to adjust to college life than we are, perhaps it is a fear of adjusting too well to the activities that President Phillips stressed as being a basic part of coeducation .
 We are told to learn the Alma Mater by a senior who reads the words to us from a note card . It is a great boost to our confidence, self-esteem, etc. A senior reads the . words from a . note card to us .
 At Thorncrag we fight over small, good-looking shoes, hoping that the girls they belong to are similar . At Thorn Crag, we fight to find out who the girls belong to .
 Whoever invented the games that were played is a firm believer in close boy-girl relationships . Somehow, one gets the impression that whoever invented the . games that . played is the . impression of whoever invented . the games .
 We should be ready for just about anything after another week of girls' dorm open houses . Girls' dorms open houses open houses are open for girls' first week .
 We are pulled to earth by registration and placement tests and book-buying . We're pulled to reality by registration, placement tests, book-bills .
 "We expect you to make mistakes and yet profit from them," says CNN iReporters . "You should be honest with yourselves and with us, and we expect you utilize your talents purposefully," says Reporters .
 In meeting your ""moment of truth" squarely you will be able to test and acknowledge your degree of maturity, good sense, and integrity . You will be tested and acknowledged your level of maturity and good sense .
 Thomas Wolfe once said so wisely, "When youth is gone, every man will look back upon that period of life with infinite sorrow and regret"
 May your eollege life on the Bates campus be all that you and we expect it to be . May your life at Bates College be all you and everyone expect it be .
 Good luck in organizing your time and developing good study habits . Make an extra-curricular contribution and learning to live closely with others .
 The ticket, costing $3.00, will admit the holder to the eleven movies scheduled for this year . The ticket will also admit to the 11 movies scheduled to be released in 2015 .
 By purchasing mis ticket, an individual will save $2.50, for single admissions are 50c.50 . Single admission is 50c .
 Robinson Players film series tickets may be purchased from Robinson Players members or at the ticket booth on movie nights . Robinson Players will host the film series at the Robinson Players' home .
 Stu-C campus would lie within the jurisdiction of the Senate . It would be the N.S.A. program . The N.C. program would be part of the program's N.U.C .
 N.S.A. is the National Student Association, an association of several hundred colleges and universities . The association is a national student body that includes several hundred college and university students .
 We have presented the functions and purposes of the respective governments to . acquaint you with the voice of the student body .
 Work is futile without your expression of interest and active participation in the projects. However, our work is futile . We are committed to the project .
 Do not hesitate to come to meetings, present ideas, and take advantage of the services that student government has to offer . Do not be afraid of coming to meetings and present ideas .
 A short skirt, slacks, a pair of socks, another sweater or half slip, a dress for a special date, we'll be more than happy to show you what you ask for .
 Many Bates Girls enjoy the convenience of a charge account with Ward Bros . We'll be very happy to explain how easy it is to send the bill home .
 Sports Editor warns incoming frosh of what to expect from their fellow students wearing the Garnet colors .
 As this year should prove the exception to this year, I will not dwell on this subject . I won't dwell on whether this year will be an exception to the rule of this year .
 It should be a good year for the Garnet athletes, both male and female . Garnet students will be competing in the competition .
 The few alumni who mistakenly require Big Ten success from our coaches should be content with their success, say the Big Ten coaches .
 Atlantic Coast Regional Championships were held at Teaneck, N. J., shortly after the close of school. Atlantic Coast Regionals were held shortly after school closed .
 The '62 gridiron season gets under way Saturday when the 'Cats face the powerful Tufts Jumbo's led by Little All-American fullback Ron Deveaux . The Tufts football team is coached by Bob Greene, who is a junior at Harvard .
 For the first time in many years, there are a few rule changes to plague coaches, players, and fans alike . The first time since 2000, there have been changes to the rules in the NFL .
 Coaches and players are fully aware of the new rule changes . The rule changes have been made for the first time since 2004 .
 Punting time allows punters time to down the ball within their opponent's 10-yard line . This rule allows the punters to be within the 10 yards of the field . Punters are allowed to be punted within the ten yards of their opponent .
 Downing the ball inside the 10 constituted a touchback, giving the ball to the receiving team on its 20-yard line . Previously downing the . 10 would have been a touch-back, instead of a touch back .
 A team fouled while attempting a field goal on the last play of the game will be allowed to run another play after the penalty is assessed . The penalty is allowed to be run after a penalty is given in the game .
 Illegal motion which calls for a 5-yard penalty and an illegal shift can be so similar . This infraction has caused confusion, even among game 'officials' because illegal motion which called for a penalty and illegal shift are similar .
 The other change this year is a shift from Z “c -5 yards the penalty for kicking an opponent's forward pass or placement . The penalty for a forward pass is also shifted to Z ‘c - 5 yards . Z ‚ ‚‚ is a penalty for
 In 27 years of college and high school coaching, Arlanson never has had a losing season . He doesn't figure to start this year, but he doesn't expect to start it .
 The Jumbos run out of a power-T and with fullback Deveaux able to plow through holes made by tackles Don Curtis, Carmine Parisi and Virgil Aiello, the team is potent .
 The Medford team should be tough at the ends and center, but lack experience at the guard slots . Medford will be tough on the ends, but lacks experience at guard slots.
 Deveaux was the leading scorer in New England last year . He was the Patriots' leading scorer last season . He is expected to start in the NFL's second straight season .
 Halfbacks Ralph Doran and Peter Titus, and southpaw Dennis Hickey round out the Jumbo backline . Halfback Ralph Dorans, Peter Titus and Peter Hickey also play for the team .
 Seven lettermen will be opening up against Tufts Saturday, according to football mentor Robert W Hatch .
 The 'Cats travel to Medford, Mass., where they will face the powerful Tufts Jumbo's . The Cats will face Tufts in their next game .
 The tentative starting lineup released by Coach Hatch yesterday has senior Paul Castolene and junior Pat Donovan at the end slots, senior Phil Tamis, and sophomore Jim Brown at tackles, junior John Schatz and sophomore Dave Cox at guards and senior Howie Vandersea at center . The tentative
 Bill Davis will open at quarterback, sophomore John Lanza and junior Paul Planchon at halfback slots, and senior Web Harrison at fullback . Web Harrison will play fullback for the rest of the season .
 Castolene, Tamis, Schatz, Vandersea, Davis, Planchon, and Harrison are the returning lettermen on the starting squad . Castelene, . Tamis and Schatz are returning to the starting lineup .
 The other returning letterman, senior tackle Bob Williams, is sidelined with a leg injury . Bob Williams is expected to return to the team this season .
 Donovan Donovan saw limited action last year but has impressed with his pass-catching ability during preseason drills . Donovan was drafted in 2013 but has been in impressive shape this year .
 Tamis is a three year letterman who was moved from the end position last year to the tackle slot . He improved over the season to become the number one tackle at the end of last year . Tamis has been a three-year letterman at the University of Cambridge .
 Tamis hails from Nahant, Mass. Mass., and his 6' 1"" frame tips the scale at 200 . Tamis is a six-year-old, six-foot-six-foot tall .
 Brown is another Hatch convertee, moving over from his guard spot last year where he saw considerable action as a reserve . Brown moved from guard to guard position last year .
 Schatz, a Moorsetown, N. J., resident, moves out of his offense guard slot to back up the line on defense . Schatz: "I'm a good guy, I'm a great guy, and I'm not a bad guy"
 A native of Milford, Mass., Cox is a former member of the ""pony squad"" who saw action last year in several games . Cox is the son of former President George W. Bush .
 Mass., is a three year letter man and has twice been selected on the All-Maine team . Mass. Mass. is a 3-year letterman .
 Co-captain Davis is perhaps the most versatile ball player Hatch has coached . The Gloucester, Mass., native has played all four back-line positions . Davis has played at all four positions for the team .
 Planchon is the third All-Maine team member on the squad and has lettered two years . Planchons is the only two players on the Maine team .
 Planchon plays the halfback position on defense and is dangerous on punt returns . The halfback is a halfback at halfback and a return specialist . He is also dangerous on pun returns .
 Lanza has impressed in preseason drills with hard running and blocking ability . Lanza is very fast and has impressed with his hard running, blocking ability.
 Harrison is another three year letterman, having lettered at both the fullback and halfback positions . Harrison is also a halfback and fullback .
 Several freshmen show promise according to Coach Hatch . Backfield candidates expected to help the squad early in the season . Halfbacks John Uskis and Robert Fisher are among those expected to be key players .
 Ron LeBlanc could see action as a punter as he has demonstrated a talented toe in practice sessions . Fullback Ron LeBlanc has demonstrated a talent to the punter in practice .
 Coach Hatch expects to get mileage from tackles Wayne Pangburn and Charlie Lockhart, guards Rick DeStefano and Bill Farrington, and end Bill Davis . Coach Hatch says he expects to see some mileage from early in the season .
 Hatch: "We have fewer than normal but there are six or eight who will really help us. Six or eight of the freshman candidates will help us," Hatch said . Hatch said: "There are fewer candidates than normal .
 Two notable personnel switches have been made this year by Coach Hatch . Coach Hatch has made two notable personnel changes this year .
 Dave Stockwell has been switched back to a guard, and Jim Callahan has been moved from center to end . Callahan is now a center to an end instead of a guard .
 Quarterback Ed Rucci came off the bench to lead the 'Cats to a 7-6 victory over Maine Mar-i time Academy . End John Williams has sparkled in defense in preseason scrimmages for the Cats this season .
 All cross country candidates, both varsity and freshmen, will meet in the field house at 1 tomorrow morning .
 All candidates for the Bates varsity soccer team will attend a brief but important meeting at 1:30m. tomorrow in Alumni Gymnasium . Coach Walter Slovenski is coach of the Bates soccer team .
 Concert Lecture Series Offers Four Programs for 1962-1963 . Bates College will present four campus programs for students and residents of the college area .
 This lecture, presented in conjunction with the Bates Chapter of Phi Beta Kappa, is open free to the public . This lecture will be presented at 8 p.m. ET .
 The George Colby Chase Lecture, open free to the public, is scheduled for Thursday, February 21, 1963, with Dr. Dr. Chase . It will be held at the University of California, California, on February 21 .
 Goncharoff is Secretary, World Affairs Education, National Council of YMCAs . He says he is concerned about the future of the world's children . Goncharoffs is a member of the YMCA, a national network of YMAs .
 Admission for Bates students will be by I.D. card . All four programs will be held in the Chapel and are scheduled at 8 p.m. Admission for students is required by the student body at Bates .
 Tickets for the Nash and Lerner lectures will be on sale to the public at the door . Tickets will be available at the the door for the lectures .
 Concert and Lecture Committee had attempted to provide a stimulating program . Students urged to take note of these dates and take note .
 In cooperation with the Lewiston-Auburn Community Concert Association, a series of concert programs open to Bates students will be presented . Concerts also offered at Lewiston High School Auditorium .
 Faculty, frosh, and upperclassmen listen to chapel choir sing at Convocation .
 Carnegie's new geology lecture room in Carnegie is also new planetarium . Carnegie's planetarium also has a planetarium in addition to a new lecture room .
 Light switches simulate an entire day, sunrise through sunset, on thin fabric sky . Light switches can simulate sunrise to sunset, sunrise .
 Freshman class met in two sections to discuss two books on their summer reading list . Freshman Discussions Concerned Work By Contemporary Authors on Wednesday .
 Snow's Two Cultures and Alan Patton's Cry The Beloved Country were examined . Snow's two Cultures were examined by Alan Patton .
 Anthony S Abbott, Professor Robert M Chute, Elisabeth Little '63, and George Stone '63 . The team includes Professor Robert Chute and Professor Robert S Abbott .
 Snow's Two Cultures examines the gulf between the sciences and the arts . Snow's two Cultures is an attempt to connect the arts with the sciences .
 Patton's Cry The Beloved Country illustrates the destructive effects of industrialization upon society . The film is based on the story of the American Civil War .
 Poll shows approval of Freshman week activity . Poll shows that Freshman Week activity is popular with students .
 An informal poll of the Freshman class showed that most thought that it had value as an introduction to college level thought, that the discussions provided a greater understanding .
 President Charles F Phillips has been speaking to groups all over the East on topics of current interest in the fields of education, foreign and domestic affairs, and the state of Bates College .
 From his many news releases comes this collection of quotes and ideas that cover the whole scope of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Dr. King's life .
 The 1962 Bates College Alumni Fund reached a total of over $67,00. Phillips reported 'that the 1962 . Bates College . Alumni fund reached a . total of . over $70,000 . Phillips reported .
 Bates College completed its seventeenth consecutive year of operation with a balanced budget . Bates College is a college that has been in operation for 17 years . The college has a budget of $1.2 billion .
 Freshmen (and upperclassmen) interested in working on the student newspaper in any capacity — news reporter, feature writer, sports, business, photography — are URGED to attend a brief meeting in the Publishing Association Office .
 School Committees say local and state funds are sufficient to meet the needs of public education . School Committees said that a recent poll of school boards indicates that local . and state . funds are adequate .
 Phillips emphasized that the true value of an education must be measured by the kind of life one leads, rather than in dollars . Phillips said that the value of a college education should be measured in the quality of life, not the amount of money .
 An alumni meeting in Philadelphia heard that the ratio of women to men is gaining in colleges across the country . The ratio of men to women to women in college is gaining .
 Commons and Chase Hall will be closed for the evening beginning at 5:30 . The facilities will be used by Lewiston Auburn service clubs .
 The Bobcat Den will be open as usual, but only the Chase Hall entrance nearest Roger Williams will be available for use . Only Roger Williams' entrance to Chase Hall, Roger Williams, will be accessible .
 Announcement of dinner arrangements for men (all will go to Rand Hall) will be made in the Commons prior to the 2Sth. announcement . Announcement will be announced at Rand Hall .
 Processional marks the beginning of another academic year at Bates College . Processional was led by the faculty of Bates University .
 Today's headlines deal only with crime, death, and other darker aspects of life . He expressed the idea that today's headlines only deal with crime and death . He said the headlines are focused on crime and the dark side .
 President Phillips then proceeded to acquaint the assembled body with various Bates graduates who were changing the world without having their names on the front pages of leading newspapers . President Phillips said that Bates graduates are changing the . world .
 Phillips stated: "Interestingly enough, these men and women have certain common characteristics" Phillips stated, ""Interestingly enough" these men, women have common characteristics. Phillips said .
 "Each and every one of them puts in long hours of hard work at his or her career," says Drexler . "Each of them are very hard workers," she says of her colleagues .
 Each is concerned about the need for a high quality of performance concerning his daily career tasks, recognizing that others are depending upon him for important services .
 A meeting of all prospective debaters will be held Thursday, September 27 at 4:00 in the debating room . The room is in the second floor corner of Pettigrew facing Libbey and Parker .
 All freshmen and any upperclassmen who have any interest are invited to this meeting . The meeting will be concerned with explaining what debating entails in regard to time and work .
 Poetry i as well as the name of the COLannounces its Annual LEGE attended . The COL. i will celebrate its 25th anniversary .
 ANY STUDENT attending either junior or senior college is eligible to submit his verse . The verse will be submitted by students attending junior and senior college .
 Shorter works are preferred by the publishers, because of space limitations . Shorter work is preferred by publishers because of the size of the book .
 There are NO FEES OR CHARES for acceptance or the submission of verse . There are no fees or charges for submission or for submission .
 ALL MANUSCRIPTS should be sent to the Offices of the National Poetry Press, 3210 Selby Avenue, Los Angeles 34, Calif.
 The number of men colloans to other countries has increased fiftyfour per cent, while the comparable figure for women is a hundred and two per cent . Phillips Compares fically, the number of women collouans to men .
 Phillips discussed the Russian educational system before the New Haven, Conn., alumni group . Phillips spoke to the alumni group before the group of students .
 Russian educational system fails to develop a background for independent thought, he says . He said that while the Russian education system produces technically competent graduates, it fails to .
 Phillips told the graduating class that we are rapidly approaching the day when all young people who can benefit from a college education and who truly want to go to college will find it financially possible to do so . Phillips said the day is rapidly approaching when young people can afford to attend college .
 Bates College President pointed out that we provide a college education for a greater percentage of our people than does any other country . The Bates College president said that the country provides a higher percentage of college education than any other nation .
 Phillips has spoken often on foreign and domestic problems that face our country . Phillips: "I'm not afraid to say I'm going to speak out"
 He told the Massachusetts Hospital Association that our foreign aid encourages socialism abroad . He said that our pres ent method of giving foreign aid encouraged socialism .
 Aid is used mainly to d&velop government enterprises in the foreign country or enterprises which depend heavily upon government direction . This means that our aid is used primarily to develop government enterprises . Aid is also used to support government ventures in foreign countries .
 As a substitute for our present foreign aid program, the Bates College President urged that the underdeveloped nations encourage the growth of private firms . The Bates College College President said that underdeveloped countries should encourage private firms to grow .
 Phillips said recent retreats in Laos emphasize that the Free World is still losing the Cold War . Phillips said that recent retreat in Laos emphasized that the free world is losing its Cold War with China .
 Finding our present policy a defensive one, he called for a policy ""under which we take the initiative" He called for the policy under which the UK takes the initiative .
 "We must train people from Communistheld countries to infiltrate these areas," says President Obama . We must train them from Communist held countries, says Obama .
 Phillips again say that our foreign policy is not sufficiently aggressive . Phillips again says that the U.S. should be more aggressive .
 "THE INTERNS"" Cliff Robertson ""BANDIT OF ZHOBE"" Victor Mature Ann Aubrey Wednesday. Wednesday. Thursday .
 We leave him free to carry out his present attack on Laos and South Viet Nam. Instead we leave him . Instead of attacking Laos and Viet Nam, he attacks South Vietnam and Laos .
 President Obama said the U.S. must develop a program to return Cuba to the Free World .
 Cuba is being used as a base for spreading Communism throughout South America, he says . The U.S. does not have a positive program for returning Cuba to the Free World, he adds .
 Each day we fail to take action sees Communism gain strength in Cuba and makes our eventual action more difficult,"" concluded Dr. Carlos S. Carlos .
 Admission to certain graduate business schools or divisions on November 3, February 2, April 6, and July 13 . Further inofrmation is available in the Guidance and Placement Office .
 Bulletins of information and application forms are available in the Guidance and Placement Office . Bulletins are available for information and applications .
 CAREER MONOGRAPHS under various and interesting titles have recently been received by the Guidance and Placement Office .
 Students or faculty are invited to consult GRADUATE STUDY IN BUSI1 these items in the Guidance OfNESS will be given to applicants I fice .
 Association of Life Underwriters says a tax cut is just one of several steps necessary to achieve more rapid economic growth in the U.S. The group says it is meeting in Montreal, Canada, to discuss economic growth .
 In addition, we must reduce our cost of raw materials by changing our present farm program . In addition to reducing the cost of food, the government must also change its farm program, he says .
 Manufacturing costs can be reduced by a concerted drive to eliminate featherbedding throughout economy . Manufacturing costs should be reduced, says Mr Hammond .
 On October 1, 1962, officers of the United Stales Marine Corps Officer Selection Team will visit Bates to talk with men who may be interested in obtaining information about Marine programs .
 It is expected that they will be available for interviews in either Chase Hall or the Purinion Room of the Alumni Gymnasium between 18m and 4 Concert Lecture Auditorium's right entrance .
 The first concert program is scheduled for Wednesday evening, October 17, 1962, with a presentation by the Ballet Espagnol . The first show is scheduled to be held on October 18, 1962 .
 Baltimore Symphony will perform with Peter Adler conducting on October 28, 1962 . Adler conducted the symphony with the Baltimore Symphony in 1962 .
 A program by Olegna Fuschi, pianist, is offered on Wednesday evening, January 30, 1963 . The program was offered on January 30th 1963 .
 The Westminster Choir, on Wednesday evening, May 1, 1963, will close the series . The Westminster choir will sing at the end of the series on May 1 .
 A Senior rally for the football game with Norwich will be held in the Alumni Gymnasium Friday night . The rally will take place in the alumni gymnasium .
 The band will begin marching to the rally at 7:00, and the rally will begin in the Gymnasium at 7.15 .
 A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family . Our Experienced Trust Department will work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind .
 Many a businessman is discovering these days that a gift to his Alma Mater can bring definite future tax advantages to his wife and family . A gift to a university can bring tax advantages, he says .
 Three Milius, Lloyd To Entertain In Theater's Introduction By SANDY PROHL '64 . Maine Bates College calls all actors, actresses, scenery painters, ushers .
 The occasion is the first meeting of the Bates College club in the CQUntry However> the Robinson Players . The Robinson Players meet Bates College at the end of the season .
 The ""cast" hopes to introduce you to some of the activities of the Players . The ""casts" will try and show you how the players are involved .
 Included in the program will be an interpretive dance by Holly Milius '63, accompanied on the guitar by Tod Lloyd '64 . The program will also feature a guitar solo by Tode Lloyd .
 Robinson Players will present a scene from the play The Barreiis of Wimpole Street, in full 19th century costume . Robinson Players also present scenes in full costume from the 19th Century play .
 Robinson Players membership cards and season tickets to their sponsored movies may be purchased . During the "intermission,"" Robinson Players memberships can be purchased at the end of the show .
 The stage is set for a fun-filled year, so all freshmen and upperclassmen, don't miss this spectacular premiere performance . October 2, at 7:00m., in the Lit tie Theater .
 B.O.C. is unique in that the entire student body constitutes the membership . Formed in 1920 to promote outdoor activities, the Bates College Outing Club has a structure similar to that of Dartmouth After Hours .
 The working Council consists of thirty-six members; twelve from each of the three upperclasses . The working council consists of 32 members; 12 from each class of the upperclass .
 In February the annual freshman Open House is held in Chase Hall to meet those interested in participating on the governing body .
 Usually, freshman year is the only time a student may be elected to the Council . The Council is only elected by a student freshman year .
 There have been some vacancies each year for upperclassmen . When such openings occur, poster displays on the bulletin board provide appropriate details to those interested .
 Included in a national literary cerned with > presenting a book rereview magazine last year (Satview The books to be reviewed urday Review, I think)
 An evaluative appraisal of the reading habits and intellectual direction of 20th century students . Also included were investigations concerning the extent of literature being consumed .
 As expected, there is a wide diversity among students, ranging from those who have literally no interest in outside reading, regardless of subject matter, to those who seriously want to get an education .
 Next week, and the weeks that follow throughout the school, will be available in paperback, both fiction and non-fiction, and will be limited to writers of the 20th century .
 The purpose of this format is to acquaint the student with material that would not be included in the courses at Bates, and to supplement the ""classics"" with contemporary material that is vital and necessary to an awareness of what is going on in the minds of men today .
 Perhaps our attempt to achieve Jung's modernity may prove to be a vainglorious one . Perhaps our attempts to achieve it may be a vain attempt to be modernised .
 The ideal of a review of this type is objectivity, and, with a desire to avoid pretentious pontefication, the offerings begin next week . Nonetheless, the ideal of this kind of review of such a review has objectivity and objectivity .
 The world will think you like 'em and proceed to give you more, says the author . If you talk about your troubles And tell them o'er and o'ers, the world will listen to you more .
 Members American Gem Society are American Gem society members . Headquarters for DIAMONDS are located in Lisbon, Portugal .
 The Board consists of seven directors, who organize the various O.C. activities . The board also includes seven members of the board of directors .
 The remaining Council members assist the directors especially in planning trips and Winter Carnival . The remaining council members assist with the directors .
 Hikes and Trips, Cabins and Trails, Nancy Levin '63 and Cliff Baker '64; Equipment Room . Hikes, Trips and Cabins, Hike and Trail Club, Hikes & Trails, and Equipment Room. Equipment Room: Judy Bradshaw '63,
 Penny Morse '64 and Lee Pollock '64; Al Pollocks '63; Nancy Conway '64 '64, Al Pollock' '63 . Penny Morse ‘64’ and Lee ‘63’ '64 were the co-stars of the 1964-64
 The Council hopes that our schedule this year will increase the enthusiasm for outdoor events . The Council wants to see more outdoor events take place this year .
 Everyone is welcome to meetings which are held every other Wednesday evening at 7:00 m.m., in the basement of the Alumni Gym, starting October 10 . Meeting will be held at 7 a.m. every other week .
 For those who enjoy the foreign film and especially the English comedy — Mr Sellers is at the top of the entertainment list .
 This Saturday evening, what was one of Mr Sellers' first ""big hits"" in this country, will be screened in the Little Theater .
 The ""mouse" in this instance is the principality of Grand Fenwick located somewhere in Europe . The "mouse" is a principality located in Europe and is located in the Middle Ages .
 The tottering economy there forces the Prime Minister into some desperate diplomacy to avoid extinction . The ensuing action revolves around war with the United States, desired defeat, and the devastating QBomb .
 The assumption is that the U.S. will be generous victor once again, and bolster its just defeated foes with ready cash . The assumptions are that the United States .
 The premise is that laughter is contagious and that Mr Sellers is an effective agent in his trio of roles . The film is set to be released on Friday .
 Also in the film are David Hosseff as an inventor, William Hartnell as the sergeant, and Jean Seberg as the daughter of the Prime Minister .
 Sneakers — Hood's Rubbers for the ENTIRE FAMILY . JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR . MAINE's only drive-in pharmacy .
 A perennial crisis on this campus is the purported lack of social life . Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents . Campus Agents are the campus agents .
 Bates will undoubtedly never become a high keyed party school (desirable or not) There is something to do which isn't being done. Bates will never be a party school .
 Robinson Players' movie program is not being supported by the student body . The Robinson Players are not currently supported by students at Robinson High School . The movie program will continue through the next year .
 There certainly isn't a wealth of activities on any one Saturday night; the cost isn't prohibitory . There are plenty of activities to choose from from all over the world .
 A glance at the movie schedule indicates that although the films are not the extravaganzas one might find in Lewiston, they are first rate . The films have received critical acclaim and have received acclaim .
 Most would agree that the studentry has the right to a social life; but this right implies social responsibilities . The studentry is responsible for their social life, but it also has social responsibilities, the author says .
 The studentry should support the work and planning of those who have organized the present social life, and do more than just talk about improvements, as was the situation last year .
 The usual controversy about hazing has started again again . Hazing is seen as a transition period in the U.S.
 This largely sophomorefreshman activity, with the frosh assuming the role of underdogs, has been investigated annually by the administration and the two student governments .
 The rules about what the sophomores can and cannot do have tightened . As a result, the rules have tightened. The rules have been tightened.
 On the women's side of campus, hazing takes place in the dormitories only, with the exception of haze day, and only at a specified number of times . For example, on the female side of the university's campus hazing is restricted to the dorms .
 The rules about the traditional ""rearranging of the, freshman girls' rooms"" on the afternoon of Stanton Ride have been changed to avoid any destruction of property or excessive messing of rooms .
 While there were a few girls who became upset or angry about the spider-webbing and tissue paper, the great majority took the hazing in the friendly spirit .
 Hazing is carried on to help the freshmen become adjusted to the school . After all, hazing is carried out to help them adjust to life at the university .
 If further restrictions are placed on this orientation period, the purpose will be defeated . Moreover, if further restrictions were placed, they will defeat the purpose of the orientation period .
 Hazing now unites freshmen in giving them a common foe — the sophomores . Hazing is now uniting freshmen in a common battle against sophomorees .
 They survived the ordeal, carrying out of it memories of good times and humorous incidents . The family was reunited at the end of the ordeal .
 If everyone remembers that it is ""all in fun,"" then hazing can help freshmen ease the jump from secondary school to college . Hazing can help students ease the transition from secondary to college.
 Bates College Band did an excellent job at the season's first rally . Bates College band members were in attendance at the rally .
 With only two practice sessions and numerous freshmen in the group, the band performed like a well-drilled unit . The band performed well, despite having just a few practice sessions .
 George R Healy is published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, during the college year .
 Entered as second-class matter at the Lewiaton Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1870 . Entered as . 1913, entered as a . second-grade matter at . the post office Jan. 1913 .
 Texas Oil Draws Bates students . Money, for many of us, is often synonomous with that magic word, oil .
 This past summer, a friend of mine and I decided to discover exactly what was going on in the oil field . This summer, we decided to find out what was happening in the field .
 Parker Drilling Company is one of the largest drilling companies in the world . The company has major locations in Oklahoma, Texas, Boliva, and the French Sahara .
 Odessa, Texas claims to be the largest oil field supply center in the world, and I would not doubt it . Odessa is a major oil field hub in Texas .
 The city is bustling with construction companies, drilling companies, well services, roustabout gangs, pipe companies, and many more . The city has a reputation for being a tourist attraction .
 Work is largely a sevenday-a-week proposition, and an eight hour day in the field is too often an oddity .
 A Toolpusher is foreman on the rig, and beneath him are three crews . Underneath him is a foreman called the Tool Pusher . The rig is filled with workers from three crews.
 The men work 10, 11, and 12 hours a day laying pipe lines, fixing machines, and setting up the various pumps, belts, and drilling mechanisms . Until the crews ""break tower"" and start on the three eight-hour shifts, the men work eight, 11 and 12
 After a rig has started drilling, the work settles down to cleaning up the location . The work includes digging drainage ditches around the rig and adding pipe to the line .
 Roughnecks wash machines, paint, wash and paint the rig . The rig is often painted by roughnecks .
 We spoke to Roughnecks who varied in age from 18 to late 40's . Many roughneckers have roughnecked for 20 and 25 years . Roughneckers range in age between 18 and 40 years .
 San Cristobal de Las Casas — September 8, 1962 . Tomorrow I enter Guatemala for the third time . Crater's Edge is the final page of the book .
 Each time it becomes increasingly difficult to enter, to stay, and then return to Mexico . Each time, the situation has become increasingly difficult, to enter .
 Each time I feel more like a soldier of fortune and less like an inquisitive tourist, I feel less like a tourist . Each time we go to the UK, we are more like soldiers of fortune, not just tourists .
 "Even I wonder why I am returning. True, I am an incurable roman-* tic, but the ever present malignant threat is so real"
 The railroad runs through the jungle country, inhabited by Indians, drawn and malaria yellow, and climbs to the capital, Guatemala City . The railroad was built and controlled by the United Fruit Company .
 The road, when not washed out, runs through mountain villages to the capital . The road passes near two Indian trading centers, Huehuetenango and Chichicastenago .
 On a market day one can see Indians from many different villages . The people of each village wearing a costume, in color and design distinctly different from each other .
 The Spanish dressed each of the tribes this way to tell them apart . The Guatemalan government keeps them this way because it's good for the tourist business .
 In fact, it's the government's desire ""to keep things the way they are""; that is the cause, in part, of the heightening tension in this country . The government wants to keep things 'the way they're'
 Americans, with a traditional belief, until recently, in no large standing army, must take a grain of salt . This feature of every Latin American country is one which Americans must take with a grain, salt .
 A huge force of country and city police, alarmingly disproportionate to' mainland the Guatemalan population . But aside from these garrisons, there is a huge force . The Guatemalan police force is alarmingly .
 They walk the near deserted streets with sub-machine guns on their shoulders . They walk with sub machine guns on the shoulders .
 Two weeks ago three men jumped one of these law officers and shot him with his own submachine gun . The officers were shot by three men who jumped in front of him with their submachine guns .
 The people in Guatemala quietly rejoiced, while some in Mexico more audibly praised the act . Some in Mexico applauded the act, while others praised it .
 While it has reversed the government's land reform program, it has assured the world that, at the present, it is not at all considering a reincarnation of the Inquisition . The government has assured that at the moment, it does not plan to reinstate the Inquisition.
 The force which directed this government into power and was its main support, is no longer trusted . The C.I.A.A., the force which directs this government, no longer trusts the U.S. government .
 Russian and American businessmen have called The Alliance For Progress the greatest aid to American interests in Latin America since the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine . The Alliance for Progress is called the most significant aid to the U.S. since the FDR-led Monroe Doctrine.
 When Jacky is not touring or playing touch football, he sends a few troops to help stabilize the Guatemalan government .
 "Their number is small but their presence there sufficiently proves to the people of Guatemala that we are not on their side," says President Obama . "Their presence ... proves to us that we not on them side," he says .
 When the Revolution comes, and I'm sure it will in the near future, there is no chance of us changing sides . When the revolution comes, there will be no chance for us to change sides, he says .
 "We have played our hand and whatever we do now, only Castro has the trump card," says President Obama . We have played a hand, Obama says .
 The people of Guatemala, as people all throughout Latin America, admire Castro, says President Obama . Castro is a former dictator of Guatemala . Castro was assassinated in 1961 in Cuba .
 It once warmed our blood to see a David confront a Goliath. It gives them hope, as it once warm our blood . The story of David and Goliath is a story of a David andoliath .
 "Food is scarce and everything is very expensive. Our economic blockade has worked to some extent," says President Vladimir Putin .
 Even a Chinese pencil (from the small course) costs almost two dollars . The small course costs $1.5 .
 The David is armed with a sling shot of public opinion and many more than three stones . The David was armed with the 'sling shot' and 'many more than a stone' David Bowie .
 It is, of course, the opinion of people we usually don't count; the people of Guatemala, for instance . The opinion of the Guatemalan people is a matter of concern, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It is less than assuring that something that Jacky might decide, Or something that the raving bearded man of Havana might do, could trigger a revolution which would sweep me away .
 Many welders often work 3 or 4 days with as many hours sleep when they are helping to rig up . Welders work 3 to 4 days a day with as little as four hours sleep .
 Students interested in working on The GARNET editorial board are invited to submit brief letters of application to Harriet Schoenholz .
 Football Night is designed to educate you, the football fan . Scheduled for 7:15 in the gym, the first Football Night will be an informative affair .
 Those in attendance will witness a display of a player's equipment, a film of a past Garnet game, and will be taught several of the new cheers .
 A lot of work has gone into this, the initial rally of this fall's season . The first rally of the season was held in New York City on Saturday .
 To the upperclassmen who have complained of the poor quality of past rallies, I guarantee you'll be satisfied. To be satisfied, you'll have to be satisfied with the quality of the rallies, he says .
 Put away the books for a few minutes and come over to show the team you'll be behind them . Saturday's game will be Saturday at 7 p.m. ET .
 A fine second half showing by the Hatchmen last Saturday indicates a promising season ahead . The Hatchmen won their first home match of the season last Saturday . A fine performance in the second half indicated a promising future .
 Bill Davis, Paul Castolene, Red Vandersea, Phil Tamis, and Phil . Tamis were outstanding performances turned in by veterans Bill Davis . Tom Carr was awesome offensive show by frosh Tom Carr .
 The game experience gained by the newcomers to the starting lineup and by the many reserves who saw action in Saturday's tilt should pay off in the upcoming games .
 Traditionally, those questioned hedge from doing so, as there are so many uncertainties to the game . Traditionally it is not possible to predict the outcome of the game, as it is so uncertain .
 Out of desperation, one makes a prediction usually with several qualifications, barring injuries, etc. Finally, out of desperation and to get rid of those asking for predictions, one predicts a prediction .
 I have done so with two qualifications, 1) barring injuries, and 2) the performance of Bill Davis . The performance of Davis will be the only qualification, barring injuries .
 I can predict a winning season barring injury to key personnel . I can remove my second qualification and can predict the best season of the Premier League .
 Speaking again of Saturday's game, a page of the program of that game proves most illuminating . The program of the game is most illuminating in the book of the book .
 A 34 year series between the two clubs shows a record of 24 wins, seven losses, and three ties for the Medford club . Medford have won 24 of their 34 games, seven of them in total .
 Other schools on the schedule include Trinity, Williams, Amherst, Northeastern, and Coast Guard . Trinity is also on their schedule for the upcoming season .
 The only school on their card with a higher male population is Northeastern . Northeastern University has the highest male population in the country .
 There is no school with a smaller male population on the Garnet's schedule . On the other hand, there is no larger male population than the school's . The Garnet has a smaller population than any other school .
 Tufts alumni and students want success, but when a school drops another from its roster because it consistently loses to it, one wonders what price success pays . Tufts dropped Leigh because of a lack of success, as did Tufts .
 "I feel reasonably sure that the Bobcat players would rather schedule a team like Tufts, who we lose to more than we win, than teams like Union, where the shoe would be on the other foot," says Bobcat .
 The Cadets of Norwich invade Garcelon Field for the annual Dad's Day . This coming Saturday the Bates studentry will be able to see the Hatchmen in action .
 This is the first year we have played Norwich in some time and personally I am glad to see this rivalry resume as it will provide a wellbalanced win, loss column for both teams . I am also pleased to see the rivalry resume with Norwich City . This is a well balanced win,
 Dad's Day is perhaps one of the best of Bates traditions as the father of each boy is invited to sit on a bench with the team and is introduced in pre-game activities . The father of the boys is introduced into pre-match activities .
 It must give a Dad a tremen-, dous amount of satisfaction and pride to stand up as being the father of a performing Bates football payer . It must be a proud moment for a Dad to stand by his son .
 Hatchmen rallied from a 22-0 half time deficit to defeat Garnet . Tom Carr scored twice for the Garnet in the second half . Hatchmen trailed by 22 points at half time .
 The Jumbos controlled the pig-* skin completely in the first half of the 34th renewal of the TuftsBates rivalry . Tufts won the game by a score of 14 points .
 The second half of the initial game of both club's '62 cards was dominated by the Garnet and Gold clad Bobcats . Bobcats dominated the second half .
 Coach Harry Arlanson's charges running around Bates' ends went 53 yards the first time they had possession to open the scoring . Doran Doran scored the opening score of the game .
 Ralph Doran scored a fifteen yard scoring scamper after taking a pitchout from quarterback Dennis Hickey . Senior halfback Pete Titus and All-New England fullback Ron Deveaux gained large chunks of yardage .
 The Bobcats were unable to move effectively through the Jumbos' line . They were bottled up deep in their own territory .
 Late in the first period the Garnet lost the ball on their own forty-three yard line after a short punt . The Garnet were forced to lose the ball after a punt .
 Tufts moves the ball to the 24 before the end of the first quarter . The Jumbos move the ball into the 24th before the period is over . Tufts also moved the ball on the first play of the second quarter .
 Peter Titus, running from his right halfback slot, turned the left side on this 24 yard touchdown run . Titus ran for 24 yards from the right side of the field for a touchdown .
 Tufts led 14-0 after a minute of the second period . The try for the point after was no good . Tufts scored a try for a point after the point .
 After taking over on the Bates 32, it took the power running Jumbo Juggernaut just six plays to cross the Bates goal line . After taking the lead, the team took just over six plays .
 Ron Deveaux, the Jumbo senior fullback from Arlington, Mass., shows why he is one of the most feared by all carriers in the East . He burst into paydirt from one yard out in the final quarter .
 At the half the scoreboard read Tufts 22, Bates 0 . Deveaux made the demonstration complete as he pulled over from the two yard line on a two point extra point Play .
 The Jumbos, Starring quarterback Bill Davis rolled around end as he picks up six yards in the third quarter of Saturday's game . Bill Davis is the quarterback of the team .
 Davis was held to a zero figure in the yards gained rushing column on the statistic sheet . Vandersea, Quinn, Tamis and Tamis block for Davis .
 Garnet was never able to get their ground attack operating and out of their own territory throughout the first half . Garnet never managed to score a single point of possession .
 Bates was unable to open up its attack against Tufts . Lacking operating room and pressed by the hard charging Tufts forward wall, Bates couldn't open up attack .
 Tufts had a strong start to the second half of the first half . The first half was dominated by Tufts' 11 men . Tufts won the game 2-1 .
 Tufts beat Gloucester General 17-7 in the third quarter . The Gloucester general scored a touchdown in the final quarter .
 Junior left halfback Ralph Doran capped a forty-two yard drive in seven plays when he plunged over from the three . Doran was the only player to score a touchdown in the first half .
 Tufts Uity 30, Bates College 0 after three quarters . Quarterback Dennis Hickey threw complete to halfback Pete Titus for a two-point touchdown . The score came from a touchdown to a touchdown .
 The senior passing combo of Bill Davis and Paul Castolene showed the way . Bill Davis was the driving force behind the success of his team .
 The Bobcats scored on a one yard plunge by frosh fullback Tommy Carr . Moving 70 yards on the longest sustained march of the day, the Bobcats moved 70 yards .
 The Davis to Castolene combination tore off large hunks of vardage . The big freshman fullback Carr was always ready Tufts offense cold .
 All-Maine center and linebacker Howie Vandersea and senior letterman Phil Tomis led the charge . Archie Lanza came up from his defensive halfback spot to halt the Tufts offensive machine time after time .
 The 'Cats had the ball again and the versatile Mr Davis wasted no time moving them . Davis was the first to move the ball in the first half .
 Freshman running backs Tom Carr and John Yuskis were good for the short gain . It was the two freshman running backs who ran for a short gain.
 Tufts faced with a fourth down and goal to go situation . Driving to the Tufts one yard line the Bobcats were faced with fourth down . The Bobcats had a drive to drive to Tufts' one-yard line . Tufts was forced to call the field back to
 Tommy Carr scores his second try of the season for the Broncos . Carr scores the second time in a row for the Lions .
 Garnet rolled to eleven first downs to Tufts' six in the second half . Garnet had 11 first downs in the first half . Tufts had six first downs, the Garnet got 11 in the last two quarters .
 The 'Cats were so superior in the second half that on one defensive play every member of the Garnet eleven but one were on one tackle during a second half Tufts march .
 Bill Davis consistently drove for good yardp^j^ Com^t^d age on the keeper and found All1 Yds^GaiSeT Parsing New England end Paul Castolene Own Passes Intercepted with his bullseye passes .
 Garnet defense stops the previously effective Punts Punts Ave. Ave.
 Robert B Priestley in his eighth year as head coach has 14 lettermen returning, led by senior co-captains Philip Cacciola, a guard, and Robert Mirabelle, a halfback . Philip Caccaccola is a guard and a half-back . Robert
 The Vermont Cadets rely heavily on an aerial game combined with an adequate running attack . Along with Marsh the other big gun in the Vermont boys' backfield is sophomore fullback Bob Nolan .
 Robert Mirabelle and Al Pettingill round out the halfback slots . Al Pettedill is the other halfback at right and left halfback in the back .
 The Cadets' line is usually balanced but occasionally they will go unbalanced to keep the defense honest . Cadets are usually balanced, but sometimes the line is unbalanced .
 Norwich's strength of their offensive and defensive line play lies in their two strong tackles, Al Bradley and Freeman Carr, two big and rangy boys . The strength of Norwich's offensive line play is in their strong tackles .
 Norwich secondary was not severly tested by Colby in their recent encounter and still stands as a question mark . Colby have not been tested by Norwich secondary in recent matches .
 Norwich beat Bates 3-4-1 in their first match of the season . Coach Walter Slovenski scouted the game for Bates, who scouted it for Bates .
 Colby Cadets defeated Norwich 34-6 in their first game of the season . The team of this year is very similar to the Colby team of last year which defeated Norwich . The Cadets managed to come out on top this year this year .
 A team that can exhibit that much improvement is bound to be a tough one for the U.S. It's a tough test for the Patriots .
 Senior quarterback Bill Davis was selected as the initial Bobcat of the Week on the basis of his outstanding performance Saturday . Davis is a senior quarterback at the University of Washington .
 In addition, he gained 37 yards on the ground despite being thrown for losses several times when he was back to pass .
 Bates College Radio Station will begin broadcasting on a regular basis beginning at 6:30 September 30th .
 The station is entirely student operated and broadcasts from 6:30 until midnight, Sunday through Friday . The station was created by students at the age of 13 .
 Freshmen interested in working on the various staffs of the radio station . Please note further announcements and get-togethers . All freshmen interested in joining the staffs .
 Candidates for the basketball and tennis teams are requested to meet with Coach Ullom in the Alumni Gymnasium on Thursday, September 27 .
 Tennis candidates will meet at 7:00m. and basketball candidates at 7.30m. Students are reminded that admission to Saturday's game is by identification card only .
 Tareyton Product of Hates Stuknt Vol. 1 . Product of our ft. Hates. St.uknt .
 Wright, who died Septem ber 20, 1961, was the head of the English Department at the time of his retirement in 1957 . Wright was a member of the National Statistical Statistical Council .
 A Bates faculty member for 31 years, his bequest will be used to establish the Edwin M Wright Fund with income used for the purchase of library books in the field of Eng lish literature . The Edwin Wright Fund will be set up to help purchase library books .
 President Phillips commented, ""it is particularly meaningful to have this Fund in his name. Wright's years of fine service as a teacher and his influence on several generations of Bates students,""
 A grant of $50,000 to Bates College from the Trustees of the Fuller Foundation of Boston was announced by Dr. Dr. Fuller . The Fuller Foundation is a Boston-based foundation .
 The grant is in memory of the Honorable Alvan T Fuller, former Governor of Massachusetts . The grant was created in honor of Fuller .
 Phillips, "to the Trustees of the Fuller Foundation for this generous grant" Phillips was awarded the award for his work in the field of art .
 Fuller's career was considered so outstanding by the Trustees of Bates College that he was awarded an honorary Doctor of Laws degree by Bates College in 1926 . Fuller was awarded a Doctor of Law degree by the college .
 This Fund will make it possible to bring to the campus each year able young men and women who lack the financial means for a college education . The Fund will help students who lack financial means to attend college .
 The total represents a 43% increase over last year when the companies inaugurated the plan . The total is 43% higher than last year .
 The grants are the companies' matching gifts for contributions made by employees and their wives . They include additional 25% incentive payments to colleges and universities receiving gifts from 50% of their alumni .
 Cope is currently a minister of the Unitarian Church of Princeton, New Jersey . Cope has served as a minister for more than 30 years .
 He was also a Professor of Religious Education at Lawrence Theological School . He was a teacher at St. Lawrence University . He also taught religious education at the same time .
 For seven years he served as co-minister of the UnitarianUniversalist Church of Greater Buffalo . He served seven years as a minister at the church in Buffalo .
 The lecture is arranged through the Billings Fund of the Unitarian Universalist Association . It is in cooperation with the Student Religious Liberals and the Bates Christian Association .
 The Bates Hall is not a new Pettigrew Hall and Page Hall, despite its similarities to both . It is not the same as Page Hall . It's a new Bates Hall, but it's a much larger building .
 One hundred eighty-six feet long and 42 feet wide, this two and one-half story brick palace will dwarf the older structure, as well as several other buildings on the quadrangle we call home .
 Two executive offices, paint, carpenter, and electricians' shops, a threestall garage, and vast storage areas will all be housed within the building . The building will include two executive offices and paint shops .
 Three hundred and seventyseven thousand dollars will be the total cost of the project . The project will cost $1 million .
 Professor D Robert Smith will give an organ concert this Sunday at the Columbia Street Baptist Church in Bangor .
 The Bangor concert is sponsored by the Bangor Chapter of the American Guild of Organists . The concert is held in Bangor .
 The Class of 1964 held its first class meeting of the year . Bowie Demands Bates Appraisal For Betterment . Bowie is a member of the Class 1964 .
 Vice-President, Paul Goodwin; Secretary, Marion Day; and Treasurer, Eunice Janson also attended . Vice-president Paul Goodwin and Secretary Marion Day also attended the event .
 The president announced that meetings of several campus organizations will be held on the first Tuesday of each month from 6:15-7:00 a.m. The president also announced that the president will hold meetings of campus organizations .
 Both the social committee and dorm representatives will also meet at this time . Both of the dorms and social committee members will meet this week .
 The group then discussed the lack of social life at Bates and compared it to that of other colleges and universities . The group also discussed the social life of Bates and other colleges .
 It was stressed that the situation will not be changed until the students themselves begin to initiate new activities . The situation is not expected to be changed .
 In conclusion, the class felt that action must be substituted for complaints .
 Further evaluation will be necessary before continuing the discussion on October 2nd . But further evaluation is necessary before the discussion begins again .
 The benefits to be gained from the centralization of all maintenance equipment are obvious . The benefits of centralizing maintenance equipment would be obvious .
 "This one central building should fulfill our needs for the foreseeable future," says the mayor . "We need to have a central central building," he says .
 Nearly three years of expectant planning and revision went into this new structure . Mr Norman Ross, Bursar and Business Manager, explained that nearly three years were spent planning and revising .
 He explained the difficulty of deciding what type of new building should be built with the available funds .
 A maintenance building, Mr Ross added, is the heart-beat of the campus . The maintenance building is a maintenance building that keeps the campus alive .
 Although not ""spectacular,"" an efficient and dependable maintenance department is a necessity . Although not "spectacular","" a dependable and reliable maintenance department will be a necessity in the U.S. State Department .
 The final decision on what shall be built is held by the Trustees, he concluded .
 Due to be completed next summer, this attractive new structure will prove that a building can be both practical and aesthetically pleasing .
 Those campus organizations looking for a new home will be forced to look elsewhere . The maintenance building is only a maintenance building .
 Debate Squad Holds Freshman Tryouts And Practice Sessions . Plans, topics, and meetings for the coming debating season have been announced by Professor Brooks Quimby .
 Tryouts for interested freshmen will be held this week, and practice debates will bring returning upperclassmen back into fighting trim .
 Debate topics this year will be in the field of the foreign trade policy of the U.S. The debate will focus on foreign trade policies of the United States .
 Fourteen upperclassmen are returning to the squad; one senior, nine juniors, and four sophomores . One senior is returning, one junior is returning .
 There will be tryouts for freshmen and upperclassmen next Thursday, October 4, at 4:00,m. and 7:00 p.m. The college will also tryout for upperclass members who have not previously represented the college in debating .
 There will be practice debates among members of the debate team in room 300, Pettigrew Hall . October 9 at 1:00, there will be a practice debate among students .
 Several topics in the field of the U.S. foreign trade policy have been formulated . Several topics have been discussed in the past .
 Bates graduate Laurence Bagley, Director of Field Services for the Maine Teachers' Association, will speak . Bates graduate is a graduate of the Bates School of Education .
 This meeting will be open to both men and women of the freshman class and to any upperclassmen who have not previously represented the college in debate . The meeting will also be held at the University of Cambridge .
 Candidates are requested to deliver an original five minute persuasive speech on a topic of their own choosing . Candidates have to deliver a five-minute persuasive speech .
 Stu G Names Dormitory Representatives For Year . Student Government Board appoints secretary-treasurers for each of the women's dormitories on campus .
 The Board then voted to resume the dining-room eating schedule which had been adopted by last year's board to avoid congestion in Fiske .
 It was decided to begin this program on Sunday, September 30, and to keep it in effect with the exception of weekends . It is decided to keep the program in effect on weekends .
 Stu-G decided that the Seniors would live under essentially the same plan as the other three classes . As no specific provisions have been outlined for this body, Stu G decided that Seniors will live under the same plans .
 At the October 3 meeting, Dean Barbara Randall and this year's advisors to Stu-G will be present . The meeting will be held at the University of Columbia University .
 Outing Club Council Announces Openings For Upperclassmen . Neale Schuman '62 opened the meeting of the year by welcoming Mr Sampson .
 Sampson and Wright had both been advisors of the Outing Club before they went on sabbatical last year . Sampson had been advisors to the club . Wright and Sampson are currently on a break from their roles as advisors .
 In addition to the returnees, there are two new openings available on the Council . One for a junior girl and the other for a sophomore boy . Two new openings are also available .
 Anyone interested should give their name to a Council member before October 6 . Council member should give his name to the Council member .
 The election of the new members will take place at the next Council meeting .
 There was a discussion as to whether the cabin is used enough to continue repairing it year after year . There was also a discussion about whether it would be used enough for repairs .
 Also on October 13, Lee Pollack '63 will lead a trip to Sabattus Cabin to replace five or six logs in that cabin . Also on Oct. 13, a trip will be to replace logs in the cabin .
 All Wednesday nights the Council meetings are open to interested students . The Council meetings will be held at least once a week .
 Announcements of meetings are posted on the bulletin boards in Rand and Commons . Announcements are posted in the bulletin board in Rand .
 Thursday, October 4 Lecture Series, Little Theater, 8 Friday, October 5 Cross Country, Colby vs. Colby . Colby will host a cross country game at the end of the season .
 Football Dance, Chase Hall Ballroom, 8 r 12m. Bates CA Art Show, 1-3 p.m. on Saturday .
 Chapel Wednesday, October 3 Robert L Cope, Unitarian Church of Princeton, New Jersey, ""Tides and Trivia and Moments of Truth"" Friday, October 5 Fall Honors Day, President Phillips and Professor Quimby . Monday, October 8 Music, Freshman Soloists
 It will be given in November and February at Brunswick and in February at Waterville .
 A candidate must make separate application for admission to each law school of his choice and should inquire of each school whether it wishes him to take the Law School Admission Test and when .
 Many law schools select their freshman classes in the spring preceding entrance . Candidates for admission to next year's classes are advised to take either the November or the February test .
 The Law School Admission Test, prepared and administered by Educational Testing Service, cannot be ""crammed"" for. Law School admission test . The test will be administered by the Educational Testing Services .
 The morning test contains questions measuring verbal aptitudes and reasoning ability rather than acquired information . The test is designed to measure verbal aptitude rather than reasoning ability .
 The afternoon session includes two tests, one of which provides a measure of writing ability and the other of general background .
 Sample questions, and information regarding registration for and administration of the test, are given in a Bulletin of Information . Sample questions and information is given in an Information Bulletin .
 The Bulletin (which includes an application for the test) should be obtained six weeks in advance of the desired testing date from Law School Admission Test, Educational Testing Service, Princeton, New Jersey . The Bulletin is obtained from the Educational Testing Services, Educational Test, Princeton .
 Those who plan to take the November examination should send this bulletin and application form by October 3, 1962 . Those who want to take it should send it to October 3 .
 Applications must reach ETS at least two weeks before the desired test administration date . ETS must allow time to complete necessary testing arrangements for each candidate .
 INFORMATION AGENCY is recruiting young women to serve at its overseas posts as secretaries . The agency is recruiting women to work for the agency in the U.S.
 Applicants must be proficient in shorthand and typing and must have secretarial experience . Applicants are required to have a minimum of knowledge and experience in secretarial work .
 Fellowships in the Arts and Sciences, A Guide to Study Abroad, and Guide to Summer Camps and Summer Schools, are available online .
 All interested students and faculty are invited to consult these materials . Students and faculty will be able to use these materials for their own purposes .
 Information agencies employ a class of management interns each year for the purpose of developing executive talent . Information aggencies accommodate management internships each year .
 Applicants must qualify under the management intern option of the Federal Service Entrance Examination which will be conducted by the Civil Service Commission four times in the ensuing school year . Applicants for the program must qualify for the Management Internship option .
 Further information is available in the, Guidance and Placement Office . Further information can be found in the Guidance .
 The application period for the spring semester study programs at the Universities of Vienna and Freiburg will open officially on Monday, October 8 . The Institute of European Studies announces the application period .
 The United States Army currently has two programs for college grads to apply for a direct commission . The U.S. Army has two direct commissions for college graduates .
 Under the second program, individuals must possess either a Master's or a Doctor's degree, or a Bachelor degree with practical experience, in any of the technical specialties ranging from engineering to administration . The second program requires individuals to possess a Bachelor's or Master's degree or Bachelor's degree
 The College Board Competition is designed for students with ability in art, writing, fashion, merchandising, promotion and advertising . Students must be able to participate in the competition .
 Undergraduate women can qualify for College Board Membership by submitting an entry that shows ability in any one of these areas . The College Board membership is a free form of form .
 The College Fiction Contest offers $500 each and a MLLE publication for the two winners . The college fiction contest is sponsored by MLLE and offers prizes .
 The Art Contest winners will illustrate the two winning stories for publication in the magazine . They will receive $500 each for their work . The winning stories will be published in the next edition of the magazine's Art Contest .
 Ford Foundation is offering secret jobs in secret locations in New York City . The Ford Foundation provides secret jobs for secret agents .
 For further information, consult the above mentioned materials at the Guidance Office . For further support, visit www.g.cnn.org .
 BROWN PLAN OF TEACHER EDUCATION offers an internship leading to the degree of Master of Arts in teaching . The internship leads to a Master of Teaching degree .
 A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family . Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial aspects of the educational gift you have in mind .
 The opportunity is enhanced by the fact that the Massachusetts polit ical scene will be a point of major national interest this year, he says . The state's political scene is a major point of national interest .
 A registered Democrat in the tradition of Roosevelt's New Deal, Hughes shied away from the Democratic primary chiefly because his chances of winning were nil . Hughes was a registered Democrat .
 He decided to run as an independent even though the ""law is written to make it hard for an independent," he said .
 With the help of what he terms a ""fabulous organization put together from nothing,"" the tall, softspoken, scholarly looking man of 46 • — so youthful in appearance he almost seems to be a graduate student — achieved a triumph in gaining the ballot that has won him the respect
 A commitment that we will not, under any circumstances, be the first to use nuclear or biologic weapons; renunciation of first-strike weapons and maintenance only of retaliatory capability; gradual abandonment of our overseas nuclear bomber and missile bases which are ""an unnecessary provocation to the USSR"
 Hughes favors the admission of Red China to the U.N. Hughes wants the United States to declare her readiness to help create an effective international peace-keeping machinery . Hughes also wants surplus food stocks available to hungry people of all nations .
 We must find an approach which can lead us to the peace and real security we want . We need to find a way to get the peace we want. We must also find a solution to the problems we face in the world's most dangerous places .
 You'll love the lines: Pendleton, Villager, Petti, Mr Thomson and many others . During your summer vacation we've opened a new store — LADY BENOIT .
 This year the fund paid the travel expenses of two juniors, David Harrison '64, and Dave Whelen '64 . The fund was set up to help fund a summer camp for underprivileged children in Germany .
 Students, workers, and tourists from every section of France, Germany, and the United States . Paris clubs contain a cosmopolitan mixture of students, workers and tourists .
 He found fewer English-speaking people in St. Tropez and as he travelled South he found fewer Germans .
 The ""Paris French"" which is curhently taught in American schools gradually gave way to a Southern dialect . Dave found the dialect easier to understand than Paris French .
 Monsieur Plateau, the manager of ""L'Entraide Cooperative" owns approximately twelve camps throughout France . He owns approximately 12 camps across France .
 Of the twen ty counselors per camp, usually only one is an American . The rest of the camp counselors are French students or work ers .
 Some counsellors had studied English for as many as eight years . But their speak ing ability of the language was not too fluent .
 Many students complain to their Outing Club representatives that the club does not do enough for the student body . Equipment Room by Jack McPARTLAND '63 is the first room in the Equipment Room. Equipment Room is the last room in a room full of students .
 Students expect the Outing Club and other campus organization's to ""spoon feed"" them with activities to pass their leisure hours . Students expect them to be 'spooned feed' with activities they want to do .
 At some point the individual's initiative must take over and he must learn to do things for himself . "At some point, the individual must take control of his own life," he said .
 No campus organization can afford to continuously provide interesting activities for the student body as a whole . At Bates this is particularly true of recreational opportunities, for students .
 One of the most overlooked areas of possible recreational enjoyment can be found in the Outing Club Equipment - Room . The Outing club equipment room is located in the club's main location .
 Each one of you pays yearly dues to the Outing Club, and over the years a sizeable investment has been made in equipment for you to use .
 "At this point, I could set down a long list of all the things we have available," says the mayor . "We have a lot of things we can do," he says .
 Take five minutes of your time some day some day and stop in to see what we have, and how we operate . Take a tour of the building and see what you can do .
 Equipment Room is located on Andrews Road side of East Parker Hall and is open from 4:00 to 5:00 on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays . Equipment Room can be accessed by the University of Maryland students .
 Please let us . proach to Peace, states his views on the issues which led him to declare his candidacy . Please let . us . Proach to peace, states the issues that led to his declaration of candidacy .
 Bales student demonstrates ski equipment available in equipment room . Students often asked about Chessman case and President Kennedy .
 American music is very popular in France, Ray Charles being a favorite singer . Ray Charles is a favorite of Ray Charles . American music has become very popular among the French population .
 Despite their interest in America, the French people are extremely proud of their national heritage . The French people have an interest in the U.S. despite their interest .
 Even kitchen workers at the camp were acquainted with authors and playwrights, from as early as the seventeenth century .
 After graduation from Bates, Dave plans to attend a business school for specialized training in international trade . After graduation he plans to go to an international trade school .
 Feature Editor asks us to write about an interesting summer, or anything else interesting .
 A few reasonable ones may be heard proffering sound advice . Editorials do not attack Cuba . Four-Bates College was founded in 1962 .
 President Kennedy and Senator J William Fullbright have urged caution upon those who blindly wish to go into Cuba and blow the top off .
 Kennedy and Fullbright are undoubtedly aware that it is morally unjustifiable for this country to invade Cuba . Kennedy is undoubtedly aware of the morally unjustified invasion of Cuba .
 It would take a great deal of ethical word twisting to justify an invasion, although this country has done it before . It would be ethical to use the word 'word twisting' to justify a military invasion .
 Critics of this editorial bemoan its ""ethical idealism,"" we may say that an invasion is also legally unjustifiable and politically impractical . An invasion is legal unjustifiable, politically impractical and legally unjustified .
 That the Monroe Doctrine became technically void, however, once we extended our influence to include European and Asian areas is too often ignored by the proponents of this antedeluvian policy . The Monroe Doctrine was technically void when it was extended to Europe and Asia .
 An attack on Cuba might be politically expedient within the context of the U.S., it would not be expedient in the world context . The U. S. has a history of attacking Cuba .
 Americans desire the world to view this country as a benelovent giant always willing to aid the underdog, especially when the aid may be given by an American corporation . Americans want to see the world as a giant always helping the underdog .
 Our image is tarnished enough; let's not give our Latin American and other neighbors any more reasons to distrust us . Our image has already been tarnished by the U.S.
 The most practical reason for not attacking Cuba is that of national safety, says President Obama . Cuba is the only nation in the world to be attacked, says Obama .
 If this country begins to play war games it could precipitate a nuclear war, it could well precipitate nuclear war . The U.S. should not be playing war games, says President Obama .
 The majority of Americans would end up quite dead . And in spite of ""Life"" and ""Time's"" most optimistic predictions, the majority of the Americans would die .
 The girls of the Bates campus are not taking advantage of the social activities offered them. ENCOURAGE ""DOES""
 Chase Hall ""stag"" dance of last Saturday evening was indicated . Chase Hall "stag" dance was indicated in a letter .
 The answer to this puzzling phenomenon lies in the definition of ""stag"" itself, says the author .
 According to Webster, the word means adult male of birds or animals . It also means young unbroken stallion, man at a social gathering unaccompanied by a woman .
 Freshman girls may venture out alone but upperclassmen will unobtrusively hibernately hibernate if dateless . Upperclassmen hibernaturally hibernize if date without a date . Freshmen girls will venture out solo but upper classmen will hibernowow
 The Chase Hall Dance Committee is considering a new dance program at Chase Hall . Chase Hall has a history of dancing .
 It is my opinion that a larger attendance would be evident, while we girls will not be forced to bury our pride and be seen ""stag"" on Saturday nights .
 Entered as second-class matter at the Lewlston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879 . Entered as . 1913, and entered as . second-grade matter at . the Lew .lston post office .
 The Chase Hall Dance Committee is charged with providing, on Saturday evenings, some form of social outlet for the students of the college . The committee is tasked with providing social outlets for students .
 Traditionally this has been a Saturday night dance, a rather dull, drab affair, taking on the atmosphere of a wake in the vigil light of Chase Hall . Chase Hall is the home of the University of Cambridge students .
 We wish to take this opportunity to report that such is ho longer than the case . We are happy to take the opportunity to say that such a situation is no longer the case.
 The Class of 1966 has delightfully infected the campus with the germ of sociability . The Bates Twist Craze is manifested in one degree in the Bates Twist craze . The new and virile enthusiasm of the Class .
 The old place really shook as Bates men and women co-educated to the fullest extent of the opportunity . This germ found its way to the hallowed precincts of Chase Hall on the last two Saturday evenings .
 We feel the season would improve even more if the hordes of Bates men, who form our stag line, were complimented by an equally large and enthusiastic covey of delightful Bates women .
 Chase Hall is the only place on campus where wholesale co-education in the non-academic tradition is actually legal and encouraged . Chase Hall has a history of "wholesome co-eduction"
 WRJR extends a sincere welcome to all of its listeners and future listeners . Very truly yours, Chase Hall Dance Committee Air Waves .
 WRJR-FM can be heard on the standard AM dial anywhere on the Bates campus . The converters are the latest in a long list of improvements to the station's AM dial .
 New this year will be the feature sports department headed by Paul Holt . Paul Holt will be Paul Holt's first sports editor of the year .
 The station has also acquired its own meteorologist in the person of Norm Bowie .
 Norm will conduct the evening weather forecasts at 6:35 and again at 10:05, immeditely following the news programs of Herb Mosher and his staff . Norm is the weather forecaster who will also conduct the weather forecast at 635 and 1005 .
 WRJR training program will begin soon to enable prospective WRJR staff members to fulfill the necessary requirements for broadcasting . For interested newcomers, upperclassmen and freshmen alike, there is a training program to begin soon .
 Persons interested in such a program should contact Bruce Cooper or Lorn Harvey for details . Drop into the station during broadcasting hours, 6:3012:00, Sunday thru Friday, for further information .
 There are many positions open in programming, technical work, and public relations . There are also many positions available in programming and technical work .
 We hope to have many interested newcomers on our staff in the near future . We are happy to welcome many new members of our staff into our ranks .
 This summer I would sit at my usual table at the cafe Marquis De Ville, drink coffee and inspect the American tourists who were passing through Oaxaca . Crater's Edge is the largest crater in the Mexican desert .
 All the tourists I spoke to either had read, were reading or were about to read this classic. All of the tourists were either reading or about to .
 The conversation I liked almost as much as the trading of facts about their individual struggles with dysentery, was the way they compared themselves favorably with some character or characters in this book . The conversation was almost as important as the fact that the characters compared themselves with some of the characters in
 "I wasn't quite sure what this character was like and curiosity almost led me to borrow a volume" "I'm not sure what I'm going to do with this book"
 "I was saved the trouble of reading it, for it was about then that I met what I suppose is an ugly American. However, I was saved by reading it," he said .
 "I was sitting at my favorite table when a painter, who I had become friendly with, approached me," she says . "I had become friends with a painter. I was sitting there at a favorite table," she adds .
 The hot, sweaty people he would have to encounter offended his acute sense of cleanliness . The hot and sweaty people offended him, he said .
 "It's a shame, I thought, that so many Americans come to Mexico and just drink," she says . "It was a shame," she said. "So many Americans ... just drink"
 CNN.com will spend the rest of the day at the library in Washington, D.C., with the help of a fellow American .
 He was an American business man, originally from Texas, who had spent twenty years in the Foreign Service . He was a business man who spent 20 years, I should guess profitably, in the foreign service .
 He was a big man, who lounged back in his chair, staring out at the Zocalo . "He was a great man," he said .
 I wondered what he was planning to do to the quiet and indefensible square . Glancing back over my shoulder quickly, I wondered .
 Grabbing the half-frightened girl by the forearm, he began in a friendly, but loud and Big Daddy-type voice, to explain just what he wanted .
 She was my favorite waitress; she always reminded me of a Raggedy Ann doll . She was a favorite waitress . She always reminds me of the doll .
 I began to add a few words in Spanish to the barrage of clear Texas shout . "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do this again," she says .
 After he was sufficiently certain that she understood what he had said, he let her go and turned to me . He then turned to her and asked her to explain what he'd said .
 "I've just finished a report, for Time and Life — 40 pages . I wrote it yesterday. Why, I'm just finished it, he says . It's 40 pages, he writes . He says .
 If we don't do something, Castro's gonna use that place for a training ground, he will use it for training ground . Castro's plans to use the site as a 'training ground' have been put in place by the government .
 It was that kind of calm which I suppose happens during a hurricane, just before the tidal wave . It was calm, calm which happens during the hurricane just before a tidal wave, he says .
 Mexicans were fighting; come two o'clock, they went and took a siesta, says historian . "They were fighting. They were fighting," he says . "Come two o’clock, the Mexicans went and take a rest."
 Give me forty drunk Texans with shotguns and we'll take Cuba . Why, boy . . Give me 40 drunk Texans with shotguns, we'd take Cuba. Why . .
 Alexander Pope's best-known line, ""For fools rush in where angels fear to tread,"" was aimed at critics . William Butler Yeats wondered what the scholars would say if they happened to meet Catullus whose works they had annotated .
 There is good reason to believe that this academic cold war is drawing to a close, but, like all civil wars, it has left deep scars on its participants . After Hours After Hours: The English Department of the University of California has been involved in a civil war that has left scars
 Scholar-Critic War seems unavoidable in retrospect, and the whole conflict seems unavoidable . Scholar-critic War was simple enough, but the cause of the conflict was simple .
 Contemporary literature is a subject of study in the universities, at both the undergraduate and graduate levels . It all began soon after World War I, when contemporary literature became a major subject .
 Ph.D. candidates in English began to grow restive, for two reasons . Eventually, however, the British and American literary past was reduced to some sort of order .
 Much of the work now remaining to be done seemed like gleaning among the stubble after a great harvest had been reaped . First of all, much of this year's work now must be done, he says .
 A graduate student who worshiped Shakespeare felt less than happy at being advised to work on some minor Elizabethan like Anthony Munday or Barnabe Rich .
 Henry James was barely cold in his grave; Bernard Shaw was still at the height of his powers . Yeats, Joyce, Pound and Eliot were producing work that challenged the critic by its novelty and disturbing power .
 Lawrence posing moral problems unparalleled in fiction since the death of Dostoevsky . Lawrence posed moral problems unprecedented in fiction . Gertrude Stein and a group of younger expatriates in Paris promising surprising new developments in American letters .
 At length the dam broke, and the ""contemporary men"" inundated the English faculties . The English faculties were inundated by contemporary men .
 The critic can proceed to analyze and interpret the work he admires, in the hope of aiding others to see its excellence . The critic has exercised his primary function of judgment, the critic can .
 The hostility between the two groups is not merely a matter of resenting the newcomers and the newcomers resenting that resentment . It's not merely the fact that established men resent the newcomers, it's the reason for the hostility .
 Many of the Ancients have sincere doubts about the validity of literary criticism as an academic discipline and / or contemporary literature as a fit subject .
 Moderns feel that some of their opponents do not care for literature in a humanistic way at all . Moderns say some of the Moderns are better occupied in collecting and classifying scientific data as biologists or physicists . For their part, Moderns .
 In spite of these misgivings, the war seems to be on the wane, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Moderns hotheads have grown cooler with increasing age . Many of the hotheads among the Moderns have grown cooler with age .
 The twentieth century is now more than sixty years of age, and the new is rapidly becoming the old . The new is fast becoming an important part of the history of the twentieth century .
 Joyce has been dead for more than twenty years, Lawrence for over thirty . Hemingway and Faulkner aave just passed on to join them, Faulkners and more . The critic must transform himself into a scholar .
 A modernist who has never had to cope with manuscripts before may suddenly find himself up to his neck in problems which medievalists have faced throughout their careers . If he doesn't try to profit by their experience, he's a numskull, he'll be a numsull .
 Until the Modern Library Ulysses was reset, an uncertain amount of American Joyce criticism was still being based on an unreliable text, inadvertently copied from a pirated edition . Until a few months ago, critics were still using the unreliable text .
 The scholar in contemporary literature needs to study modern printing techniques with some of the care that modern Shakespeare scholars have lavished on the printing practices of the Elizabethans .
 It would be premature to say that the civil war in the English Departments is over . Controversy Continues .
 Professor Clarence Gohdes, Chairman of the Board of Editors of American Literature, refuted this cosy notion from the moment he began to speak . Professor Clarence said: "It's not a myth. It's a myth that the world of literature is a myth."
 Lowry is a completely original writer . Despite the relation Lowry seems to have with other great writers, there is no doubt that he is original .
 His success in portraying with intense feeling and scrutiny the last days of the tragic figure of a mescal-drinking retired consulate in Mexico makes his novel one of the most significant literary achievements in the 20th century .
 Lowry is not more noted today because he didn't have a chance to write another novel, Lowry says . Lowry: "The reason that Lowry didn't get a chance is that he didn’t have a time to write a novel"
 One does not rate the honor of being called a "giant" with only two major works to your credit, unless you happen to be Homer . Homer is Homer's first major work, and his last major work is "Homer"
 After reading the first hundred pages you may wonder why this reviewer is so excited about it . When you come to those words in Spanish at the end of the novel that deliver the final soul-shattering impact — you should understand why .
 I stood up quickly, almost knocking over the Raggedy Ann doll, with the three four minute eggs . I stood . up quickly and almost knocked over the . doll, which I almost knocked . over the doll .
 I had acquired his speed; and would have said anything to make my exit. "I had acquired my speed," he said. "But I would have been happy to make his exit"
 I was certain he then was more interested in protein than playing with dolls . I'm certain that he then played with protein rather than dolls .
 When I did venture back, I found that the Texan had left on the morning flight, the day after our conversation .
 It was a hasty departure from such a beautiful city, but I guess there was nothing he could do to turn the Zocalo into money . It was the last time he was able to leave the city .
 The distinction between scholar and critic has always been a misleading one in any case. The distinction is always misleading one, he says, and it's not always true .
 He showed no prejudice against the literature produced by his contemporaries . He wrote his Poetics about . seventy-five years after the great age of Greek tragedy had ended .
 All-Maine center, Red Vandersea, All-New England center and line backer, Dick McPherson, will be traveling northward with the Northeastern squad .
 Garnet co-captain McPherson plays both ways and often times for 50 minutes or more each game . Vandersea's repute is that he plays only defense, while Garnet plays both sides . Garnet often plays both way and often plays for more than 50 minutes
 Tom Carr and Red Vandersea were sent in as the back and lineman of Saturday's game . Tom Carr was sent in to play for the Lions at Wembley Stadium . Red Vandersese and Tom Carr were both playing for the Saints .
 The team of the week is usually announced on Wednesday, too late for The Student as it goes to press .
 Garnet co-captain Howie Vandersea was selected to the first E.C.A. team of the week . Vandersea is the first Garnet to be named in the first team-of-week .
 Coach Hatch has instituted a practice where the seniors, after having watched the films of the previous Saturday's tilt, vote on who among them should receive the ball . This year as there are many seniors on the squad, Coach Hatch instituted the practice where .
 This week the seniors selected senior tackle Phil Tamis as the recipient of the ball . The seniors selected the senior tackle to receive the ball at the end of the season .
 Verne Ullom is certainly the reason behind this year's fine line . With all the plaudits our linemen are receiving, one can only reflect back to their line coach, Verne .
 The A.A.U. annually holds fall meets throughout the country . It seems incongruous to be mentioning track at this time of the year .
 Bates thinclads participated in such a meet in Brunswick last week . Bates thin clads have been taking part in several competitions in recent weeks .
 Co-captain Bill LaVallee copped two firsts and a second, while Mike Gregus and Jon Ford garnered one first each . Jon Olson and Dave Johnson picked up second places .
 Mike, unfortunately, will be hanging up his spikes under doctor's orders . His absence will be felt by both the winter and spring track squads, as well as the cross country team .
 Mike's most outstanding performance as a Garnet runner came in last year's state meet where he finished third in a fine effort . Mike finished third last year in the state meet .
 Ford breezed to a win last week in the 440, beating out teammate Dave Johnson . Johnson later in the day finished second in the high jump, finishing second .
 Some bard in an era long gone by is quoted as saying discretion is the better part of valor . Some bards are quoted as having discretion is said to be the best part of a bard .
 His words were undoubtedly prompted by such action as was displayed at the half-time last Saturday's game .
 The incident could have been avoided if the overly-zealous freshman had not ventured into the lion's den with his taunting banner . The entire incident was the subject of a condemnatory editorial .
 The Student sportswriters select the Garnet athlete, who in their opinion, came forth with the most outstanding performance during the previous week .
 It is the opinion of those watching the game, not of those participating or those on the sidelines . To reiterate, it is a view of those who watch the game .
 On some weeks making such a selection is easy and there is no controversy, while on others such a case is not the case . This week's selection is an example of how difficult it is to make such a decision .
 I would like to make the selection of the Bobcat of the Week a student body-wide affair but have found no manner of doing so . The selection has been made by the student body of the week but has not been made so far .
 Freshman fullback Tom Carr heads around end in Saturday's game as he picks up six yards in the second quarter . Freshman quarterback Tom Carr is one of the team's best players in the game .
 Carr was selected as the Back of the Game by the press for his offensive and defensive performances . Carr was also selected for his defensive and offensive performances for the press .
 The Pomfret, Connecticut, flash compiled most of this yardage in the first half . The Bates offense scored three touchdowns in 15 minutes . Bates scored most of the yardage .
 The first Bates TD was scored by Planchon on a neat 21 yard gallop that saw him break off right tackle and then cut back to the left to escape Norwich .
 John Curtiss' try for the conversion was blocked after a high snap from center which forced Curtiss to try a hurried drop-kick . Curtiss was forced to try drop-kicks after the high snap was high snap . The result was a narrow loss for the home side .
 First Bates TD was set up by a fine pass interception by freshman halfback John Yuskis .
 Norwich was forced to punt early in the second quarter by the strong Bobcat defense . Senior quarterback Bill Davis started Bates up the field on their second scoring drive .
 This touchdown was set up by another Planchon run that saw the junior halfback take the ball on the . 46 on the halfback draw play and gallop 28 yards .
 The next play from scrimmage saw standout 'Cat end Paul Castolene feint his defender out of position and then cut for the left corner of the end zone where he hauled in a Bill Davis pass to make the score 12-0 .
 The two-point conversion try worked as Bates faked a kick and Davis again hit Castolene in the same spot to put the 'Cats ahead by 14 . The two point conversion try was the second try for the Cats .
 The Cadets of Norwich were soon forced to punt and again the Bobcats were off on another scoring drive, starting on the Norwich 36-yard line . The Bobcats had a score of 14 points in the first half .
 The Bobcat rush for the two -point conversion was stopped short and the half ended with the score 20-0 in favor of the Garnet . The Garnet scored 20 points in the first half .
 Grant Farquhar came through with a key defensive play for Bates late in the second period . He intercepted a Cadet pass in the end zone to put a stop to a serious Cadet scoring threat . Bates had a strong start to the game .
 Norwich, true to predictions, proved to be a second-half team as they parlayed the passing arm of quarterback Burt Marsh . Bobcat fumbles and violations during the second half turned into two touchdowns .
 A Bates fumble was recovered by standout Norwich guard, Phil Cacciola, on the 'Cat 27 yard line . Cades score on Sneak a touchdown .
 The Cadets then drove over for the score with Marsh sneaking sneaking sneaking into the end zone . Freshman John Yuskis intercepted a Norwich pass early in the game . Marsh then drove the score for the Cadets .
 The interception set up the Garnet's second score over from the two-yard line . The Garnet intercepted the interception and set up a touchdown .
 The Cadets added two more points as Marsh passed to end Brad Cleary for the conversion . Marsh added the Cadets' final two points to the scoreline .
 Two personal foul penalties aided the Cadets' 90 yard march to their second and last touchdown . The Cadets scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Marsh suffered an injury to his passing arm and was forced to leave the game . Marsh suffered the injury on the 'Cat' 20-yard line . The Cadets were playing at the time .
 Marsh's substitute entered the game and on the first pay lofted a lefthanded jump-pass into the end zone . Two Norwich receivers and one Bates defender were waiting for the throw .
 The attempt to rush the ball over for the conversion was stopped short by the stout 'Cat line . The 'Cat' line also stopped short the conversion attempt . The conversion was also stopped by the 'Cat's' line .
 With' just over two minutes left in the game, Al Pettingill intercepted a Bates aerial and returned it to the 'Cat 40' with two minutes remaining .
 Cadets attempted four passes on the next series of downs and only completed one . The Cadets completed only one of the four passes . Cadets had only one pass completed on four downs .
 Linebacker John Schatz came through for Bates when he knocked down a fourth down pass . The Bobcats took the ball over on downs and ran out the clock for their first victory of the '62 season .
 Standouts for Bales on offensive were Planchon, Carr and Davis . Howie Vandersea, the whole Bales defensive line, was also a standout .
 Quarterback Burl Marsh, end Brad Cleary and halfback Brad Nolan were the big guns for the Cadets . The Cadets won their first game of the season on Saturday .
 Student photographer Steve Talbot catches some of the football players' dads enjoying their pregame meal at which they heard Coach Hatch speak . Bates: Carr 22 run Norwich: Marsh 2 run (Cleary pass from Marsh) Norwich: Weller 20 pass from Nugent .
 Scotland Native Assumes Soccer Coaching Position at Bates . This year, soccer has reached varsity status at Bates.
 In the past years there have been various adults who have acted as advisors to the squad . This is the first time the England squad has had an advisor to the national team . The squad has been coached by adults in the past .
 Mr Somerville has coached a soccer team for the first time in his career . He has a wealth of knowledge about the sport, including how to play soccer .
 In 1923, Mr Somerville came* to this country from Scotland, where soccer is the biggest sport . In 1923 he moved from Scotland to the UK .
 When he lived in Scotland he played a lot of soccer . He played for several years in a soccer league in the greater Lewiston area .
 Mr Som gram was started in this state less than ten years ago . Now there are varsity squads at Colby, Bowdoin, Bates, and Nasson .
 Soccer has an advantage over its rival sport, football, because of the erville goes back to Scotland to fact that 14 is inexpensive to outfit a soccer team . He feels that in the future, soccer has a advantage over football, as of the future .
 Many schools may drop football as a sport because of the expense involved . Then they will have soccer teams soley, and then they will play soccer .
 Mr Somerville feels the team should have a successful season this year . Because of the strong finish the Bates team had last season, he feels it should be a good season .
 Almost every day, he took his sister's car, packed a lunch, and then went to watch a soccer match in the nearby area . He packed up a lunch and went to a soccer game almost every day .
 He is retired, his former employer being the Central Maine Power Company . He says he is retired .
 Mr Somerville has one son who is the assistant principal at the high school in Gardiner, Maine .
 He compares it some ways to our national sports like baseball and football . He compares the sport to the country's national sports .
 For example, he tells of the tremendous stadiums and the huge crowds of people that come to soccer matches .
 The junior teams are comparable to the farm teams in American baseball in that that is where the professional teams get their material . Below them are the junior teams, which are similar to the American farm teams .
 Mr Somerville also notes that some of the top professional players get salpries that would make Yogi Berra and Stan Musial envious .
 He cites the many high schools that have soccer in their athletic program . He cites many other high schools with soccer programs .
 He says Maine schools are an example of the progress soccer has made in college sports .
 Lloyd Lux, Director of* Athletics for Men since 1949, is one of the staunchest advocates and greatest benefactors of the Intramural Program at Bates . Lux has been the director of athletics for men since 1949 .
 This familiar figure has been ""sort of a jack-of-all trades"" in athletics . Most of the students are ignorant of his varied background .
 He began his coaching career at a high school high school in suburban Philadelphia . Dr. Dr. Larry King is a former Philadelphia high school coach . He has been in charge of the Philadelphia Police Department since 1984 .
 Lloyd Lux was head coach of football and assistant coach of basketball at Lloyd Lux University . He was also assistant coach at the University of Birmingham . Lloyd Lux also coached football at the university .
 Deciding to further his education he did work for his Master's Degree at Springfield College . Decided to further education he worked for Springfield College in Springfield, Illinois .
 At the time time he gained more coaching experience at Wilbraham Academy as head baseball coach and assistant football coach . At the . time time, he gained . more coaching . experience . At . time he . gained more . coaching experience . at WilBraham Academy .
 Lux returned nearer home to teach Mathematics at Moorestown while serving as head baseball coach, and assistant swimming and football coach . Lux returned to Moorestown to serve as head coach, assistant coach and assistant swim and football coaches .
 He began the swimming program at Moorestown High School; now one of the strongest in New Jersey . He began it at the age of 16 .
 His duties also included varsity basketball and the freshman football team .
 He found time to be head of the basketball and baseball program at the Jacksonville Naval Air Station . He also heads the baseball and basketball programs .
 He gained his first real taste of the intramural system, serving as the supervisor of Columbia's vast program . He served as a supervisor of the program at Columbia .
 In 1949 he came to Bates College in his present role of Director of Physical Education for Men . He came to the college in 1949 . He is now Director of physical education for men .
 Lux's greatest ambition at the moment is to improve the intramural program . Lux is aiming to improve its intramurals program by improving the program .
 He feels that a club system would enhance the idea of competition and would be a self-perpetuating system . The club system has been criticised in the past .
 This type of program has been highly successful at other schools and would tend to place the competition on an equal basis . The program is expected to be successful in the future .
 He feels strongly that the student body on a voluntary basis should try this club plan for a period of two years . The student body should try the plan for two years, he says .
 Lux feels that sports are not overly emphasized or deemphasized at Bates College . Lux says that sports is not over emphasized at the school . Lux: 'Sports are not over-emphasized' at Bates .
 Scheduling is always a problem and Bates has a much smaller male enrollment than most of the schools that it plays . Scheduling will be a big problem .
 Lux took pride in the fact that the athletes miss less class time than any other school in New England . Lux said the athletic teams do very well considering the limited amount of manpower and number of men on the coaching staff . Lux also said that the sports are very well done despite the limited
 Lux has served as the golf and tennis coach as well as the mentor of the now defunct junior varsity baseball team . Lux has also coached golf, tennis and tennis at the University of Columbia .
 His son spent the last three years at Andover where he played football and lacrosse . His father says he is proud of his son's success .
 Yale freshman is one of the candidates for the freshman football team . Now he is a freshman at Yale, he says he is looking forward to playing football .
 Soccer, Cross Country Squads prepare for Season Openers . Hopeful candidates for varsity roles in the 1962 editions of the Bates soccer and cross country fortunes .
 Other Garnet stalwarts are fighting for starting roles and varsity status on the squads of the other two fall sports here at Bates . Under the shadow of the mammoth fall spectacular, football is in the spotlight for football .
 Coach James Somerville's soccer club is enjoying the fruits of the first year of official varsity status . Cocaptains Lee Nute and goalie Don Mawhinney are the stars of the new team .
 Lee Nute and Bob Lanz rate high in Coach Somerville's plans for a winning season . The pair are in line for a place in the top two spots in the team .
 The vigorous conditioning schedule is highlighted by an hour long daily scrimmage . Wind sprints also features wind sprints to build that all important speed and endurance .
 After opening at Nasson on October 13, the Bobcat Booters will face such soccer powerhouses as Brandeis, Nichols, Colby and Bowdoin . The college will play in the fall .
 Coach Somerville's much-counted-on veterans face a tough schedule and the first cuts on the squad will be made this week in an effort to trim the 'Cats to a working unit in readiness for their first game . The first cuts are expected to be made in an
 Coach Walt Slovenski's cross country team has a large squad of athletes . Coach Slovenski leads the cross country squad at Garcelon Field .
 Eighteen strong, the largest cross country squad ever to don the white, cross-striped garnet running jerseys of Bates . The varsity candidates are the best conditioned, highest spirited group Coach Slovenski has ever had . The team is the largest ever to wear the garnet-
 Co-captains Eric Silverberg and Bill Dunham are pleased with many veteran runners in Ed Belden, Finn Wilhelmsen, Pete Heyel, Ed Margulus, Karl Wolf and Pete Parsons . Watch out, varsity, for two frosh, Marsh Snow and Ken
 Coach Slovenski lays out an entire new route for his fall runners . Increasing campus interest in this ordeal of endurance, of man against himself, has prompted coach Slovenski to lay out new route .
 The runners will travel a campus route including such forbidden spots as Prexy's Puddle and even the lower slopes of Mt. Mt. Olympus . Starting and finishing on the end of the athletic field near the tennis courts .
 The fighting Bobcat can be seen on the soccer field and the cross country course as well as on the gridiron .
 "The type of girl who lets out little squeals of excitement during the play of the game is a terrible headache," says the author .
 Maine's only drive-in pharmacy . Phone 4-7521 Lewiston, Maine .
 The Boston squad has split in its first two games, winning the opener 28-0 over Rhode Island and losing Saturday to Bridgeport 7-6 . The team also lost the opener 7-0 to Rhode Island .
 Star quarterback Gerry Varnum was sidelined with a sprained ankle and broken blood vessels in the foot . The loss was understandable as the quarterback was sidelined . The Patriots won't be without the star back in the area .
 The Huskies last year posted a 4-4 record . preseason predictions listed them as doing as W I U (31^ IT KMf* tVt** U»» well or better this season . The U.S. women's football team is ranked 31-31 .
 Coach Zabliski has AllNew England center Dick McPherson returning . Coach Zabbiski is particularly blessed at center as he has All New England center returning .
 Jack and Tom Kelley of North Quincy, Mass. Mass. Kelley of the Red and Black boasts of a brother combination in the back yard .
 Quarterback Ed Mullins, 5' 8"" from Maynard, Mass. is filling in for the injured Varnum .
 Mullins accounted for the Huskies' lone score last Saturday as his aerial to Schettino clicked for Six points . Mullins scored for the U.S. Huskies last Saturday in a loss to UConn .
 Victor Victor presently is the third string fullback but is used as a kicker in field goal situations . Victor is currently the third-string fullback for the New England Patriots . Victor currently plays for the Patriots in the NFL .
 Victor attempted a game-winning, 57-yard field goal with 47 seconds remaining in the game but the kick, although accurate, fell ten yards short . Last Saturday, Victor attempted to win the game-ending game with just 47 seconds to go .
 "To watch a football game is to be in a prolonged neurotic doubt as to what you're seeing," says Grisly .
 "Linemen, with the exception of ends, have lower status than backfield men," says Jacques Barzun .
 David Riesman: "The only qualifications for a lineman are to be big and dumb. Many players believe that backfields are recruited from higher social strata than linemen."
 Bobcat of the Week honors goes to junior halfback Paul Planchon . To be a back, you only have to be dumb, says Knute Rockne .
 The All-Maine pick last year was playing at less than full strength as he had been sidelined the week before with the flu . He had been out of action for the week due to a bout of flu .
 BATES COLLEGE, LEWISTON, MAINE, October 10, 1962 . Alumni Assn. at Bates College is proud of its achievements .
 Representatives of campus organizations meet with Alumni Secretary Hank Stred to plan Homecoming Weekend . Homecoming weekend will be held at Bates College of Technology . The University of Bates will host a variety of events throughout the weekend .
 On Friday, October 19, Bates Alumni will return to the campus for a weekend of greeting old friends, renewing acquaintances, and chatting over college days . Alumni from Bates will meet old friends and renew acquaintances .
 Each event, from the pre-rally round-up Friday, to the Thorncrag open house Sunday, has been planned so that friends will have many hours to talk with one another .
 Alumni Association has been working with students who are key members of campus organizations . Back-to-Bates week-* end comes to an end at the end of the week .
 Paul Sadlier '64 '64, representing the Chase Hall Dance Committee, is in charge of Friday evening's open house in Chase Hall . The Chase Hall dance committee will be holding an open house Friday evening .
 Holly Milius '63 and Les Jones '63, co-captains of the cheerleading squad, will lead the crowd in cheering the Bobcats on to victory over Middlebury's Panthers at the game .
 Immediately following the game, Kathy Pease '64 will greet students and alumni during the Women's Athletic Association coffee hour . Pease will greet alumni and students during the coffee hour.
 The Back-to-Bates dance will begin at 8:30 Saturday evening in the Alumni Gymnasium . Chase Hall Dance Committee will lead the event .
 Peter Gomes '65 and other members of the Christian Association have planned Sunday's Chapel Service . The service will be held at the University of Cambridge, Massachusetts .
 From 2:00 until 5:00 that afternoon, the Outing Club invites all to visit Thorncrag Cabin to socialize over cider and donuts . Neale Schuman '63, is a member of the club headed by Neale .
 The Reverend Robert L Cope, guest speaker, addressed Bates students in the first religious service of the school year, on Wednesday, October 3, at nine o'clock .
 Reverend Cope invited to Bates through the combined facilities of the Billings Fund, the Student Religious Liberals and the Bates Christian Association . Cope was invited to the campus by the students' Christian Association and the student Religious Liberals .
 His speech dealt with a serious problem in a world which takes life too much for granted . His speech was the first of a series of speeches to address the world's problems .
 He advised the gathering to slow down its hurried pace, to stop and savor every moment of the wonderful era in which it lives .
 He reminded students that life is too precious and short to waste, for just at the moment we discover the true meaning and purpose of life, like a Roman Candle, it sputters, and quickly dies .
 Cope commented on the richness and promise of our age of scientific advancement . Cope spoke of the richness of the scientific age of the 21st century .
 The Single Culture"" Tomorrow night, October 11, at 8:00 in the chapel, Bates* College will play host to Sean O'Faolain, Irish writer, critic, and Phi Beta Kappa Visiting Scholar for 1962-63 .
 His twoday visit to the Bates campus is being sponsored jointly by the Bates College Campus Lecture Series and the Bates chapter of Phi Beta Kappa .
 He will consider some of the dangerous implications in Sir Charles Snow's thesis and some unobserved elements in the artist and the scientist which makes a bridge between them of sympathy .
 Professor Robert Berkelman's English Composition class will be O'Faolain's next audience at 8:00 Friday morning .
 In 1954 he gave the Christian Gauss lectures on contemporary literature at Princeton, which were later published in his book, The Vanishing Hero . He also gave a lecture at Princeton in 1954 .
 O'Faolain's roots are deep in Ireland, and he has extensive travel both in Europe and the U.S. O' Faolain is a multi-million-year-old award winner .
 The Irish Revolution, in which he took part, is reflected in most of his work . He took part in the Irish Revolution and wrote about his experiences .
 O'Faolain is perhaps most renowned for his short stories and for his novel, A Nest of Simple Folk . He is best known for his stories, short stories, and his novels, including A Nest Of Simple Folk.
 Bates President Charles F Phillips and Professor Brooks Quimby, chairman of the College's speech department, made the awards . The awards were made by Bates students at the College of Speech .
 Students aim to stimulate inquiring mind, develop skills in research, writing, public speaking, and drama . They also aim to instill understanding and appreciation of the natural sciences .
 "Those receiving honor awards today have given evidence that they are achieving these goals,"" Dr. David Perry says of the recipients of the award .
 General Scholarship Awards to the highest ranking man and woman in last year's junior, sophomore, and freshman classes were awarded to David H Hosford '63; duplicate awards to Nancy L . Nancy L '63 . Seniors and their parents are invited to attend Back to Bates Coffee and Tea
 To celebrate '63 and '65, congratulations are to Norman E Bowie '64 and Jane McGrath '64; to Dennis D Keith '65 and Laura S Deming '65 . To celebrate, please send photos and videos of your favorite winners .
 The Lelia M Foster Award, awarded at each Commencement to the young man and woman of the preceding entering class, was presented to Dennis D Keith '65 and Laura S Demirig '65 . The award is given to young men and women who have shown character and ideals
 The Alice Jane Dinsmore Award to the woman in the sophomore or freshman class who excels in creative work in either prose or poetry was presented to Susan J Ingham '65 .
 The Albion Morse Stevens Award to the man and woman in the freshman class who have done the best work in a foreign language, presented to Yoko Hirasawa '65, for progress in French; and Irwin H Flashman '65 .
 The President's Award is based on the point average of 3.3 by three Farmington High School graduates . Farmington's top three students attending Bates College attain the highest combined general average during the academic year . The award is given annually to secondary school whose top 3 students attend Bates College
 For the 1961-62 year, 81 secondary schools were eligible for the Award . 81 schools were awarded the Award for the year .
 Winning the Award for Farmington High School were Laura Deming '62, Eunice Janson '64, and Marion Schanz '63 . The winners of the award were Laura . Deming, E. Janson and Marion . Schanz .
 Second place in the ranking of combined point averages went to Manchester High School, Manchester, Connecticut, with 3.59 .
 Representing Manchester High School were Dennis Keith '65, Alan Williams '64, and Linda Olmstead '65 . Representing the Manchester High students are Dennis Keith "65," Alan Williams "64," Dennis Keith" "65", Alan Williams" "64" "Linda Ol
 Third place in the ranking went to Pittsfield High School, Massachusetts, with a 3.3 average .
 A Doll's House and Hamlet will present such famous plays as Hamlet, to name just two . A program dealing with existential philosophy will also feature existential philosophy and a festival of the Arts .
 List of new programs to be offered during 1962-1963 season . New programs offered during this season .
 A special highlight this year will be the showing of two college credit courses, one in American Government and the other dealing with the American Economy . The show will also be a special highlight for college students .
 Six other new shows will be seen on Monday nights . Six other shows will also be on the air on Monday night .
 A new scientific program, ""Challenge,"" will deal with radiation and its problems . "Challenge" will focus on radiation .
 Wednesday, October 10 Vespers, Chapel, Chapel; 9-10 Thursday . Thursday brings three more Thursday events .
 Haze Day Debibbing Night, Women's Locker Building; 6-9m. Sean O'Faolain, Chapel; 8 Friday, October 12 Haze day debibbing night .
 October 13 Football at W.P.I.I., Cross Country at Nasson, 2:30 . Cross Country and Soccer meet at 2:15m.
 The Bates debating squad will make its initial appearance in the Chapel on Wednesday, October 24 . Sneakers — Hood's Rubbers for the family .
 Debaters engaged in a series of practice debates designed to sharpen their prowess for the coming season . During the past week the debaters have been engaged in practice debates .
 Fifteen upperclassmen are returning to the squad; and six freshmen are trying out for it . Six freshmen will try out for the squad .
 Carol Johnson, Linda Lash, Max Steinheimer, Richard Rosenblatt, George Strait, and Nancy Vail are among the writers .
 Ronald Snell '65, Peter d'Errico '65 and Jeffrey Rouault '65 . Norman Bowie '64, Morris Lelyveld '64 . Norman Gillespie '64 and Norman Davis '65. Norman Davis, Norman Bowie, Norman Gillespie, Norman Davis and Norman
 Dr. Mavrinac: Democracy is so ideal that people don't really want it . He says democracy is "so ideal" that people are not really interested in it . Dr. Mavinac: "Democracy is so beautiful that people want it"
 This conviction, together with the belief that the law must be an expression of a community composed of rational human beings, form two of the basic precepts of democracy . The conviction, along with the . belief that . the law . must be the expression of the community composed . of rational
 Susan H Smith '65 reported on her trip to two conferences held in Ohio during the past summer . Smith spoke to Stu-G on the Student Government Board .
 She outlined the main events of the National Student Association Coordinators Conference, and of the NSA Annual Policy Making Conference .
 Miss Smith expressed her wish to run a regular colmn in The STUDENT acquainting Bates students with NSA and with the vast opportunities and assistance .
 Miss Smith returned to Bates with many ideas for improvement on campus and with the desire to make Bates an active worker in the over-all NSA plan .
 Janice Bauld '63 and June Gustafson '63 led a discussion regarding a proposed series in which students and professors would gather informally in the basement of the Women's Union to discuss topics of the professor's choice .
 A committee is looking at the possibility of launching such a series during the second semester . They expressed a desire to see more students volunteer to serve on the committee .
 President Bette Anne Little '63 informed the board that Debibbing for freshman women would take place on October 12 at 7:00 in the Women's Gymnasium Building .
 She also asked board members to inform all sophomore women that the Intergovernment Committee had an opening . She also told board members that she also asked for information about the committee .
 Those interested should see Bette Anne Little, Nancy Nichols, Susan Smith, Susan H Smith, or Carol Kinney, for help .
 Avery's Peak will be the goal of Bates Outing Club mountain climbers on Sunday, October 14, announced George Hunter '63 and Judy Bradshaw '63, directors of hikes and trips .
 Bigelow, is located in Dead River Plantation in Somerset County, Maine . Bigelows is a plantation plantation . It was established in the 1800s .
 The mountain gets its name from Major Timothy Bigelow, who climbed the mountain under the order of Benedict Arnold during the march from Maine to Quebec . The mountain is named after the Major Bigelowe who climbed it under the orders of Arnold .
 The procedure which George and the other EMPIRE NOW PLAYING J STANLEY KRAMER'S UDGMENT {^Nuremberg Tracy Widmark Schell Schell Lancaster Dietrich Garland Shown Twice Daily Mat., Eve.:30 Adm.30 Ad .
 Leaders will follow is typical of almost any climb. Kir/ij Edward . Edward. Edward .
 After the buses drop students off at the foot of the mountain, students will begin the hike through the surrounding woods . Students will begin hiking through the woods .
 As for foot apparel, hiking boots are preferable, although sneakers are permitted . Hiking boots are preferred, but sneakers are also permitted .
 Sweatshirts, lumberman's jackets or ponchos are good for outerwear . Dungarees as the best type of pants are the best kind of pants for outer wear .
 One should keep in mind the obstacles to be met, when deciding what to wear . One of the obstacles should be met when choosing what you wear .
 The Mount Avery climb is for anyone who would like to go . Unlike the Mount Washington climb, it is open to anyone who wants to climb . The climb is not restricted to upperclassmen .
 A lecture before each play tells something about the background and setting of the play; 3. A lecture about the setting and background of each play; . A lecture on each play telling something about a play's setting; .
 Admission and eligibility to participate in a minimum of four workshops produced by Robinson Players and/or the Acting Class .
 These workshops will include work from the classic theater to the modern avant-garde or theater of the absurd writers . Workshops will be held at the University of California's Theater of the Insane Theater .
 Those who chase tickets first get the best re served seats . Everyone is reminded that those who chase ticket first get best seats first .
 Players intend to extend their scope this year by bringing to the student audience examples of the theater, past and present, through its workshop program and monthly meetings .
 Members will present skits and other entertainment in the next meeting on November 6 . The meeting will take place in New York City .
 Judy Mosman '63 is a member of the U.S. Women's Club . She has been involved in the Student Council of Women's Equality for Women's Rights for Women .
 Robinson Players meets by membership card only . Students are admitted to Robinson Players meetings by memberships card .
 Doug Macko, vice-president; Holly Thompson, secretary; Judy Bryden, treasurer . Holly Thompson is also a member of the board . Doug MacCooney is the president of the United States Hockey League .
 Chase, Abby Pamer; Hacker, Candy Richardson; Wilson, Jay Wells; Frye, Karin Mueller; Mitchell, Joyce Mantyla; Whittier, Rosie Staddie; Milliken, Lyn Melander; Page, Louise St. Page .
 Smith North, Steve Quattropani; Smith Middle, Ted Davis; Smith South, Pete Pequignot; John Bertram, Jim Fine . East Parker, Jim Brown; West Parker, Dick Rozene; Smith North and Smith South .
 Newt Clark, president of the class of 1965, opened the first meeting of the sophomore council Tuesday night, October 2 . Newt Clark issued a general invitation to the class to attend the class meetings .
 Libbey Forum will meet first Tuesday of the month at 6:15 a.m. The forum will be held in Libbey .
 Any dorm representative who misses two meetings during the year will be dropped from the council . A new dorm representative will be elected from that dorm to fill his place in his place .
 The council next discussed plans for the pep rally which was held last Friday night, October 5 . The council held the event at the end of the month .
 Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family . Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift .
 Augusta, Maine, is Maine's only drive-in pharmacy . Phone 4-7521 Lewiston .
 Maine Pine land Seeks Volunteers To Aid Patients . Bates Christian Association was recently contacted by the Pineland Hospital and Training Center in Pownal, Maine .
 They have requested help in their program with the mentally retarded and handicapped children . The children's parents have also requested help from the government .
 I, as a CA member, visited the hospital last Friday to find out what their exact needs were . In an effort to learn what their needs were, I, a member of the hospital, went to visit the hospital .
 The fields in which help is needed are unlimited, according to the Institute of Science and Technology . The institute is dedicated to helping people in the fields of science and medicine .
 Premedical students can be of value in such fields as physical therapy, x-ray, and bio-chem. laboratories . Students can also learn in physical therapy and x-rays .
 Psychology majors can find a place to apply their knowledge in such things as giving tests or just working with children . Psychology majors will be applying their knowledge to the classroom .
 Students from Colby come down once a week to work at Colby . Elizabeth H Nevin, Elizabeth H. Nevin . Nevin: "I learned that students ... come to Colby to work"
 Most students return year after year because of the experience and enjoyment they get from helping these children . Students return to the school every year because they enjoy the experience they get .
 Pineland offers you a chance to help others and yourself at the same time . Pineland is located in Pineland, Georgia, and is located on the outskirts of Atlanta, Georgia .
 It is a job which must be kept up on a weekly or monthly basis in order to be of any value to you or to Pineland . Pineland.com will provide an example of the work done for you .
 The children become depressed when volunteers who are expected do not show up . They cannot use people who are willing to come on a haphazard basis, for the children . The children's school cannot use volunteers who do not expect them .
 There are many problems such as transportation and working hours which must be solved . There is no solution to the problems of working hours and transportation . There are also many problems to be solved such as transport, working hours .
 I will hold a meeting in behalf of the CA of any who are interested in 8 Libbey at 7 p.m. Thursday, October 11 .
 During your summer vacation we've opened a new store — LADY BENOIT . Pendleton, Villager, Petti, Mr Thomson and many others will be available .
 Come in, browse around the store and meet your friends . It's your store and we welcome you any time. Come in and meet our friends .
 LADY BENOIT TYSs* opened the gathering by briefly outlining t h e administrative framework at Bates . She opened the meeting by outlining the administrative framework .
 He reminded the assembled group that the campus is organized on a highly centralized basis . The problems going from the bottom of the structure to the top, he said .
 The legal source from which students get their authority is the Charter of the College . The Charter is a charter of the college's charter .
 Business powers are placed in the hands of the Board of Trustees . On-campus activities are left to faculty dis cretion . Business powers in the University of Cambridge are placed at the Board's hands .
 The faculty is respon sible for student activities under Mavrinac Talks . Talks will determine the course of his whole life .
 If the ma jority's decision is not in his favor, he is not driven to violence by the belief that his whole life will be ruined, he says . Therefore, if the decision is in favor of the man, he will not be in the way of his own life .
 It is the function of great leaders to understand the basic conflicts of the people, says David Cameron . Great leaders understand these conflicts and put them into relatively harmless terms for the voter .
 All fundamental issues must be decided, not by the government, but by the individual . In this manner, all fundamental issues should be decided by the person, not the government . The government must decide not by government but by individual .
 Only the individual himself can decide whether it is right or wrong to love one's neighbor . Only he can take the unpleasant responsibility for such decisions, says the author .
 By forcing the people to decide for themselves, Mavrinac concluded, the democratic government develops the individual human being and his beliefs .
 Dean Boyce reviewed the Student-Faculty Activities Committee with the group . Following the President's statement, Boyce met with the committee .
 The purpose of this body is to formulate the policies under which campus activities are run . He explained that the purpose of the body was to formulate campus activities .
 As many students must frequently apply for blue slips, the procedure to obtain them was then discussed . The procedure to be followed in obtaining them was discussed .
 Blue slips were devised so organizations and private groups could reserve space and equipment for meetings, parties, and informal get-togethers . Blue slips are devised so that organizations and . private groups can reserve space for meetings and parties .
 Boyce reminded the students present of the importance of submitting their blue slip requests at least one week in advance of the date of the event .
 Dean Healy then spoke about the Faculty Advisor System on the Bates campus . Healy also spoke about a Faculty Advisor system .
 He said extracurricular activities were important as both an enjoyable and a valuable educational experience . He said that extracuricular activities are important as an enjoyable experience .
 It is a requirement of the College that all organizations have advisors . The College is required to have advisors at every organization .
 It is important that any advisor be kept informed of what his group is undertaking. It's important to keep an advisor informed of his group's plans .
 President Phillips closed the meeting by expressing the hope that those present would keep in mind that all people who come to the campus as speakers and visitors are our guests .
 Barb Tuttle and Bill Young '64, Cora Jean Snow '63 and Lee Smith '62, Bonnie Logie '63, Dick Carlson '62 and Elaine Woodford '63 . Genie Wise and "Swifty"" Hathaway Hathaway "62" Hathaway '62 .
 Maine's Educational TV station, sponsored jointly by Bates, Bowdoin, and Colby, is planning to supplant many of its old programs with new presentations . The station's new programs will be replaced with new programs .
 Friday, October 12 Haze Day Debibbing Night, Women's Locker Building; 6-9 Saturday. Saturday, October 9 Haze day debibbing night, October 11 .
 Ronald Snell '65, Peter d'Errico '65 and Norman Davis '65 . Norman Bowie '64, Kenneth Woodbury '63, John Strassburger '64 and Norman Gillespie '64 . Norman Davis, Norman Bowie, Norman Gillespie, Norman Davis and Norman
 Debibbing for freshman women will take place on October 12 at 7:00m. in the Women's Gymnasium Building . President Bette Anne Little '63 informed the board that debibbing would take place in October .
 Nuremberg Tracy Widmark Widmark Schell Schell Lancaster Dietrich Garland Shown Twice Daily Mat., Eve., Eve.:30 Adm. George and the other EMPIRE NOW PLAYING ■ STANLEY KRAMER'S Judgment ^. The procedure which George George and
 I KM* I liXltiXtrtll't't'l • UoufiUm \H<obinson\ 2 tt'cc/iH in atiotlicr ikttvn < !, <l<l< t S <l
 Judy Mosman 'G3.3' is a member of the public who would like to help or participate in this meeting . The meeting will be held at the same time as the meeting of the '3G'
 Newt Clark, president of the class of 1965, opened the first meeting of the sophomore council Tuesday night, October 2 . Clark issued a general invitation to the class to attend the class meetings .
 A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family . Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind .
 The Bates Christian Association was contacted by the Pineland Hospital and Training Center in Pownal, Maine in regard to a need for volunteer work . Pineland Seeks Volunteers To Aid Patients .
 I will hold a meeting in behalf of the CA of any who are interested in 8 Libbey at 7 p.m. Thursday, October 11 . The CA will meet with any interested in the project on October 11 at 7pm .
 Business powers are placed in the hands of the Board of Trustees . On-eampus activities are left to faculty discretion .
 The 4< HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE of ALL TYPES FOUR BATES STUDENT, Oct. 10, 1962 Editorials .
 Pride in one's college and the concomitant spirit has noteably been absent from this campus for these last few years . Pride in the college has been absent in recent years. Pride in your college is an important part of your college experience, says the president .
 The shadow of school spirit is emerging and taking shape in the shadow of the school spirit . Now in the growing glory of a successful season in football .
 "Perhaps as we raise our voices in criticism this coming year, we might also look within ourselves for the faint outlines of pride and concern for this college," the author says . "We might also raise our voice in criticism, but perhaps also find the faint outline of pride, concern for
 Ours has been a heritage of complaint directed against the institutions of this school . Ours have been directed at the institutions, this school has been accused of corruption .
 It is time that we look to ourselves for the heritage of pride and school spirit which we have not had. It's time to look back at ourselves for our school spirit . It is not the first time we have had a school spirit in our history .
 Our years here should not be spent in adding to the apathy that has prevailed. Our years should be spent not adding to that . Our years in the U.S. should not add to that apathy .
 We can take pride in Bates College only to the extent that we have confidence in ourselves as citizens of a college community which means something to us . Bates College is a small college in the heart of the nation . We are proud of Bates College. We are confident that Bates College means something
 As we bask and enjoy the success of our football team, let us realize that it is not upon the accomplishments of our teams that school spirit can be sustained . School spirit can't be sustained if school spirit is sustained by team success .
 For such sustenance is totally external and dependent upon our conquering of others, we must conquer others . For such a great thing is that we conquer others, our sustenance must be external .
 In your attitude, not as a class, a team, or any group, but as an individual, lies the extent to which school spirit shall emerge, take shape and prevail here at Bates . The school spirit will emerge as a result of the attitude of an individual .
 White discussed the littered disorder which reigned over Walden after it had been opened to the public . White discussed how the once peaceful Walden had become littered after it was opened .
 Maine highways are noted for the quantities of beer bottles and cans strewn by the wayside . Maine highways have a reputation for strewn beer bottles, cans and cans .
 "The mess of gumwrappers, paper scraps, and whatnot is unnecessary, unbecoming, and frankly, embarrassing," the author says .
 Such litter is unnecessary because the college provides an adequate number of wastebaskets . Such litter was unnecessary because of the college providing an adequate amount of waste baskets, the college says .
 It's embarrassing because some students do care what impressions others receive of Bates . Bates says it's embarrassing that some students care about what they think others think about .
 "We have a beautiful campus and we must all help to keep it looking clean," says the university president . "We need to keep the campus clean," he says .
 Every gym class I am required to do something beyond my physical capability. Yet every gym class is required to be physical . I'm not a physically fit person, but I'm an athlete. I want to be a fighter, not a fighter .
 I am required to play games I cannot understand, do not enjoy, and cannot participate in with even the slightest physical dexterity or prowess . I'm required to participate in games I can't understand .
 And I am not alone in wanting to do something about improving my present physical state. And I'm not alone. I want to improve my physical state, I'm going to do it .
 "I do not think that the continually changing five week units are going to improve me. But, gentlemen, I do think that . I do . But I don't think that changing five weeks units will improve me," he said .
 This year I am floundering around on the football field — and while my attempts serve as amusement for my classmates and my coach, I feel that I am getting nothing of benefit from the activity . This year, I am . feeling that my attempts . serve for amusement for classmates and
 Rather I want a remedial gym class to take the place of my present class . I want to be able to learn how to use the gym again, rather than go to the gym .
 "I honestly think that I am too far gone physically to do much on my own without supervision. Of course, one might argue that could improve myself on his own, but I think that could not improve myself without supervision."
 "I would like to toughen up and become able to perform in a regular gym class with some confidence," she said . She said she wants to 'toughen up' and become more confident .
 "I think that the athletic department is failing to give people like myself a sane physical education program. And I think that . And I'm not going to be able to go to college," he says .
 I acknowledge the value of the athletic program and do not mean to detract from its place in the Bates curriculum . I do urge the department to recognize the fact that there are those students incapable of performing adequately in the standardized program .
 Malcolm Mills '65 Five Time Grand Prize Film At Little Theater at Little Theater . "I ter frolic and dream in a fragile"
 The simple and poignant Indian film ""Pather Panchali"" will renew far-away memories of childhood delights, fantasies, and sorrows .
 Satyajit Ray's "Song of the Road" is the first film of a Hindu trilogy . The film is written, directed, and produced in India . It is also the first of a trilogy of films by Ray . The trilogy is a sensitively and profoundly written and directed
 Ray, formerly a commercial artist, has used non-professionals, instead of stars, to capture the mist-filled joys and experiences of young, rural Brahmin children . Ray's work is based on the experiences of children in rural India . He has been using non-
 Apu and his beloved older older siscontrasted to and endangered by their rude, impoverished environment . Apu's beloved older brother and sister are also endangered by the environment of their environment .
 Daily their witness their poetic father and work-worn mother struggle joylessly in a never-ending effort to protect the family from the enveloping arms of poverty and starvation .
 Apu has been able to mirror and balance life's laughters and sorrows . However, in spite of the decaying society in which Apu lives, Ray has managed to balance his own life .
 The film is enriched by artistic and detailed photography, which enhances the universal appeal of the movie . Besides lyrical realism, this film is also enriched by detailed photography .
 ""Pather Panchali"" has been an award winner from Calcutta to the Cannes' World Film Festival . It's no wonder that the film has been awarded multiple award winners .
 Circulation, Merry Webber '65, Betsey Tarr '65 and Betsey Spare '65 . Jan Soltis '65: "Circulation" is the name of the first class of the class of 1964 .
 Entered as second-class matter at the Lewiston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879 . Entered as . 1913, and entered as . second-grade matter . entered as a . second class matter .
 It seemed to be fitting to thank those whose labors made the new facilities possible at Bates College .
 Many people were involved in last year's library research project . Many people contributed their time and ability so that the student body might have more useful study facilities .
 At least one person devoted so much time at the expense of her school work that she was unable to return this year . At least another person devoted her time to school work so much that she couldn't return to school .
 Others also gave hours of spare time and supported the project with their interest and concern . Others gave hours to support the project .
 President Barack Obama's administration recognized the work of the campaign . The Obama administration recognized it as a success .
 In the short time I've been here at Bates College, I have come to appreciate the library study rooms . I've come to know Bates College has a great library study room .
 I'm glad the upperclassmen fought for the extended hours of these study areas . "I'm glad I fought for these extended hours," she says. "I hope it will be a great experience"
 At the library every student is concentrating which makes it all the easier to accomplish something . At school, students are concentrating more easily and more easily than at home .
 Rousseau observed in his idea of the ""Social Contract,"" citizens give up their individual liberties in return for the protection of the state . Citizens give up individual liberties to the state, Rousseau said .
 A state's purpose is to protect its citizens, the author says . "The one purpose, the only purpose, of a state is protecting its citizens," he says .
 If the U.S. were to permit an intolerable situation to develop in Cuba because of the doctrine expounded upon by the STUDENT, then that government would be failing in its raison d'etre .
 Any government which deludes itself into thinking that such a situation can be ignored because it does not conform with its wishful thinking would have to be considered incredibly naive . Keeping in mind the fact that the first function of a government is simply to exist, any government deludes themselves into thinking
 When morality conflicts with reality and necessity, then morality must go . When morality clashes with reality, morality should go, the government says .
 One need only look at the success of the Soviet Union in this area to determine the extent of which Machiavellian politics influence the power struggle . The Soviet Union was one of the most successful countries in the world .
 The STUDENT itself points out that it is the image of the United States which is tarnished . Yet, as the STUDENT points out, it is a U.S. citizen .
 Foreign governments see the United States as a giant power too weakkneed and hesitant to protect its own interests . This is because foreign governments, with foreign policies determined as they are by Machiavellian politics, see the U.S. as a weak, hesitant power .
 And let us not be intimidated by ridiculous fears of a nuclear war over Cuba . Let's not be afraid of ridiculous fears over nuclear war . Let’s not be scared of nuclear war. And let's not get scared of it. Let us not fear it.
 The Soviet Union is no more ready to precipitate a nuclear holocost over Cuba than we were over Hungary, says historian John Sutter . Sutter: "The United States is not ready to deal with the Soviet Union over Cuba"
 Machiavelli ruled by the Soviets, such an action by the U.S. might conceivably help deter a future war . Indeed, as the Soviets are also ruled by Machavelli, such a move might help deter war .
 An invasion of Cuba would not be ""legally unjustifiable"" and ""politically impractical,"" but, quite to the contrary, morally and politically unavoidable,"" writes . In conclusion, I feel it quite conceivable, given a significant military build-up in Cuba, that an invasion
 Sincerely, Robert Boyd '64 . Headquarters for DIAMONDS are located in the U.S. Gem Society .
 The mighty trio did manage one championship tilt which was captured by the slenderest of the trio . It was the largest championship tilt of all three teams in the world .
 Perhaps his speed afoot annexed him the title, but it would seem rather that it was the lack of conditioning on the part of his opponents . It was perhaps his speed that won the title .
 Bobcat Harrier Co-captain Bill Dunham annexed the leaf catching championship on the lawn of Smith,, Sunday . Dunham ran down a total of 10 gale-driven leaves . Dunham won the championship by running down 10 leaves .
 A few leaves remain so perhaps there will be a rematch, but one rather doubts that the championship will be relinquished . A rematch is possible, but there is no doubt that the title will be won .
 Garnet Co-captain Red Vandersea left Northeastern's Dick McPherson wallowing in the mud of Garcelon field . Vandersea was Garnet's first Garnet player to win a Garnet game .
 Northbridge, Mass. resident was selected as the E.C.A.C.'s lineman of the week for the second consecutive week . He was selected at the guard position at the University of Massachusetts .
 Garnet leader totalled 61 points under Coach Hatch's scoring system . Garnet had 61 points to lead the Garnet Garnet .
 Smith South proctor intercepted two Huskie passes and galloped 55 yards with one of them for the first score of his college career . In addition to many tackles and assists Howie was in on, he was also involved in many other plays .
 Bobcat fans stood in the rain for 30 minutes to welcome the Garnet gridders to the Den . The spirit shown by the fans was shown by fans who stood outside the Den to welcome them in .
 With spontaneous spirit like that showing the Garnet warriors that the student body is behind them 101%, perhaps a State championship is in the making .
 The Hatchmen take on the Engineers in Worcester, Massachusetts . The match will be played in the middle of the season . The teams will meet in a friendly on Saturday .
 The Engineers have always been a thorn in the Bobcats' side . The Bobcats will be seeking revenge for the pasting the Engineers gave us last year .
 Route 9 runs from the top of the hill behind Lake Quinsigamond to the lights at top of a hill . Route 9 is located north on route 9 until you hit the lights .
 Go straight at those lights and you will come into a rotary at the bottom of the hill . The rotary is located at the top of a hill .
 In case you get lost in Worcester, ask for route 12 or Park Avenue . Park Avenue is the road which runs alongside Alumni Field .
 Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents Paul Planchon BILL DAVIS COLLEGE PHARMACY, Inc. Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAIS PHARMERY, Inc., Inc. Paul Planchnon is a former college pharmacist .
 Bates College offers $1.00 luncheon and Dinner Specials 7 days a week . Bates College is located near the campus of the University of North Carolina .
 The rain hampered the respected Bates passing attack considerably and forced the 'Cats to play defensive football, taking no chances and punting on the third down . Bates puns on third down, puning on the final drive .
 A nifty 45 yard pass play from quarterback Ed Mullins to Brian Hayes was the key play in this drive . The drive ended in a touchdown for Mullins, who was intercepted by Hayes .
 Paul Planchon knocked down a fourth down pass to turn the ball over to Bates . Once the Huskies got inside the Bobcat 10 the 'Cats' defensive forward wall stiffened .
 Planchon later boomed a third down punt from deep in his own territory to the Huskie 5-yard line shortly before the end of the period . The Huskie punter also boomed third down puns from deep into the Huskies' territory .
 The first Bobcat score came with less than 5 minutes gone in the second period . First Bobcat goal came less than five minutes before the end of the period .
 The Huskies were on the Bates 45 and appeared to have their offense in high gear . Huskies had a strong start to the second half of the season .
 'Cat cocaptain Howie Vandersea picked off a John Kennedy pass from his linebacker position and stepped out on a fine 55 yard touchdown run . At this point, Vandersea has a 55-yard touchdown run.
 Northeastern took the kickoff and once more began to march up the field . Northeastern won the game by a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Paul Planchon intercepted a pass on his own end zone with 2 minutes remaining in the half . The 'Cats intercepted the pass with 2V 2 minutes left in the first half .
 A 19-yard pass from Kennedy to end Frank Schettino broke over the middle accounted for this tally . The score came from Kennedy's pass from the quarterback to Schettinino .
 At this point the one point separating the two teams looked like it would be the deciding factor as the rain was coming down harder and the field had been turned into a quagmire .
 With 8 minutes remaining in the game, Northeastern was forced into a punting situation near their own forty . Carr scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Victor was off and he just managed to get his hands on the ball before he dropped it . Victor dropped it off in the middle of the ball in the first half .
 Quarterback Bill Davis launched an aerial to John Yuskas who caught the ball, then fumbled it when hit by two defenders . On the second play from scrimmake, Davis fumbled the ball when he caught it .
 Paul Planchon picked up the ball and avdanced it to the one-yard line before being hauled down . He was hauled down by officials but was not penalized .
 Twice Davis called upon fullback Tom Carr to buck the line and on the second attempt he slammed into the end zone . Davis called on Carr to do the same on his second attempt .
 The score was 14-8 in the 'Cats' favor . Curtiss' conversion attempt was good and the conversion was good . The Cats won the match by 14 points .
 After the Bates' kickoff the Huskies were unable to advance the ball for a first down and were forced to punt . The Huskies had to punt after the Bates kickoff .
 The strong Huskie forward wall held the 'Cat offense . The 'Cat scored a try for the boys from Boston . The Huskie scored a late try to equalize .
 Paul Planchon was roughed on his punt though and the Bobcats were able to run three more plays before punting . The Bobcats ran for three plays and punted again .
 The Bates defense accounted for the third 'Cat' TD on the next series of plays when Kennedy was chased back to his own ten and then fumbled . Graham scored a touchdown for the Bates defense .
 The ball squirted into the end zone where reserve 'Cat guard Bill Graham fell on it for the score . 'Cat Guard Bill Graham scored the score for the 'Cat'
 The score was 20-8 in favor of Bates with less than a minute left in the game . Curtiss' kick was wide and the score was 19-8 . The game ended in a tie for Bates .
 Northeastern fumbled the following kickoff and the 'Cats ran out the clock for their second win of the year against a lone defeat . Northeastern lost their first game of the season to the Cats .
 Standouts for Bates were Tamis, Vandersea, and Ritter in the line and Davis and Planchon in the backfield .
 Mullins, Kennedy, Webb, and Schettino were the guns for the Huskie offense . Bill McPherson p*layed a good defensive game . Mullins and Kennedy were the main gunsmen .
 Bobcat distance runners dedicated Coach Slovenski's new cross country course . Bobcat beat Colby by 19 to 42 at Bates Monday afternoon . Colby is a weak Colby club by a 19-19 count .
 Co-captain Eric Silverberg set a new course record in the time of 24:36 for the four and a quarter mile course . The Garnet romp was paced by Silverberg, who led the pack .
 Four men in the first five positions and four in the second five . The Garnet runners showed promise of a fine season this fall .
 Frosh standout Mike T r u f a n t followed Silverberg across the finish line . Roger Jeans nailed down the third spot for the White Mules from Waterville .
 Sophomore Mike Gregus, who finally got the OK of the medicos, was fourth and co-captain Bill Dunham rounded out the first five .
 Mabee of Colby, Wilhelmson, Richardson, Parsons and Heyel, all of Bates, rounded out the first ten .
 Coach Slovenski was quick to point out that this was a weak Colby team that seemed to be in poor condition in comparison to his team . Slovenski pointed out that the Bobcats were a weak team that appeared to be weaker than their own .
 The Bates meet takes place Saturday at Worcester, Massachusetts . The team will run in the pack running .
 Bobcat coach Mike Gregus is back with a full bill of health . Coach Gregus says he is happy to have Mike back for the first time since his injury .
 As a matter of understanding to the fan, the lowest score wins a cross country meet . The lowest score won't be allowed to be scored at a cross-country meet, the fan says .
 The 'Cats travel to Worcester, Mass., Saturday where they will face the Worcester Tech Engineers . The runner receives the number of points .
 Engineers sport a 1-1 record, winning the opener 21-0 over Central Connecticut State and losing last Saturday to Middlebury 27-0 . The Engineers are now 1-0 in two games .
 Twelve lettermen give Coach Robert W Pritchard little to cheer about as his search for a signal caller has not found much success .
 Each year the Worcester team comes up with a strong line and this year it was no exception . The Worcester team has a strong team of players .
 Telstar is the world's first private enterprise communications satellite . And that it reached the U.S. via Telstar, the first privately owned satellite communications satellite.
 Bell System's Telstar has relayed electronic signals of many types -television broadcasts, telephone calls, news photographs, and others . But there's one Telstar reflection you might have missed: "Telstar"
 It is the reflection of Telstar's success that glowed brightly on the faces of all who shared in the project . It is a reflection of the success of the Telstar project that reflected on the face of the project's success .
 Telstar is bringing its benefits down out of the clouds to your living room . Their engineering, administrative and operations skills created Telstar . Telstar will be bringing Telstar's benefits to your home .
 Bell System makes your phone service still better, more economical, and more useful . Bell System people are talented and dedicated to making the best phone service .
 Ron Gemma, who played regular right half back last season, and Mike Littizzio, a reserve who saw some action last season . Only two offensive backs have returned, Ron Gemmma and Mike Littzzio, who was a reserve last year .
 Denny Gallant will be the likely starter at one halfback slot, as he played strictly defense last year . Denny played defense last season and does have some game experience . Another leterman, Denny . Gallant, will likely start at halfback .
 Backfield coach Charles McNulty has experimented in the first two games to fill the two remaining positions . McNulty: "Backfield coach has experimented with experimenting in the past two games"
 Gemma Gemma, Littizzio and Gallant are all former trackmen . Tech's backfield, although inexperienced, boasts speed . Tech Tech's backroom boasts speed as Gemma and Littzzio are all ex-trackmen .
 Gemma Gemma romped for two touchdowns in the Engineer's tilt with Central Connecticut . Gemma also scored two touchdowns .
 The Engineers are blessed with two fine ends, and if Coach McNulty can find a quarterback that can throw to them, Tech opponents will be in for a long afternoon . The Engineers will be looking to find their quarterback to throw to their opponents .
 Both these boys are exceptional pass receivers and are tough on defense . The receiver duo will be tough to defend for the next two weeks .
 Senior letterman Howie Vandersea led the Bobcats to an upset win over a highly rated Northeastern squad . Vandersea was named the Bobcat of the Week for his performance .
 Sportswriters again named Red as the lineman of the game . Red will again be named the first team E.C.A. team of the week and possibly to the AllEast team .
 Senior members of the Garnet squad, presented Howie with the game ball . For his efforts Howie was presented with the match ball .
 The lowly frosh accepted their fate with differing amounts of the proverbial grain of salt . They accepted the fate with varying amounts of salt.
 Freshmen carried on the dignified proceedings in the best of spirits . Ribald speeches and mockery, howI ever, soon dispelled all ideas of ill nature .
 The affair began in the early hours of the morning when the first costumed and somewhat reluctant frosh men appeared . It was the first time the students had been invited to the party .
 Tinkerbelles, cowboys, knights, strippers, street gangs, and street gangs from the 01* South all flew, sallied forth, rode, or slunk as inconspicuously out of their dorms .
 After the frosh had seen the other hapless men of '66 in equally unpretentious garb, their apprehension evaporated . '66' was the first time the men had seen each other in their own unpretending garb .
 Then the female set came forth in their curiously detailed and colorful apparel . The female set also wore colorful clothing .
 Milliken ""Alices"", Whit ""Rabbits"", Page ""Hiawathas"", and Wilson Cyranos under the pseudonym of ""Pinocchios"" delivered orations from Hathorn's time-honored steps .
 Great trains of haze-dazed students of dubious origin wound their way about the campus, now hopping, now Conga-ing, now twisting to the heights of Mount David .
 Students sampling and rating the girls' kisses, asking their measurements, and making polls of other pertinent data . Students also asked their measurements and made polls .
 Barrie certainly would have blenched had he seen the J B. versions of Tinkerbell floating about . Perhaps Coleridge might have been a bit disappointed in the representation of one of his famous figures .
 Haze Day was sometimes foolish, often rioting, but here memories are formed and past ones renewed . Haze day was often foolish and often riotous, yet here memories were formed .
 Next year's activities are being plotted by a vengeful freshman class . Certainly next year's events will be plotted by the freshman class, it's said .
 Last Friday night marked the transition of freshman girls from bibbed babies to young women . I Girls Perform in Debibbing Skits at Bates .
 At the traditional ceremony held in the Women's Gymnasium, the freshman girls, although tired from the various activities of Haze Day, summoned energy enough to throw their bibs joyfully into the air . Andrea Buck and Jan Soltis welcomed the audience and in .
 Other skits were ""Bunny Bugs Me"" by Hacker, ""The Hunt by the Mitchell House Flintstones"" by Mitchell, ""Fight for a Tail,"" by Page III, ""Bambi's Blooper"" by Chase, ""I Can Get It for You Cheap
 Hinman, retired to consider the choice of the winners, and Emily Blowen led group singing . Hinman's retirement came to an end .
 Narrator of this skit was a shy litttegirl named Hermione, who stole everyone's heart .
 Mitchell House received second prize, while Page I and II and Frye House tied for third place . Mitchell House was awarded the top prize .
 Betty Ann Little, president of Stu-G, then spoke to the freshmen, welcoming them to the ""Batesy Family,"" and leading the traditional Alma Mater . Yoko Hirasawa, accompanied by Betty Ann, also spoke to them .
 The mystery of debibbing night was not yet over, for at ten o'clock the freshmen returned to their dorms, ready to view the ""ravages"" inflicted on their rooms by the sophomores .
 Homecoming Activities Start This Friday night . Football rally, football game, traditional dance highlight Back-To-Bates weekend for 1962 .
 The schedule of activities begins Friday night and will last until Sunday afternoon . The schedule for activities is below .
 Dean Lindholm will lead a discussion on what to expect from college and how admissions program selects students . The Counseling Conference will be held on Saturday morning .
 Back-To-Bates Football Rally, Alumni Gymnasium . Open House, Chase Hall, Time to dance, Refreshments will be served Saturday .
 Admissions Counseling Conference, Skelton Lounge in Chase Hall October 20 . Reunion Classes Organization Meeting — New Little Theater . Tour of Carnegie Science Building and New Addition . Bates vs. Bates at Carnegie Science building October 20 at 8pm .
 Middlebury University Alumni Coffee Hour, Women's Athletic Association 8:30 — Back-To-Bates Dance, Alumni Gymnasium, Music provided by Lloyd Rafnell and his orchestra Sunday . Middlebury, Garcelon Field 4:00 — Alumni coffee Hour,
 The editorial board of the GARNET is now accepting material for the Winter edition of your campus literary magazine . The editorial team is accepting material from your campus magazine .
 Interesting scientific essays and imaginative sketches will be considered for publication as well as imaginative sketches .
 Student Senate Constitution To Undergo Further Consideration . Constitution of the Men's and Women's Proctor Councils also on its long trek toward implementation .
 At that time, the arduous task of discussion, debate, and decision was just beginning . At the time, discussion and debate was still being debated .
 This year the discussions continue to continue, as members of Stu-C, Stus-G, and representatives of the administration meet to iron out details of the Constitution .
 When this stage is completed, the plan will be sent to the Extra Curricular Activities Committee for appraisal . The plan will then be submitted for appraisal by the committee .
 This group can submit the Constitution to the faculty either with or without approval . The Constitution can be submitted by the faculty with or with approval . It can then submit it to the university's faculty .
 If faculty, after reviewing the proposed Constitution, it will be presented to the student body for ratification . If the faculty considers it workable, the proposal will be reviewed by the faculty .
 Those concerned generally agreed to the principle of better government inherent in the Student Senate .
 At 8:15 in the Lewiston High School Auditorium, the year's first performance of the Concert and Lecture Series will begin . The Concert will be held in the Auditorium at 8:30 .
 The Ballet consists of Roberto Ximenez, Manolo Vargas, Manol Vargas and a company of dancers . It is the first ballet ballet in the history of the Ballet .
 The two leaders, Ximenez and Vargas, are Latin Americans; but they have both become expert in the Spanish dance art form . The two are both experts in Spanish dance .
 Spanish dance is a remarkably controlled art, making the greatest demands on its performers . The Spanish dance makes the most demands on performers, including dancers .
 This group is especially known for its unusual arrangements and productions .
 Bates students are reminded that admission is via their I.D. cards at the Auditorium's right entrance . Bates students can be found at their Auditorium entrance . Admission is free at Bates College of Technology .
 Attendance is urged both for those students who have borrowed in previous years and those who may wish to borrow or obtain information for the first time in the current academic year . Attendance should be encouraged for those who have borrowed in previous year .
 Doctor Sidney Jackman pontificated on the ""amateurism and eccentricity" of British education . Jackman Comments On His Year Of Study Abroad .
 Jackman spent a year at Clair College, Cambridge, writing and mixing with the English students . Jackman: English students had a great social life with the faculty .
 Jackman said that a large number of them came from private institutions, but were infused with spirit and not burdened down by tradition . Jackman: "A large part of the private institutions came from ... private institutions"
 English students are not required to attend lectures which tend to be highly specialized . English students do not attend lectures that are highly specialized. English students will not need to attend such lectures .
 Instead they wear long black gowns, presumably to hide their unshapen bodies . Instead, they wear short, revealing gowns .
 Jackman said that the library has found no better way to arrange its books than according to size and date of acquisition . Jackman: Library has found a new way of arranging its books .
 He stated that library hours were worse than Coram's and that undergraduate students were not allowed to remove books from the library proper without permission . And he said that students were also banned from removing books from library proper .
 Jackman closed his highly imaginative talk by waving goodbye, his traditional closing for an informal lecture .
 Psychology Club Hears Talk On Causes, Treatment Of Alcoholism . October 9, 1962 the Psychology Club had the first meeting of what should be an interesting year of programs .
 Mr Rowland Hastings of the Alcohol Counseling Service in Lewiston was the guest speaker . Mr Hastings was a guest speaker at the event .
 Mr Hastings, who graduated from Bowdoin and did study in the treating of alcoholics at Yale, discussed alcoholics and alcoholism in the community . Mr Hastings is a former Yale professor who studied alcoholics .
 Mr Hastings stressed alcoholism is a disease or behavior disorder that causes increasing problems in all areas of the alcoholic's life .
 There are ""alcoholics"" on the street who have never taken a drink, according to Mr Hastings .
 The causes are to be found in the psychological structurings' of the potential alcoholic . The psychological structures' of a potential alcoholic are to blame .
 Persons between 17 and 23 years of age are the most susceptible to this disease . Persons between the ages of 16 and 23 are most susceptible .
 There are five counselling centers in Maine with one located in Lewiston . One of the centers is in Maine .
 The alcoholic's spouse and family must cooperate with his treatment as well as often be treated themselves . In order for treatment of alcoholics to be successful, the alcoholic's family must also cooperate with treatment .
 Alcoholics Anonymous also runs groups for nonalcoholic spouses and for teenage children of alcoholics . Alcoholic groups also run groups for spouses and teenage children .
 A A. A. has been successful in 50% of its cases as compared to 2% rate of success by psychiatrists . Psychiatrists have a success rate of 2% success rate for A.A. A .
 Mr Hastings told the club that he felt himself particularly qualified to discuss alcoholism because he was himself a former alcoholic .
 Following the talk, as at all meetings, a question and answer period was held . The talk was followed by a question-and-answer session .
 Psychology club believes it has an interesting and varied program this year . The psychology club hopes to have an interesting program this season .
 Community Concert tickets must be obtained for these outof-town concerts . Community Concerts are available at the request of the public .
 These will be available during daytime hours from Miss Foster in the Library . Miss Foster will also be available in the library during the day .
 Debate Training For High Schools Set For Oct. 31 . Sneakers — Hood's Rubbers . S & H GREEN STAMPS SHOE REPAIRING WHILE YOU WAIT at JEAN'S MODERN SHOE .
 Portsmouth High School will host a debate clinic for high schools enrolled in the Bates Interscholastic Debating League . Saturday, October 27th will be a discussion contest and debate clinic .
 There will be panel discussions on what the foreign trade policy of the U.S. should be . Panel discussions will be led by Morris Lelyveld '64, Norman Gillespie, Robert Ahern, Keith Bowdoin '64 .
 Professor Quimby will speak on the topic, ""How to Debate,"" and this shall be followed by an exhibition debate . The exhibition debate will also be held on the same day .
 Morris Lelyveld and Norman Gillespie will assert the affirmative, while Robert Ahern and Thomas Hall will take the negative . Morris Leleyveld, Norman Gillespie and Norman . Gillespie will be on the front line for the Irish Parliament .
 Democracy contains within itself the power of selfdefeat, says David Cameron . Political power, wherever it reposes, is to be exercised subject to limitations, he says .
 Any constitution, in order to embody this principle, must meet three definite requirements . Any constitution must meet these three requirements, including a constitution .
 It must define the members of government, regulate the relationships of men to each other, and determine the mode in which men will exercise sovereign power . It must also define the relationship between men and women, and the mode of government .
 See the Guidance and Placement Office for a bulletin t>f information and an application blank . Application blank is blank .
 THE FEDERAL SERVICE ENTRANCE EXAMINATION will be offered on November 17, January 12, February 9, Feb 9, March 16, April 20, and May 11 . The Federal Service Enrollment Examination will be held on Nov. 17, Jan.
 The Management Intern portion will be given in November, January, and February only . Management Interns will be available in November and January .
 Guidance and Placement Office for full information and application . Inquire at the Guidance . and Placements Office for more information .
 The American National Red Cross needs qualified personnel to serve at military installations and in military hospitals, both in this country and overseas . The American Red Cross is seeking qualified personnel .
 Out-of-town guests must wait in the foyers until local ticket holders have been seated . Qualifications for spestood that out-of.-town guests have to wait for local tickets to be seated .
 "Lawless Breed" Rock Hudson cals will be sent on request . Rock Hudson will be on display in New York .
 Elizabethtown College, Pennsylvania will select a limited number of applicants for teaching posts in secondary schools of Ghana and Nigeria . The program is based in Pennsylvania .
 Guidance and Placement Office has further information and application blanks . Application blanks are available for further information .
 NEW YORK DEPARTMENT of CIVIL SERVICE, represented by Charles G Wolz, will set up a stand in Chase Hall on October 16 .
 As long as it effectively limits the power of government, it may be a constitution . It recognizes the Princple "not under man, but under God and the Law,"" as long it recognizes the princple .
 Constitutionalism provides a legal limit to arbitrary power, and, at the same time, permits a complete response of the government to the governed . This is the duty of Constitutionalism, writes David Frum .
 Judicial Review serves as a link between Democracy and Constitutionalism . The principal of Judicial Review is to be seen as part of the Constitution . Judicial Review has been a model of American democracy .
 The Court, through its interpretations of the constitution, can judge whether or not governmental action is within the limits imposed upon it by the constitution . The Court's interpretation of the Constitution is critical of government action .
 By adapting its interpretations to meet the needs of a constantly changing government and people, the Court ensures the growth and development of the democracy . The Court will continue to adapt to meet changing needs of the government .
 What remains to be done is to carefully examine the wording of the Constitution, to change and strengthen it where needed, to build a stable, workable, and sure foundation for the future .
 Committee on Graduate Study was established in 1959 to encourage more Bates students to undertake graduate study in applied as well as academic areas . Committee was established to advise the Dean of the Faculty concerning students to be endorsed by the college for non-departmental grants .
 The Committee's advisory function has been carried out by sifting academic, extracurricular, and other qualifications of students wishing to be endorsed by the college for the various competitive grants .
 Each candidate's objective and plans for attainment constitute an important influence on the Committee's judgments . This aspect has considerable weight in the decisions of the selection committees of the various foundations .
 The Committee's second function is to encourage more students to enter graduate study . Results come more gradually, but results come more slowly .
 Forty-seven percent of the men in the Class of 1961 actually did graduate work as against 43% in the . Class of 1959 . The Class of 1960s was the most successful class of men in history .
 The library has also established a separate collection of relevant books . ""A Guide to Graduate Study"" by Ness and ""Fellowships in the Arts and Sciences,"" are most valuable to a prospective student .
 The Committee's effort to make known available financial assistance is an effort to help the American Gem Society raise funds .
 Lewision ance was an important step but of interest only to those students who had already decided to enter graduate school and were in need of financial help . Students were able to apply for financial assistance to help pay for their education .
 In order to encourage more students to undertake graduate work the Committee has been pointing out the importance of this not only to the individual but to society due to the greater development of talents in whatever the chosen field might be .
 This has been promoted through assembly talks, Phi Beta Kappa sponsored meetings and the effort of individual faculty members . This is the result of the efforts of faculty members and students .
 Bates graduates may be in strong competitive positions within their respective fields . Graduates need to obtain specialized or technical training which generally entails graduate study for advanced degrees . Bates graduates are required to obtain advanced or specialized training .
 This is true not only for academic careers but in applied areas where specialization and tech nology are advancing so rapidly . This is especially true for applied areas such as technology and technology nology .
 Guidance and Placement Office is primarily in position to help students who do not plan graduate study and are seeking employment in business or secondary school .
 More than half of our seniors now hope to go on to some area of graduate study requiring detailed and personalized advice from some faculty member .
 A knowledge of individual students and the variety of experience required for sound advice is beyond the resources of any small committee or administrative group . A knowledge is beyond a small committee and administrative group can't afford to rely on small groups .
 Committee is providing each department with data concerning the undergraduate record plus what is known about the career plans of each of its senior majors . Committee will also provide data about career plans .
 There seems to be some hesitancy to become committed to becoming committed, as though a change in circumstances or new evidence would not permit a sensible change in plans .
 An early act should be to introduce the idea of graduate study to one's family . Discussing its purposes and importance with those whose encouragement will help even if financial support is unavailable .
 Another positive step is to read materials available in the library such as ""A Guide to Graduate Study"" by Ness . Another positive way to help students is to take advantage of the experience .
 Then seek advice from whatever faculty member one would enjoy discussing the matter with . Then ask for advice from whoever you want to discuss it with .
 If a faculty member feels unable to advise, he will undoubtedly send a student to someone else he believes is able to suggest appropriate undergraduate courses to take and graduate schools to apply to .
 Students sometimes put the cart before the horse by trying to settle the matter of financial support first . Students sometimes, and quite understandably, put the . cart before . the horse first .
 No one is interested in supporting a prospective graduate student lacking a clear objective and a reasonably well thought out plan concerning how he expects to attain his objective . But no one wants to support a student who lacks clear objective, a well thought-out plan .
 Those interested in graduate study in regular academic discipline in pursuit of either a master's or doctor's degree should seek advice from faculty members of the appropriate undergraduate department .
 Students interested in graduate study in non-academic areas should seek advice from faculty members who are interested, informed, or will help secure the kind of advice needed .
 Any notices received by the college concerning available grants or financial aid in applied fields will be sent to the appropriate adviser to be field for student use . The college will also provide information on available grants and financial aid .
 The Arts, Architecture, Decoration, etc. Miss Foster is Miss Foster . Lawrance Library Science Miss Foster was Miss Foster. The Arts and Architecture of the Arts and Decoration of the Year .
 Social Work Guidance and Placement Education (including MAT and similar programs) Guidance & Placement Foreign Study (other than in the languages Prof. Walsh) Mr Walsh .
 Seniors seeking employment following graduation should register with the Guidance and Placement Office for either business or teaching positions as soon as possible . Jackman Seniors should register for either a business or a teaching position .
 Those who are still undecided about a career might find it helpful to discuss the problem with Prof. John Defterios of the University of Cambridge .
 The Guidance and Placement Office in Chase Hall has an appointment with Mr. Wiliams by making an appointment .
 Students who are late in registering or deciding what they would like to do following graduation frequently miss good employment opportunities . Students should register or decide what they want to do after graduation .
 Y'S Barber Shop is Maine's only drive-in pharmacy . The best way to learn is to teach is to learn .
 By teaching English to Indian boys in a small district school in the Sierras De Oaxaca, my Spanish improved one hundred fold. By teaching  boys in the small school, I was able to learn English from Indian boys .
 Language was only a small segment of my education at Guelatao . But the language I learned in those two weeks was only one of many things I learned about .
 This small village was the birth place of Benito Juarez, the great president of Mexico . Juarez was born in a small village in Mexico's capital, Mexico .
 A full blooded Indian, born in poverty and obscurity, he led his country through one of its most trying periods . He was born into poverty and poverty and was born in obscurity . He led the country through a difficult period in the 1930s .
 A contemporary of Lincoln, he was often compared with the American president . He was a contemporary of Abraham Lincoln, often compared to him .
 I had come to Guelatao to learn about this man, but it was my interest in the people of this village which held me there. I had been there to study this man's work, but I was interested in his work .
 The Indian boys who live at this school are taught the fourth, fifth, and sixth academic grades and a craft trade . The boys are also taught the 4th, 5th, and 6th academic grades .
 The boys have to scrape out three years of schooling during their young lives spent working in their fathers' fields .
 Mexican students are permitted to enter a university after sixth year . After the sixth year, they are allowed to study in Mexico's universities .
 There is only one in about three hundred who ever gets that chance. However, there is only about one in three hundred of those who ever get that chance .
 Most of the rural Indians of Mexico are reared to a system which keeps them in the position of poor laborers and therefore, the lower strata of society . The system keeps them from being poor laborers .
 Many Mexicans profess that it is not the system and that the Indians are stupid . Juarez was a freakish exception. Many Mexicans say Juarez is an exception to the system .
 Zopotecs of Guelatao are intelligent and eager to learn, says counselor . "I have acted as counselor for adolescent boys for the last five years and I had never found a group as intelligent," he says .
 They learned and retained more English in two weeks than I did Spanish . They learned more English than they did Spanish. They were able to retain more English .
 Many were able to carry on ungrammatical and simple conversations with me before I left that village . "Many of the people in the village had never been able to talk to me," he said .
 There are several obstacles in the way of these intelligent and interested boys learning English, but the most pressing is the lack of text books . The most pressing problem is that there are no text books to teach English .
 To have studied another language is one step toward becoming another Juarez, Juarez . To study another language, it's one step to become a citizen of Juarez. It's a step toward the university.
 You will do a great service to Mexico, to our country, and especially to our fellow students in Mexico by giving them your old Spanish texts and dictionaries . Give them to your fellow students, especially to fellow students .
 WRJR is the only major campus organization which is not supported by the student activity fee . The "HOBB" is a service provided by A^L TYPES FOUR BATES STUDENT .
 WRJR must go out each year and solicit funds to keep operating . Whereas other organizations can rely on a definite income, WRJR can't rely on that income . WRJR has to solicit funds each year to keep running .
 WRJR staff improved equipment and expanded its service . WRJR is proud of its hard work and mature leadership .
 Most students do not listen to WRJR at any one time, but at some time or another most students do listen . Undoubtedly the majority of the students do .
 Consider seriously the importance of a campus radio station operated by students . Consider seriously, consider seriously, for students .
 The faculty has now set the stage for an increased graduate study program . The studentry now must act .
 Professor Williams and other faculty members who prepared the graduate study report should be praised for the thoroughness of their efforts .
 The students must themselves initiate action which will take them upon this path . The students, however, must themselves start taking action .
 There are a greater number of students who are qualified to do graduate study in applied areas as well . Graduate students often think of graduate study as preparation for advanced college teaching or research .
 It is usually this student who either fails to seriously consider further study or procrastinates until late in the spring term .
 Graduate study in applied areas is just as significant as that in the academic world . Graduate study is often more important than in academic studies . Graduates should be able to apply their skills to their degree degree degree .
 There is no reason why at least 65% of the present senior class should not go on to graduate study, and this includes women . This includes women in the UK's highest graduating class .
 It is not too early for juniors to consider their future . It's not too late for seniors to begin their careers . Seniors should start thinking about their future in the summer .
 Once again our friendly, coeducational college welcomes ' its freshmen . Hazing .
 The first week-end of the upperclassmen were back, freshman girls returned from an outing to find their rooms in cleverly arranged disorder . Freshmen girls returned after an outing with their rooms found their rooms neatly arranged .
 Blindfolded students enjoined to silence become better acquainted . The activities ""to promote dorm spirit and help in getting acquainted"" had we wonder .
 The issue involves a more significant aspect than the achievements of hazing . The issue is more significant than hazing, it is hazing for a young person, says coach .
 Even if hazing freshmen can make them feel part of the college, hazing remains an unnecessary, embarassing and dangerous affair . Even though hazing can make freshmen feel proud to be Bates men and women, it's still an unnecessary and embarassous affair .
 Being upperclassmen provides ability to discern what is best for all freshmen . Supposedly, becoming an upperclassman provides ability for freshmen to discern best for them . The University of California students say it's a mistake .
 She must leave the library before books on the reserve shelf are given out; she returns to her dorm in time for noisy hours . She returns to the dorm in her room to spend time with her friends .
 Little studying can be accomplished by eleven; little sleep is allowed until after twelve . Little sleep can be achieved until after after after twelve.
 Others in the dorm who wish to study or sleep must wait until after the haze ""parties"" to do S ° .
 The studentry becomes increasingly aware of the value of learning and eager in its pursuit .
 Hazing discourages thoughts of the academic thrill; it disrupts all classes studying in the dorms . On Haze Day it penetrates the library, disrupting classes in dorms and the library .
 Between the levels of academic capability and social civilization stretches a great distance . The levels of social civilization and academic capability can be seen in the U.S. society .
 Welcoming new-comers through a series of essentially barbaric rites and customs admits the failure of our education . Welcoming newcomers to the UK into a 'barbaric' culture admits failure of education .
 Some freshman girls had a sugar solution poured over their heads; others were annointed with detergent . Others had their heads annointed by detergent or sugar solution .
 Surely college students are sufficiently mature to extend hospitality in an adult manner? College students should extend hospitality to adults in a mature manner .
 Organized group activities such as outings, work trips and open houses can achieve what hazing claims to, without falling to its level or incurring its risks . Organized groups can achieve hazing without falling into its level .
 Freshmen are introduced to the college community by introducing them to each other . Include a freshman in conversation during a meal, greeting him on campus, inviting him along for study break .
 Countenancing hazing marks a regression to an immature stage in human development, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says hazing is a sign of an immature phase of development .
 Sue Smith, NSA Coordinator, writes to James Meredith, Jr. Student Body Presidents .
 We urge students to write to James Meredith in expression of their sympathy and support . Bates College Lewiston, Maine, students should write to Meredith .
 When one is daily risking his very life for the cause of equal rights in education, words of en couragement from fellow students should be of great moral encouragement, says student .
 Rumor has it that the Outing Club is looking for people who enjoy a view from the top of any of nine different mountains in Maine and New Hampshire .
 The Hikes and Trips directorship of the Outing Club is in charge of scheduling and supervising mountain climbs, ski trips, and canoe trips for the college . The club also supervises mountain climbs and ski trips .
 Washington in New Hampshire is the first campus-wide activity sponsored by OC in the fall . OC is sponsoring the fall activities at Washington University in N.H.
 This is followed by two more autumn climbs to such mountains as Tumbledown, Avery, Saddleback, Baldpate, Carter Dome, Baldface, and Old Speck .
 These are rotated on a four year basis, so within the usual period of college residence, it is possible to climb all eight mountains . The eight mountains are located in the U.S. National Park in Colorado .
 In the spring, the final mountain climb of the year is once again held on Mt. Olympus . The final climb of 2014 will be held on the mountain in the spring .
 The ascent is made only to Tuckerman Ravine because of the severe weather conditions encountered at higher altitudes . The climb is only made to the top of the mountain because of weather conditions .
 A recently opened ski development in Auburn has made it possible to ski during the week at Lost Valley . Lost Valley is a popular destination for skiing in the winter .
 The Outing Club owns six fiber glass canoes which are stored at Cobboscontee Stream, about 20 miles from Lewiston, Maine .
 Canoe trips are held in the spring and fall and can be run by any member of the student body . Students can run canoe trips in the fall and spring .
 Anyone interested should contact either George Hunter or Judith Bradshaw about scheduling a trip . Anyone interested can contact either Hunter or Bradshaw for details .
 Washington climb, which is closed to freshmen, is opened to the entire campus . Washington climb is a climb that is only open to freshmen at the university .
 This is a wonderful thing to say, and a great undertaking on the part of all educational insti tutions . This is not the first time I've heard from such a group of people, it has been said .
 Bates' Fall Honors Day program questioned the value of the program . Bates' comments come in light of the controversy surrounding the program's use of social media .
 It would seem that pursuit of an education should be motivated by a sincere de sire on the part of the student to learn .
 Perhaps the greatest thing Bates (or for that matter, any college) has to offer, is the excitement of learning how to learn . How to use the library, how to talk to professors, and how to read and understand what you have read .
 The Fall Honors program was a pointed example of the stress Bates puts on false stimulation . If students were stimulated by this program, we were stimulated for the wrong reasons .
 We are not approaching education with the correct attitude if we do so with awards, grades, and cuts as our goal . We should not approach education with an attitude that awards and grades are not our goal, it's our attitude . We need to focus on education, not awards and cuts
 Many students agree that at Bates too much pressure is exert ed to get cuts, dean's list, and awards . Many students say at Bates students are pressured to be on top of the Dean of Lists .
 With these as goals as goals, it is too easy to lose a great deal of what a course offers by memorization and writing just what the professor wants .
 The only way to stimulate students is by offering rich courses, good professors, good libraries, and intelligent fellow students, says John Defterios . "The only way of stimulating students is to offer rich courses," he says .
 It may take the student a long time to appreciate and learn to use what a college offers, but ultimately this, and his own desire will be the only stimulation of value .
 The editorial is narrow-minded and filled with half-truths in an endeavor to swing the reader to its specific viewpoint . The editorial has been filled in with half truths and half-stories, the editorial says .
 We are positive that the U.S. intervention in Cuba is at the very least as justified as those of the Soviets in theirs . We hope that the United States' intervention is justified as was the Soviets' in theirs. We hope to see that the Cuban government is in the right
 "We must preserve our image on the international scene, so we look for justification," says President Obama . "We need to look at justification. But we need to protect our image," he says .
 The editorial typifies the type of material we hear all too frequently from Washington, says CNN's John Sutter . We hear constant delay and discussion over relatively insignificant, underlying phases of the issue .
 Some sort of eventual compromise with the Soviet Union would probably be the end result . "Some of the eventual compromise" would be the result, he says .
 Hitler took country after country when the European Powers had no firm foreign policy . Hitler took countries after country . When European powers had no clear foreign policy.
 Neville Chamberlain virtually gave away Czechoslovakia to the Nazis . Neville Chamberlain found that out at Munich when he virtually gave . Chamberlain found it out by giving away Czechs to Nazis .
 As Hitler could not be stopped except with strong national policy, neither can the tide of International Communism . Neither can be stopped by strong national policies, says David Cameron . Cameron: 'Hitler could not stop except with national policy'
 Today marks the opening of the annual WRJR-FM fund drive . Jon D Olsen '64 i si 9 Bates STUDENT, OCTOBER 17, 1962 FIVE .
 Each year the campus radio station finds it necessary to conduct such a drive in order to maintain the fine broadcasting quality of the past .
 WRJR does not receive support from the Student Activities Fee . It is almost totally dependent on student contributions . We ask you to dig deep during* the next ten days and support your Bates College radio station .
 Your contributions will spell the future success of WRJR . If funds are sufficient, WRJR will allow such extras as away coverage of basketball games .
 Last week saw the installation of this year's library display, depicting WRJR past and present . The WRJR library display was installed last week .
 Other big events in lower Pettigrew include a modernized control room, many new record albums, and much better news coverage .
 A steak dinner will be given to everyone in the dorm winning the WRJR Fund Drive competition . The competition is based on a competition between WRJR and WRJR .
 This is the ONLY way your station can raise the funds necessary to operate for the coming year . The only way to raise money is to donate to your local radio station .
 Representatives will contact you in the dormitories and in the Rand and Commons dinner lines . Representatives will be in contact with you in dorms, dinner lines and dorms . Reps will also be in the Senate and the House of Representatives .
 Dorm -scores are on a percentage basis, so the smallest dorm has an equal chance with the largest . Dorm scores are based on the size of the dorm .
 WRJR polled other college radio stations of comparable size to WRJR . None had operating budget of less than $1,500 per year . WRJR found that none of the stations had operating budgets less than that .
 "There are men who have arrived at different kinds of knowledge," says John Sutter . "We find that there are men in tins process," he says . Sutter: "There is no easy way to explain the difference in knowledge"
 Science and the humanities are science and humanities . For convenience, this difference has been set under two headings, Science and Humanities .
 This statement tends to give one the impression that existentialism is an organized school of thought that is peculiar to the 20th century, and that the term ""existentialism"" is a neat category with clearcut boundaries . This statement is thought to be an attempt to make it seem that
 Only one philosopher, JeanPaul Sartre, has openly called himself an ""existentialist" He then proceeds to explain what he means by the term by explaining what it means by it .
 William Barrett's study, Irrational Man, serves as an excellent introduction into the sources, influence, and significance of present-day existential writings . However, there is more to existential philosophy than Sartre .
 Barrett begins his book by naming writers and philosophers who are either directly or indirectly associated with existential thinking . Barrett also names philosophers and writers who are related to each other . Barrett's book is published by Simon Tisdall at the University of Oxford, Oxford University, London .
 One of the introductory chapters, ""The Testimony of Modern Art,"" is particularly interesting because of its examination of the nature and basis of modern painting and sculpture .
 Kierkegaard, Neitzsche, Heidegger, and Sartre are four major philosophers associated with existentialism . Barrett traces back the sources of existentialism in the Western tradition . Barrett discusses their thought at length .
 Barrett's analysis is nonetheless a valuable introduction for those who are unfamiliar with the respective philosophies, and is also a stimulating study for those already have a background of reading . Although it goes without saying that any talk about a philosopher is hardly a substitute for his actual writings .
 Irrational Man is a lucidly written book that is rich with ideas and insights . It is also a lucid and insightful guide to the world's most complex ideas .
 Any college student should find reading it well worthwhile and rewarding . We are only using different vocabularies that fundamentally and in the last analysis mean the same thing. We are not thought differently in any important sense .
 Of course, we do realize that there is a breach between these two headings, science and the humanities . Science and humanities are science and humanities, the author says .
 At odd moments these two groups hesitate and stare at each other across a chasm . The two groups stare across the chasm at odd moments . At odd times, these groups hesitate to speak .
 Thinking the same thoughts, they shrug and turn away, for they can't understand each other . They shrug and say, 'I don't know what I think'
 We all realize that such a chasm can't be carried too far, for they have many, many things in common . We're not alone, but it's a good thing to say: 'I'm not sure what's going on here'
 The man of culture extends to each side the gritty hand of common goods . Thus we can see riding down the middle of the chasm amidst tremendous dust .
 Let us not forget that even though these three are holding hands that they are still separate from each other . Even though they're holding hands together, they're still separate .
 From a careful analysis of this one discovers that science and the humanities are doing different things . Science and humanities do different things differently, says the author of the book .
 It would be folly to say that the scientists weren't doing science and the humanists, humanities, humanities . "It's not a matter of whether science and humanists are doing science," she says .
 This distinction leads to a consideration of the differences between the two in general . This distinction is based on the fact that the two are different .
 It is very difficult to tell whether a person is a scientist or a humanist by the clothes he wears . It is well established that today it is . difficult to . tell whether someone is a . scientist or an artist by the clothing they wear .
 Generally speaking, they are birds of a feather who haven't been able to flock together . They're birds of the feather who have been unable to flock .
 I think we can all agree that the real issue here is not what separates these two groups but what is the thing that joins them together . The real issue is what separates the two groups, not what makes them different, it's what they have together .
 The two groups are not threatening each other in the west but are together facing a greater and a graver threat . They face each other's greater threat than they did in the past .
 National Hat Week seems to have no significance to the Bates students . The Bates students seem to be oblivious to the event .
 RJR gives excellent coverage to away basketball games, events which studies and class schedules necessite missing in many instances . Each year RJR provides excellent coverage of away games .
 They tape the games and rush them back to the campus to be played late in the evening of the game . The games are taped and then rushed back to campus for the evening .
 This makes it convenient for fans who can get their studying done earlier in the night . Though this is done by necessity, it makes it easier for fans to get their studies done .
 Chuck Lasher is the number one golfer on the Garnet squad . Lasher had a summer of golfing success with the British team .
 Chucking Charlie came in second in the District Four championships in his homestate Connecticut .
 The course was Charlie's home course, on which earlier in the summer he had fired a blazing 65 to set a course record . Charlie had earlier shot a 65 on his home course in which he had set a record .
 It's old, it's not about Bates nor written by a Bates student, but on the other hand it is not left-wing . The Nation is not reprinted from The Nation. It is not about the Bates school, but it is about the school .
 He dreamt the night before the fight that he would knock Doyle out and that Doyle would die in the ring . He said he dreamt about the fight night before he fought .
 Doyle, who was carried out of the ring, died in a hospital some hours later . Doyle was carried away from the ring but died hours later in hospital . Doyle died in hospital hours after the fight .
 Eddie Arcaro has retired, but Willie Shoemaker and Bill Hartack are the best jockeys in the business . Shoemaker, Hartack have been the top jockey in the sport for years .
 Willie is easy-going, affable, hard to get quotes from, reasonably uncomplicated . Willie is known for his hard-going attitude . He says he is "comfortable" with his life .
 Bill Hartack is hardnosed, a loner, very quotable and very complicated . Hartack: "I'm not afraid to admit that I'm a hard-nosed loner"
 Hartack speaks out about as frankly as any athlete has ever spoken out in public . In the June issue of Sport Magazine, Hartack talks about his experiences in the past .
 Leo Durocher in Florida talking to a writer about a new $150,000 house he is building in the canyons outside of Los Angeles . Frank Sinatra's home is near the can canyon where he built the house .
 Durocher described the house, as only Leo can, in glowing superlatives, and the writer whistled appreciatively . The writer whistles appreciatively.
 Worcester Tech came from behind to whip the Engineers, 20-7 Saturday afternoon before 3,000 spectators at Alumni Field in Worcester . Tearing Worcester Tech's line to shreds in the second half, the Bobcats came out of behind to win .
 The three tallies for the Saugus frosh gave him a four game total of 42 points and first place among New England scorers . The three games gave him the top scorers in New England .
 It was the third victory in a row for Carr & Co. and the Hatchmen's third win in four games this season . The Hatchmen have now won their last four games in all competitions .
 Worcester scored in the first half when quarterback Mike Oliver galloped 27 yards to paydirt . With 12 seconds left in the half, Oliver elected to run .
 Guard Bill Zinno kicked the extra point to give Tech a 7-0 lead at halftime . Tech is the defending champions of the U.S. state .
 Highlighting the drive to the 10 was a fake kick run around end by Paul Planchon on a fourth and one situation . Highlighted the drive was the fake kick kick run by Paul Planchon on a fourth and one situation.
 Planchon galloped 20 yards to the 16 aided by a crushing block by Howie Vandersea . Vandersea cleared two Engineer defenders out of the path of PlanchON's path .
 Garnet defense held Worcester team for no gain in fourth downs . Cair kicked off into the endzone for Garnet . Garnet kick kick kick off into endzone .
 Following Dick Ryczek's booming kick to the Bates 15, the Garnet started to move . The Garnet won their first game of the season in a straight away victory .
 A first play end run by John Yuskis accounted for 29 yards and a first down on the 44 . A first-play end run on the field was a 29-yard touchdown for the first play .
 Tom Carr breaks through the line and rumbles 38 yards to the one foot line before being brought down from behind by speedster Mike Littizzio . Tom Carr was seemingly stopped for no gain, but was brought down in the end of the play .
 On the next play Carr leaped over a pile of Bates and Tech linemen for the Garnet score . The Garnet scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 With less than a minute gone of the final stanza, the 'Cats scored again . The Cats scored again in the final minute of the game .
 The Hatchmen scored 12 in 14 plays in the first half . Carr drove over from the 2 to secure the win for the Hatchmen .
 Highlight of this second scoring drive was a 27-yard draw play by Carr . Carr scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 The 'Cats take the lead in the first quarter of the 2014 season . Carr scored a touchdown and a touchdown in the second quarter . Carr was the first to score a touchdown .
 Garnet defense held for four downs . Planchon returned Ryczek's kick to the Bates 46 . Garnet returned Plancheon's return to the end of the drive .
 The Pomfret, Conn., junior picked up 17 yards on a first down play on a nefty run as he bowled over three Tech defenders . The run was a 17-yard run from 17 yards to 17 yards .
 Planchon and Carr picked up another first down with 7 yard carries, bringing the ball to the Tech 23 . Carr and Carr ran for 7 yards with 7 yards each carrying .
 A Planchon off tackle run picked up 3 yards and Davis garnered the first down on a keeper play . Davis garnered a first down of 3 yards on a tackle run on a run for 3 yards .
 Planchon again carried for a first down as he went around left end to the 2 . Planchons carried for the first down and carried for another first down . He then carried again for the 2nd down .
 Carr carried the bacon into the endzone and the visitors led 20-7 with 8:45 remaining in the game . Carr's touchdown was the first touchdown of the season .
 Coach Hatch clear his bench giving reserves game experience . Coach Hatch cleared his bench for the remainder of the game .
 Playing outstanding games for the 'Cats were Bob Williams, Red Vandersea, Dave Stockwell and Tex Ritter . The entire backfield starred for the Hatchmen, while the entire backline starred for them .
 Davis now boasts an outstanding 32 of 50 pass completion record for an excellent .640 percentage . Davis is now a record-breaking success record for the completion record .
 Bob Williams, senior tackle, played an excellent game for Garnet . Williams opened up several holes for the Garnet backs . The Garnet senior tackle was an excellent offensive lineman for the team .
 Willie also played a good game on defense, making several key defensive plays .
 Carr now has scored 42 points over the season and leads New England with 42 points . Carr is the only player to score 42 points for the Patriots this season .
 Students who wish to have guests sit with them may purchase tickets at the Athletic Office at $2.50 each . Students who want to sit with guests can purchase tickets for $2 .50 each at Athletic Office .
 Bates students follow the same procedure as for nonreserved seat seats . Bates students must use the same method of seat selection as students .
 Tickets for this game go on sale at the Bates Athletic office beginning on Monday prior to the game and end at noon on Friday . Tickets for the Bates game will be available from Monday to Friday .
 Upon presentation of ID cards, students may purchase student tickets for 1.00. Students may also purchase tickets for $1.00 .
 Reservations for guests to be seated with students may be purchased for $2.50 at the Bates Athletic Office only . Reservations can be purchased at the Athletic Office of Bates .
 Soccer has finally become a varsity sport at Bates College . Raphael Leads Booters To Win; Veterans Face Nichols Today .
 A A. A. sanction means for away games, the team will travel in a bus rather than have the players drive their own cars . The sanction means the players will not be allowed to drive cars for away matches .
 The squad has been given new equipment, and new nets have been put in the goals . The squad have been given a new equipment and new equipment .
 There will be a game-captain for each match and next year co-captains will be elected next year . Last year's team won 2, lost 4,* and tied 1 .
 Bates Garnet coach Bob Hatch is trying to build small college football as well as lead the Garnet football team to a winning season . Hatch picks two present players on AU-Stas team . Hatch Picks Two present players On AU-stas Team . Hatch is a familiar sight on
 Hatch had nothing but praise for the spirit and morale of the Bates eleven this year . Hatch has nothing to do with the morale and spirit of the team this season . Hatch says the team is very happy to have a successful season .
 Bob Hatch began his athletic career in Melrose High School, Melrose, Massachusetts where he was a four-year letterman in football, basketball, and baseball . Hatch played in the North-South Game of the World Series .
 Returning to BU in 1946 he played three years of varsity football and baseball . He played three seasons on the BU football team .
 The 'Cats beat Nichols, a team with a 23-2 record for the last four years . Nichols has won 23 games in a row over the past four seasons .
 At this point in the season the booters began to show a great deal of improvement . The booters have been in impressive form in recent weeks .
 In the last game of the season, they tied Colby 2-2, thereby knocking that team out of the N.C.A. small college tournament . Then, in the final game, they beat Colby 3-2 .
 It should be noted that the team played most of the season with injuries to key personnel such as Lee Knute and Steve Barron .
 Last year's team was a young team as shown by the fact that only five players were lost because of graduation . Only five of the players were left out of the squad .
 Dave Rushforth, wing Dave Kramer and fullbacks Dave Lougee, Jim Nye and Carl Peterson were all part of the original line-up . Rushforth was center-halfback, wing-back Dave Kramer, and full-back Jim Lougee . Nye, Lougee
 Lee Nuce, Bob Lanz, Dick Danowsky, Raphael Dnemelukwe, Lloyd Bunton, and Steve Barron give the line some fine shooters and hustlers .
 Lee Nute, who missed most of last year because of a foot injury, is returning at left inside . Nute is returning to the starting line-up for the first time since returning from injury .
 Bob Lanz was the top scorer on last year's team, scoring five goals . Lanz's five goals made him top scorer last year, with five last season .
 At the wings are Nigerian student Raphael ""Boom-Boom"" Onemelukwe and Lloyd Bunton . At the end of the show is a Nigerian student who has been in the wings for three years .
 BoomBoom is noted because of the fancy ball handling and hard shooting that he adds to the team . Boom is noted for his hard shooting and ball handling .
 Steve Barron scored three goals last year, before he had an unfortunate accident . Barron is a big man in the front line, with three goals scored last year . Barron was injured in an accident last season .
 Jim Kiernan, Ron Green, Gary Lea, John Malcolm, and the Trasier twins are also included in the forward line . Ron Green is also included .
 George Beebe, George Hunter, George Kramer and Bob Kramer will return at halfback . Beebe and Hunter will play for the U.S. team .
 Jim is a very talented soccer player in that he can play two positions, halfback and goalie . Jim can play halfback or goalie and play goalie .
 The addition of Bob Thompson more than compensates for the loss of the three graduating fullbacks . Frosh starts at fullback for the first time .
 Don has good hands, can react quickly, and can throw the ball past the midfield stripe with ease . Don has a good reputation for throwing the ball into midfield stripe .
 All in all, this looks like a strong soccer team . Backing Don up is freshman Bob Miller, who is a freshman at this time .
 The Bates soccer team won its first game of the season last Saturday, beating the Nasson Lions . The team's first game was against Nasson .
 The Bobcats easily subdued their opponents by a score of 8-0 . In the first period there was no scoring . The Lions were fired up to a fever pitch .
 The several shots at they were either blown off course or deflected off the post . Several shots at . they either blown . off course . The . several shots either blew off course and deflected . off the . post .
 Dick Danosky scored the second goal during a mad scramble in front of the Nasson goalie, Bob Lanz, then scored two unassisted goals in a row . The Nasson team won the game 2-1 at Nasson .
 Lee Knute and Raphael again combined to score two more goals, with Raphael hitting the mark on each of them . Raphael hit the mark for each of the goals in the first half .
 Nute, Lanz, Onemelukwe, Kramer and Danosky scored two goals apiece for the team . Kramer scored one goal each for Kramer . Lanz scored one for Lanz .
 Halfbacks George Beebe, Jim Onemelukwe, and Bob Kramer did very well at keeping the ball in Nasson territory . Nasson were beaten 2-0 at half-time on Saturday night .
 Fullbacks Bob Thompson and Todd Lloyd handled the ball very capably . If the ball did get near the goal, it was handled by the fullbacks .
 As a result, goalie Don Mawhinney only had to handle the ball five times . The goalie had only to handle five times during the game .
 Coach Hatch was also selected to play in a baseball All-Star game in Detroit in 1948 . Hatch also played in an All-Stars game . Hatch played in the All-American All-League in Detroit, Detroit and New York City .
 During his senior year at BU he served as an instructor in Physical Education and coached the university's golf and tennis teams . He served as a Physical Education instructor at BU .
 He graduated in 1949 with a B S. degree in physical education and a minor in history . He graduated with a major in history and physical education .
 Bob Hatch began his career at Bates the same year as freshman football, basketball, and baseball mentor . Hatch has been in charge of freshman football and basketball teams since 1983 . Hatch is a member of the Bates College football and baseball teams .
 In 1951 he moved up to head baseball coach until the advent of Chick Leahey . In 1951, he became head coach at the University of California .
 Hatch picked his All-Star football team made up of his greats at Bates in the last 12 years . Hatch picks his team based on his 12 years at the school . Hatch says the Bates team is the best in Bates history . Hatch: "It's a great thing for Bates
 Two starters on this year's team are listed on the starting select eleven . Red Vandersea and Paul Castolene are listed as starters on the team .
 The televising of pro-football games has improved the popularity of the sport . It has served as an aid to coaches who don't have direct access to new formations and plays .
 Hatch felt that with limited student enrollment it was impossible to year after year play powerhouses like Maine and Tufts . Hatch said with limited enrollment it is impossible to compete with powerhouses such as Tufts and Maine . Hatch: "With limited enrollment, it's impossible to ... play power
 Bates hopes to schedule opponents such as Bowdoin, Colby, Middlebury, W.P.I., Union, RPI and Wesleyan with approximately the same number of students as Bates . He hopes to play opponents such a number of teams with about the same size of students
 He still favored a six-team loop where each team would play the others twice in an eight-week period . The loop would see each team play twice in the other twice in eight weeks .
 Hatch feels that this wouldn't place any more of a load on the players than a mid-week scrimmage . The amount of class time lost would equal that lost by other squads . This would necessitate two mid-weeks games .
 The meet was run on Worcester's 4^ mile course, which included several formidable hills . The meet included several hills, including several hills .
 Eric Silverberg, described as very confident and up"" for the race, finished in first place for Bates in a fine time of 2 1:29, finishing considerably ahead of the W.P.I, second place winner .
 Coach Slovenski termed Eric's time as ""excellent for the course"", adding that the time of the fifth place runner must improve considerably in order to be a potent factor in some of the tough meets coming up .
 The overall pack time was a definite improvement over last week's win against Colby, said Slovenski . Slovenski said it was a 'definitely improvement' over last weekend's win .
 Co-capt. Hoffman of W.P.I.I, finished second to Silverberg, followed by promising freshman Ken Trufant, and co-captain, Ken Truford .
 Other Bobcat finishers were Mike Gregus and Finn Wilhelmson in seventh and eighth places .
 Coach Slovenski satisfied with his team's effort but indicated that some tough workouts were in line in preparation for next Wednesday's meet with Maine . The U.S. faces Maine Wednesday .
 Further closing the time gap between the first and fifth place finishers appears to be the main objective in the coming workouts . Further closing of the time gaps between the top and fifth places is the main goal in the race .
 Highly Rated Middlebury Squad Face Hatchmen On Homecoming On Saturday . BatesMiddlebury football games have developed into rea> scraps .
 This year was called a ""rebuilding"" year by Middlebury coach ""Duke"" Nelson . Nelson had only eleven lettermen returning from the team .
 That same year his Panther squad put together the first of three consecutive 5-1 records . The Panther team went on to win five straight seasons .
 Already the ""rebuilt"" Panthers have won two games while only losing one . The Panthers have already won two of their first two games .
 Both Wesleyan and Worcester Tech fell to the Panthers 14-0 and 27-0 respectively . The Panthers also shut out Worcester Tech and Wesleyan .
 Williams beat Middlebury by a score of 10-0 last week in a battle of defenses . Last week Williams defeated Middlebury in a game of defense . Williams is ranked No. 1 in the state football rankings .
 Until the Williams game, Middlebury had one of best defensive records of the country's small college football teams . Middlebury's defensive record was one of the best in the country .
 Bates will have his hands full trying to penetrate this strong Panther line . Bates has a tough task to come up against the strong Panther front .
 Coach Nelson has six men available to fill in his guard slots . Craig Stewart TBae Imtamw&l Sceiae by Craig Stewart . Coach Nelson also has six players available to play in the team .
 Roy Crocker, Don Elmore, Dave Hutchinson or Pete Kullberg will fill these two positions . Therefore, either Crocker or Elmore will fill the vacant positions .
 Senior co-captain Craig Stewart has been moved from halfback to quarterback . Stewart has become a key cog in the Panther offense in recent years .
 Holmes scored the touchdown that tied Bates last year on a 27-yard run last year . Holmes also scored a 27 yard run to tie Bates in the season opener .
 The Intramural Touch Football program began last week with games being played in each of the three leagues . Holmes, like Holmes, Holmes, has a touch football program .
 Stewart, is a exceptional broken field runner and is a constant threat to go all the way . There were were Stewart, and he is an exceptional runner . Stewart is a regular threat to win a major championship .
 The other halfback slot can be filled by anyone of a number of talented sophomoes who have proved themselves capable in the preceeding three games .
 He is the man who Bates has to stop if they want to stop the Middlebury offense . Bates has a job to do so if he wants to stop Middlebury .
 Middlebury-Bates will play each other on Saturday . The game is scheduled to be played at 7 p.m. ET on Saturday night .
 Take a couple of pax vobiscum next time you il mumi come to the Coliseum. Take a few of the pax pixixes to show your support .
 Four contests in both the ""A"" and ""C"" Leagues and two in the ""B"" League . Two contests in each of the five leagues .
 Games on Friday, October 5, were rained out and these will not be rescheduled . Games on October 5 were also postponed . Friday's games on October 6 were also cancelled .
 East Parker appears to be the team to beat as they jump to a quick 2-0 record in the ""A"" League . East Parker defeated J.B. 12-6 and Smith Middle 12-0 .
 Pete Glanz intercepted Middle aerials for a TD as did Al Harvie in the shutout against Smith Middle . The capable hands of Pete ""The Brow"" Glanz intercepted a touchdown for Middle Middle .
 Smith South defeats Smith Middle 6-0 as Tom Freeman tallied the lone score of the day . J.B. Smith Middle defeats Smith South 12-0 in other ""A"" League action .
 Bob Blagg and Jeff Hillier scored in J.B.'s first win of the young season . J.A. won the first game of the season . The win was the first of the 2013 season .
 Smith North down the boys from the ""Home of Champions"" (Smith South) by a 6-2 verdict . Owl Scores ""B"" League action saw Smith North defeat Smith South by a 6-2 .
 Chuck Bailey scored the lone touchdown of the day, but hard-charging lineman Pete ""The Owl"" Koch chalked up a safety to make the score read 6-2 .
 Roger Bill trounce Smith North 18-0 in the only other ""B"" League contest . Roger Bill defeated Smith North in the other B League game . The only other "B" League contest saw Roger Bill defeat Smith North .
 Freshman Al Cruichshank led the winners in scoring two touchdowns . Sam Shewell added one for the boys from Rho Beta Phi . Al Cruchshank scored two touchdowns for the winners .
 In the ""C"" League, West Parker and J.B. both have 2-0 records after one week of play .
 Parker ran over Smith North 40-0 and then defeated Roger Bill by forfeit . Parker then defeated Smith North by forfeit in the other game .
 Jim Dodds scored four touchdowns for West in thumping of North . Dodds was 'outstanding' for West as they thrashed North in the thumping win .
 Savello scored twice and Matzkin added a safety in J.B. to the victory over Roger Bill . Savello also scored twice in the win over the Billies .
 Robert Ahem '64 and Howard Blum '63 will represent Bates and oppose William Madel and John McDonnell of Oxford . Robert Aham '64 '64' and Howard '63 are representing Bates and will oppose Madel, McDonnell .
 Following the debate the audience will have opportunity to cross-examine the contestants . The audience will also be able to question contestants .
 George Goldat will serve as faculty advisor this year . Jim Linnell is the chairman of the faculty council . Jim Goldat is the faculty advisor at the university .
 Art Association was created out of a need for art on campus with the hope of interesting other students in this kind of activity . The Art Association hopes to encourage students to participate in art activities .
 The main interest of the members is not to study art in the normal classroom sense of the word, but to practice it . Art is not a subject of study in the classroom, but practice it, says the club .
 The group's philosophy is that one learns to paint by painting, and this idea is no less true for sculpting, weaving, ceramics, or any other of the group's activities .
 In harmony with the campus trend toward change and growth this year is the Association's proposed expansion of facilities . The Association is looking at expanding facilities in the future .
 "In the past the activities of the whole group have been hampered by a definite shortage of necessary equipment," says the group . In the past, the group has suffered a shortage of equipment .
 The largest item on the list is a kiln for ceramics and sculpting . The members are trying to raise the sum of two hundred and fifty dollars for the purchase of new equipment .
 Good equipment if treated well will last for years and should serve many a student . Though the initial cost of such facilities seems high, it should be pointed out that good equipment will last years .
 During the academic year, the Art Association will present a number of exhibits, some indoors and some outdoors . The Art Association is also presenting exhibits indoors and outdoors .
 On display will be samples of the various types of art pursued by the Association's members . Paintings are done in both oil and watercolor .
 Everything on display will be the original work of students and faculty of the University of Cambridge . Customarily, judges award no decision in interactional debates .
 Madel and McDonnell have been debating in colleges on the eastern seaboard . Madel, McDonnell have debated in colleges across the country . McDonnell and Madel have debated on the east coast .
 The Committee on International Debating of the Speech Association of America and the Institute of International Education are sponsoring their trip .
 William Madel was born in 1938 and was educated at Uppingham School prior to his enrollment in Keble College . Madel is a member of the British Parliament of Representatives .
 John McDonnell was born in 1940 and attended the City of London School before entering Balliol College . He attended the University of Cambridge and Balliol before becoming a doctor .
 American debating is characterized by an adherence to facts and figures . Debate is defined as a matter of facts and facts . Debate has been a long tradition of American debating .
 British debaters direct their arguments to the audience and use wit and digressions . In contrast, they direct their argument to their audience rather than to each other .
 Many American debate tournaments are conducted in empty rooms, according to Professor Quimby, the Bates debate coach .
 In 1921 the Bates debate team travelled to England and participated with Oxford in the world's first international debate . Bates debated with Oxford at the first ever international debate held in 1921 .
 Since then, Bates has taken part in over a hundred international debates . Bates has been involved in over 100 international debates in the past .
 Since 1950, individual college teams have been replaced by national teams in international debating . Individual college teams were replaced by international teams in 1950 .
 Charles Radcliffe of Bates was part of the first national debate team in 1950 . He was a member of the debate team at Bates College in Bates, Bates . Radcliffe won a gold medal in the debate competition .
 Baltimore Symphony Orchestra, Peter Adler conducting, will present a matinee performance on Sunday, October 28, 1962 . Baltimore Symphony will perform on October 28th .
 The program, which is part of the Lewiston-Auburn Community Concert Association, will begin at two o'clock in Lewiston High School Auditorium . The program will be held at 2:30 p.m.
 In its relatively short history it has become one of the top major orchestras in the country . The orchestra has also become a national orchestra .
 One hundred forty concerts are performed during a season by the 86 members of the orchestra . The 86 members perform 100 forty concerts a season .
 The Baltimore Symphony emphasizes educational programs, reaching 100,000 children in a season . The Baltimore symphony reaches out to children through its educational programs .
 During the concert season the orchestra presents fifteen pairs of mid-week concerts with distinguished guest soloists and conductors . The orchestra plays traditional and contemporary music .
 It is hoped that the show will stimulate new interest in art and perhaps encourage new members to join the group .
 Everyone on campus is invited to attend this first exhibit . At present the Art Association has thirty members . The exhibit will be held on campus .
 General invitations have not yet been extended this year, but, in the words of Dr. Dr. David Perry, the president of the United States, will be extended . General invitations are still being extended, but Dr. Perry says, "General invitations have been extended"
 Goldat, "Anyone who is interested in art is more than welcome to join us," Goldat said .
 Since 1949 he has been the music director of the NBC Television Opera Theatre . He is also a guest conductor with the Cleveland and Detroit Symphony Orchestras .
 Miss Starr is a graduate of the Curtis Institute of Music of Philadelphia .
 Carnegie Contains Finest Telescope In Northern NE . Bates College owns the best telescope north of Boston .
 Carnegie Science Hall in revolving dome commands an excellent view of the heavens . Perched atop the new Carnegie science Hall in a revolving dome, it commands an impressive view . The new Science Hall is located in the revolving dome .
 Karl Woodcock, Professor of Astronomy, stresses the fact that the present location is ideal, and that there are no obstructions . The telescope was mounted in a small building where Page Hall now stands .
 The telescope was hand made by Mr Roscoe Stephens, of Kennebunk, Maine .
 The final result of his work is a twelve-inch reflecting telescope with a one hundred-inch focal length . The telescope is a 12-inch reflect telescope .
 It took Stephens two years to grind the mirror, which is the heart of the telescope . Stephens spent two years grinding the mirror for two years .
 Experts claim it is ""an unusually fine mirror,"" considering that there is a certain amount of luck involved in grinding a mirror of this type . Woodcock said experts claim experts say it is an unusually fine .
 Stephens donated the telescope to the college . It was mostly a gift from Stephens . The college paid a fee for the telescope .
 With a one-inch eyepiece, an object is magnified one hundred times . With a 1-half-inch eye-peaker, it's magnified two hundred times more than a half-inch . With an eye-witnesses, objects can be magnified
 The observatory is primarily for the use of the astronomy classes . It is also used by students at the University of Columbia .
 Woodcock states that there are plans to use it in physics classes in connection with the study of optics .
 There can't be no heat in the observatory because the density of the warmer air would distort . There can be no heating in observatory due to density of air .
 Dr. Abraham Speaks To Chapel, Citizenship Lab . Friday chapel speaker and visiting Lecturer in Government . Dr Abraham speaks to Chapel and Citizenship Lab on Friday .
 In Chapel he chose to discuss the U.S. Supreme Court in the light of political process . He chose to talk about the case in light of the political process.
 "After a brief introduction con-* mm . . , sr . .. commit suicide,"" he said, "but it cerning the theory of separation of powers, Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. committed suicide"
 Abraham sited the struggle that has existed between the three major branches of government . Abraham said the struggle is between the government and the private sector . Abraham: The struggle is a struggle between the two branches of the government .
 The power of judicial review was established in the Supreme Court case Marbury vs. Marbury . However, since the Marbury case, judicial review has been allowed to be reviewed by the public .
 The Supreme Court has invoked this power to strike down as few as 89 provisions in 82 pieces of legislation out of a possible 65,000 pieces of law passed by the United States Congress . Madison the Supreme Court can strike down 89 provisions of a single piece of legislation .
 Abraham concluded that the personality of the Supreme Court Justice is as much a factor in the court's struggle for dominance as is its power of judicial review . Abraham: The personality of a Supreme Court justice is as important a factor as is the power of the court . Abraham concludes that the court
 Supreme Court Justice has the unique position of being able to interpret his powers as broadly or as narrowly as he chooses . Supreme Court justices have the power to interpret their powers broadly or narrowly .
 When the Chief Justice is passive and lacks vigor, supremacy passes to the President or to Congress, says the Supreme Court . "Supremacy passes to Congress or the President," says the chief justice .
 No matter how powerful the court seems, the men on it are human to the extent that a judge can be human . The men on the court are human, even though they are powerful and powerful .
 These men and their decisions are often over simplified when in actuality they attempt in the confines of con stitutional law to arrive at deci sions, taking into regard the max imum of human understanding .
 Abraham concluded that the guardianship of our liberties should not. and in fact in the realm of preservation could not be transferred to another branch of the government . Abraham concluded by emphasizing that .
 The logic of constitutiona law, the basis of Supreme Court interpretation, cannot be transferred into the realm of politics and still be safeguarded as it is today under the watchful eye of the United States Supreme Court .
 The Supreme Court is the branch of government directly concerned with answering this vital question . Professor Abraham went on to point out that the Court System is directly responsible for answering it .
 The Supreme Court is a supreme arbi trator, settling the argument between the individual and society . It reserves the power to say ""no"" to the government by declaring a law unconstitutional .
 This body must act as the conscience of the Nation, above public opinion . This is the body of the National Council of Ministers .
 Often, as Professor Abraham put it, "The fact that a law is stupid or idiotic or undemocratic makes no difference" Professor Abraham said: "Sometimes laws are stupid, idiotic, or undecessible, make no difference. The fact that law is idiotic
 Still, interpretations of the constitution have changed through the years, interpretations have changed . Still, the constitution has been defined by the constitution .
 In fact, this very change in its interpretation is what has made our constitution a living, growing, elastic document . The constitution has been a living and growing document, says David Cameron .
 The Supreme Court must decide what limitar tions to put on individual liberty for the sake of society in general, the court says . According to its interpretation of the Constitution, the Constitution must decide .
 The surest way to keep democratic ideals strong is to pit them against the strongest argument one can find against Communism, including Communism . For the most important thing is to keep democracy strong, he says, is to oppose Communism .
 If we must resort to repression to protect democracy, we are losing faith in democracy . If we are resorting to repression, we will lose faith in our democracy, says David Cameron .
 Phillips Academy offers a varied preparation for teaching . The program combines a year of Andover internship and graduate study adapted to each person's needs and interests .
 The United Church Board for World Ministries is seeking men and women who are interested in finding effective ways to express their world-mindedness . The U.C. board for world Ministries seeks those interested in expressing their world mindedness .
 Those who are members of the Protestant Christian church and believe in its world mission are invited to interview Mr Loy L Long, Personnel Secretary of the Board, when he is here in 1963 .
 See Professor Kendall, Room 303, Pettigrew if you are interested in MAT programs . Visit Professor Kendall for information about MAT programs.
 Captain Mary O Goodsell, WAC will meet with women interested in officer training and service in the Women's Army Corps . Captain Goodsell will be available for information on officer training, service and service .
 On Friday, November 2, Mr George W Marshfield will interview men and women interested in career and summer opportunities in Social Service .
 Interested students should sign up immediately at the Guidance and Placement Office . Students will be required to sign up for the program at the school .
 Jean Anouilh's Ring Round The Moon is the first major Robinson Players presentation of the 1962-3 season . Rob Players Name Final Cast For French Comedy .
 Ring Round The Moon is an adaptation by Christopher Frye of L'invatation au Chateau, one of Anouilh's Pieces Brilliantes . Ring Round the Moon is one of the pieces of L.I. and L.E. Frye adapted from L
 Robinson Players have presented one of Jean Anouilh's plays . This is not the first time they have presented a play by the Robinson Players .
 In previous years the Players presented Anouilh's Antigone, a play quite different from that of Ring Round The Moon . The Players have presented Antigon in previous years .
 An event to remember is the preplay lecture to be given a week before the play . The pre-play lecture will be given at the end of each week .
 Caron of the French Department, will present a background for this French comedy . Caron will present an interview with Caron .
 Students who wish to cast an absentee ballot in the coming election can find all available information in the library . Niehaus Thomas Hobbes students can cast absentee ballots in the upcoming election . Students can also find information on absentee ballots .
 Sneakers — Hood's Rubbers for the ENTIRE FAMILY . S & H GREEN STAMPS SHOE REPAIRING WHILE YOU WAIT . Corner of Park and Main the image.
 Woodcock remarked that this is the case in even the biggest observatories around the world . Woodcock said that even the largest observatories in the world have not been able to find the exact location .
 Carnegie Science Hall features a twenty foot planetarium dome . The dome is the largest dome in the world's most famous science hall .
 It is possible to simulate the rising and setting of the sun through the use of controlled blue and yellow lights . The sun rises and sets in controlled lights .
 With the purchase of a special projector, it will be possible to show the motion of the planets and to study the movement of galaxies . The projector will also be able to show planets' motion .
 The catch is that the projector will cost $15,000 . At the moment there are no serious prospects of raising the money for the project .
 Woodcock stated that we probably wouldn't get a projector until Thanksgiving . Woodcock: "I'm not going to be able to use it until Thanksgiving"
 He also said that although the projector would not get a lot of use, it would be good publicity for the college . The projector will not be used much, he said .
 Three Senorita Garcelon Favors The Bates Junior Year Abroad Plan . The Bates junior year abroad plan is based on the Bates Junior year abroad .
 Only one of three modern languages spoken fluently by Bates' instructor, Senorita Barbara Garcelon . Bates students learn languages from Spanish, Spanish and Spanish .
 Senorita Garcelon has been teaching Spanish, French and German on and off since 1958 . She has taught Spanish, German and Spanish at the school since 1958.
 Senorita Garcelon is a native of Lewistoh . Her father, a surgeon, took her family to Vienna for two years . She learned to speak languages at a very young age .
 At a pre-school age, she received her first experience in speaking German .
 Senorita Garcelon decided to take up the study of French in grade school . After returning to Lewiston, she decided to study French at home .
 She used to go to the Dominican convent to receive oral practice by speaking with the nuns . She was able to speak to the nuns in order to get oral practice .
 Senorita Garcelon received her formal education at Wellesley College . She studied in Munich her junior year in Munich .
 It was during this period that she had the opportunity to visit Spain and other European countries . She was in Spain and Spain at the time .
 Senorita Garcelon first appeared on the Bates campus in 1958 . She taught French, Spanish and German at the university .
 Herr Buschmann's place during the second semester while he left for a sabbatical . However, she returned to take her place in her place at the end of the semester .
 Bates had to do without Senorita Garcelon during 1961, as she returned to Radcliffe to do course work for her doctorate . Bates has broadened from German to comparative literature .
 Senorita Garcelon's life has revolved about the study of language since childhood . As is evidenced by her experience and work in the field of linguistics, she has a passion for language .
 I feel that languages are essential to promote understanding of other people and that they should be a neces sary part of education . I feel . that languages should be an essential part of our education .
 The study of languages should be emphasized more in the primary and, secondary schools . The study should be more emphasized in primary and secondary schools, says the author .
 The Ballet Espagnol was a highly exciting night of artistry . Despite technical flaws and some artistic imperfections, those attending the October 17th presentation were treated with an exciting night . The ballet was performed in Lewiston, Maine .
 Modern dance expresses passion of rawest origin, but there is nothing brutal about the living life and lust of these dances . The strictness of form tempers all of these emotions into art, for the strictness .
 Dean Healy Comments On His New Hours And Habits . Healy is a successor to retiring Dean of Faculty, Rayborn Zerby .
 Dean Healy said in a recent interview, "I don't feel that I have changed professions" "I have changed office hours and habits," he said .
 Most students have an idea of what the title, Dean of Faculty, implies, yet many are unaware of all that this position entails . Many students have a very different idea of the title .
 In a sens e, the position is clapped and their bodies whirled 1 a clearin g house of committee re-arranged . Men' dents in the American Gem Society .
 Dark-eyed women with raven hair and voicelike hands found a universal rhythm . They established for their audience something beyond time — beyond Lewiston .
 The program started slowly with the Escuela Bolera which consisted of four dances . The maestro, Roberto Ximenez, saved his appearance until the second number, Suite Iberica .
 "I did not feel, however, that either of the first two numbers were entirely successful," says author . "I didn't feel that the first number was entirely successful. I did feel that it was a success."
 "I think that the problems with the highly inefficient lighting crew, and the ignorance of the audience to the dancing art somewhat stifled them at first," says the director of the show .
 The lusty rhythm they created began to live separately from them . The audience and dancers swirled panting away from Lewiston, Maine, and their own petty little existences .
 The hall turned into a Dionysian festival where every tension and frustration was released to the fury of the castenets . Beating heels made the head split with exhileration and masses of brilliantly colored clothing swished and crackled .
 "To find such an evening of alarming diversion in Lewiston was unexpected and satisfying," says author . "I was surprised and delighted to find this evening's diversion was unexpected"
 Dean Healy spoke of his specific duties as many as numerous . Healy said he has a lot of responsibilities to be responsible for the country .
 The Dean of Faculty is encharged with the Chapel-Assembly Program . For one, he is encharge of the Chapel Assembly Program .
 He is ex-officio, a member of all committees, and officially, the chairman of the Educational Guidance and Curriculum Committee . He is also the chairman .
 At Bates, the Dean of Faculty assumes the role of an administrative officer, and, as a result, the position involves a large amount of paper work . Furthermore, at Bates, at the time, the dean of Faculty is also an administrative official .
 The Zerby Tour is still under the direction of its founder, Dean Emeritus Zerby . The office still has charge of the Junior Year Abroad Program .
 Dean Healy was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, where he attended the local public schools . Healy is best known for his role in the television series "American Idol"
 If you wish to be miserable, think about yourself; . Think about what you want, what you like, what respect people ought to pay you . Then to you nothing will be pure. Think about yourself, and then to you .
 MONIER'S TEXACO STATION is located at the corner of Main and Russell Streets . Lube offers these specials to you Lube .
 Before coming to Bates, he served as an instructor at Minnesota, and also spent five years, from 1951 to 1957, at M.I.T. where he taught courses similar to our Cultural Heritage program .
 Dean Healy was a member of the Cultural Heritage department at Bates College . Healy came to Bates in 1957 and has been there since 1957 .
 Because of his new duties as Dean of Faculty, he no longer teaches Cultural Heritage . He no longer taught Cultural Heritage because of new duties .
 This semester Dean Healy is conducting one course covering the history of eighteenth century Europe . Healy hopes to continue teaching, as he has always enjoyed teaching . This semester he is conducting a course on eighteenth century European history .
 Dean Healy was unable to answer some questions put to him, due to the newness of his post . Healy spoke frankly about Bates at the start of his new role at the University of Cambridge .
 The Rockefeller Brotheis Theological Fellowship Program offers male citizens under thirty years of age a ""trial year"" fellowship during which the Fellow seeks to determine whether the ministry should be his lifetime vocation .
 About 60 fellowships are awarded to those not now planning to attend graduate theological school . Those who would be willing, if awarded a fellowship, to attend such a school for one year in order to consider the ordained ministry .
 Fellows may apply to any Protestant Seminary which is a fully accredited member of the American Association of Theological Schools . Fellows can choose from any Protestant seminary that is fully accredited by the American . Association of theological Schools accredited .
 The stipend provides for room, board, tuition, fees, and $600 for books and miscellaneous personal expenses .
 Any men interested in the possibility of such a program should contact Prof. Prof. John Defterios of the University of Cambridge .
 Miller is glad to advise students interested in the ministry or related vocations . Miller: "I am happy to advise you to consider a career in ministry"
 Nominations must be received in Princeton not later than November 20th . This year's contest will be hosted by Princeton University .
 Aside from freshman week and a short period before Christmas, few of these trinkets are sold .
 This window area and trinket cases waste space which could be given to book displays . This waste space could be used for book displays and other displays .
 The number of books would triple if the counters were taken out and the whole store made an open book rack . The idea is to make the store a book store into a book shop .
 A few years ago the Irish in Boston could either enter politics or become cops, but now they have now elected a President .
 The Negroes are tired of the statement that they'll get their rights as soon as the courts can convince the many narrow-minded Americans to relinquish their privileged status . They are justifiably tired of saying that they're getting their rights .
 They want equality now, not under an abstract law, but in the supermarket, on the beaches, in the bars . They say they want equality not under abstract law but in supermarket, beaches, bars .
 They'll scoff at those who advocate moderation and token integration . They'll laugh bitterly at those advocating gradual social change . Those who send telegrams but no physical or monetary support will support them .
 Force does not necessarily imply violence; it does, however, imply stronger economic, sit-in and marching methods . Force doesn't necessarily mean violence, but it does mean stronger economic and sit-ins .
 The Negro will seize his rights with or without the idealistic Americans who support him in spirit, as long as the spirit doesn't enter their lives . The Negro's rights will be seized with or with the idealism of idealism, but not with the spirit of the ideal .
 President Phillips noted an increase in the number of students participating in the Junior Year Abroad program . President Phillips also noted the increase in students taking part in the program .
 Dean Healy will hold a meeting soon for interested Freshmen to answer questions and give information about the program . There are in fact, some 29 Sophomores currently planning to go abroad for their Junior Year .
 Freshmen will be able to travel to other parts of the world to study abroad . We hope this will whet the appetites of Freshmen with a hunger for new and different educational experiences .
 We encourage Freshmen to think seriously about the possibilities of this program . Freshmen should consider the possibility of the program .
 There is no better way to learn a foreign language than to go to the country in which it is spoken . Go to the countries in which the language is spoken to learn the language .
 There is no better way to learn about British Culture than by going to Britain . Go to Ireland to learn of the muses that inspired Joyce, Dylan, and Yeats .
 Bates is offering its students an opportunity to travel, to learn how others live and how they think, and to enter into worlds which are foreign to us and our New England provincial ways . Bates students will be able to travel around the world .
 Students may earn up to a full year's credit for a year's work in one's major . With careful planning together with professors, students can earn a full credit for one's work .
 T , The Editor-in-Chief writes all unsigned editorials . initials refer to the editorial immediately preceding them .
 Editor-in-Chief Marilyn Fuller, Managing Editor Judith Trask and Feature Editor Barbara Reid '63 Norman Gillespie '64 Peter Reich '65 Alan Marden '63 Stephen Barron '64 Business Manager Dianne Johnson '65 Exchange Editor Edward Rucci '63 .
 In the past two weeks, letters have appeared in ""The Student"" either in favor of or attempting to provide justifications for an invasion of Cuba .
 Both parties unwittingly pointed up a greater menace — abandonment of moralty in a quest for national power .
 As American citizens, we are committed to a number of ideals, among them freedom, the political equality of all men, and the right of the people of each nation to choose their own form of government .
 Many would claim that we are, in a way, also governed by a Christian ethical system . Many would also claim that Christian ethical systems govern us in some ways .
 As this is a debatable point, however, I shall not consider this aspect of the problem . I will not consider the fact that this is not the only reason for this .
 The freedom of man is not only an end, it is also a means, and a regulation of means . I doubt that Mr Boyd and Mr Foster are somehow aware of these ideals, but I do doubt that they have any understanding .
 We must remember that Cuba is a sovereign nation, no matter how distasteful that thought may be . However threatened we may feel by Cuba, we must remember it is sovereign nation .
 The Western Hemisphere is not the sole domain of the United States to go blundering around in as it wishes, regardless of the thoughts of the other inhabitants . We must also bear in mind that the Western Hemisphere isn't the only domain the U.S. wants .
 While we may encourage a democratic revolution in Cuba (and this I heartily advocate), we may not forcefully impress our will upon that of the Cuban people . The Cuban people are not strong enough to impose their will on their own, he says .
 America is not only a political power, it is also an avowed upholder of certain standards of morality and human dignity . America should be committed to the cause of human freedom, the author says .
 To answer this, we will have to ask ourselves what our reasons are for invading Cuba . The U.S. should ask ourselves why we invaded Cuba, he says .
 "I'm sure that Mr Boyd does not feel that our existence is threatened by Cuba," Boyd said . "I don't think that our survival is threatened," he said .
 Mr Boyd feels that any nuclear weapons that might be in Cuba, or in the possession of its allies, would only be used in offensive, and not defensive, military action . This seems to indicate that Mr Boyd .
 Robinson Players will present The Asphalt Jungle, one of the finest crime films ever to come out of Hollywood . Quemoy, Matsu, or Quamoy, or Rob Players To Present Extraordinary Crime Film on October 18 .
 The story is the story of a jewel robbery planned and executed with the precision of a military operation . The robbery was planned for and executed in the precise way of a robbery .
 The film maintains an extraordinary tautness as it depicts the careful preparations for the crime . It reaches an agonizing climax of suspense as the safecrackers methodically complete their job .
 The conclusion of the film conforms to Hollywood's usual "crime doesn't pay" formula . The fate of the criminals, especially the ""master-mind,"" lies not in the cops but in themselves .
 The Asphalt Jungle is the first of a long line of films about the techniques of professional thieves . The film is based on the work of thieves in the jungle .
 Marilyn Monroe played a small role in the film in one of her first appearances on the screen . It was imitated in the French film, Rififi, and parodied in the Italian, Big Deal on Madonna Street .
 Golding's book is usually dark and frighteningly comprehensible . The symbolism Golding employs is quite clear and consistent, consistent, usually dark .
 The fact that this book is in its seventeenth printing attests to its overwhelming popularity, particularly among college students . The book is now in its 17th printing .
 Golding employs the ideas of Freud throughout; the concept of Id, Ego, and Superego, sexual symbolism, and the ease with which ""the thin veneer of civilization" can wear away and expose primordial animalism and anarchy .
 The film is set on an island in New York City . It stars Ralph (a society-builder who ""makes sense"") and Piggy (Ralph's in tellectual adviser) in the role of Jack (an irrational Id) and his brutish gang of wild-eyed
 After all, no one is willing to start a nuclear war over some petty little valuable bases . No one would start a war over petty little tiny bases .
 Unless, of course, we expect the Russians to be more sane or more moral than we are and refrain from starting wars, especially nuclear ones . Unless we expect them to be sane or moral, we should be more moral and more sane .
 I've failed to mention world opinion, etc. because we know what the effect on that would be, and, after all, that is an ""impractical, unnecessary"" consideration . I'm not sure if world opinion is important enough to mention, but it's an "impractical
 In conclusion, if Mr Boyd and Mr Foster still feel that an invasion of Cuba is necessary because Cuba poses a threat to us, then I would like to ask them if they see any considerations that would limit the necessity of removing what is felt to be a threat .
 The forest and all ihe other dimly appreciated places echoed with the parody of laughter . For a moment or two the forest echoed with a parody of laughing .
 Golding presented again the problem that has ever plagued the mind of civilized man. Golding has presented again . Golding presents again the . problem that . has never been solved .
 Golding has perhaps shed new light on a dark problem . The Greeks called it the Furies; Freud called it The Id; the ""existentialists" call it the irrational . Now Golding's ""beast"" has shed light on the problem .
 Jack and the other ""hunters"" kill a pig in chapter eight . Jack and other "hunters" kill the pig in the novel .
 The whole killing is directly analagous to sexual intercourse, and afterwards, any elements of rationality and civilization in Jack are now completely purged . After sex intercourse, Jack's life is now gone, and the killing is no longer rational .
 Golding is saying that the misuse of the most powerful force in Nature, the sex drive, and its estential need for fulfillment, is a basis for the things that we do which we can't understand, he says .
 Consciously dealing with the unconscious is a difficult, perhaps impossible thing to do . "I'm not sure how to deal with it. Consciously, it's a very difficult thing for me to do," she says .
 Only after exploring every means available will we be able to admit submission to the ""Furies", who "". . . . keep with hard hearts unmoved constant watch on human sin"
 There will be a meeting of the United Nations of Poetry this Sunday . Poetry meeting will be held in New York .
 This was the question uppermost in my mind in March, 1961 when I learned that this city in the North of England would be my junior year home . This is the question I asked when I moved to the city in 1961 .
 The Empress of England was forewarned by English passengers about the notorious Manchester weather . It was rain, rain and at times thick fog .
 Mancunians live up to their reputation of being among the friendliest of the English . Manchester citizens are affectionaly called .
 I was fortunate to observe' three different aspects of English life at close hand . I was lucky to observe three different parts of the English life, says author .
 First term found me in the comfortable and pleasant home of a university lecturer, his wife, and three daughters . First term was in a comfortable home of the lecturer and his wife .
 Each morning Joanna would gently wake me with a steaming cup of tea . Joanna was ten years old when she was ten when Joanna died .
 I was summoned to breakfast on the stroke of eight-fifteen by the ringing of a gong . I was often invited to afternoon tea in the drawing room in the draw room .
 This family with their exaggerated class consciousness, formal ways, and concern with correct manners were typical of the educated upper middle class . This family was typical of an educated upper class .
 It must be stressed that the above would not be your curriculum — at least not your educational one . But, it is not your curriculum .
 "I'd like to enlighten the underclassmen of the opportunies that can be enjoyed," he says . But seriously for a moment, he says. "I'm not going to let it pass on to him. But seriously, I'm not."
 English is a language major, yet having the desire to go to Europe, I investigated the possibilities . Not being a language student myself, I decided to travel to Europe as a student .
 England appeared too damp and dreary; it smacked a wee mite of the climate of Maine . Maine is a state of nature .
 The Institute for American Universities is located in Aixen-Provence, France . It was founded by the French city of Avence in 1968 .
 The Institute is organized like an American college and offers many of the courses one would expect to take his junior year . It's organized like a U.S. college and is organized as a college .
 There are courses in European literature in translation in translation which I found to be superb . There are also courses in translation courses in English literature .
 Courses are given in international relations and organization, European history, art, education, and education, sociolog, geography, and many others . Courses include international relations, organization, art and education .
 In my history course we took field trips each Saturday to many areas of Provence rich in antiquity . In this year's history course, we were given field trips to many Provences rich in ancient history .
 Courses are given by American and European professors in English . There is intensive concentration on French language instruction . Courses given by professors in American and French .
 By the end of the year you should be able to have a fairly good command of the language . You can also learn how to use the language of English by reading a book .
 There are courses at the regular university which one can follow for credit when your facility in the language is adequate . Also there are courses which can be taken for credit at regular university .
 Your expenses of tuition, room and board, books and transportation to Europe will come to several hundreds of dollars less than what it is costing you to come to Bates .
 "I went to 14 countries in Europe and the Near East and these added on another $800," he says . "I also went to the Middle East and Europe and spent $800 in Europe," he adds .
 It's quite possible to spend a month traveling all over Italy, for example, and spend only $60 . It's also possible to travel all over the country and spend just $60.
 This program I attended has many interesting facets which I would be gad to djscuss with inyone interested . This program is a great example of the diversity of topics discussed .
 It is mainly for those wishing to be on the Continent, who aren't fluent in a language and would like to learn it there . Travel and study a different culture with many different attitudes toward life .
 Murray's warmth, kindness, and generosity made up for what might have been considered drab surroundings . Murray died in a hospitable environment . Murray's kindness, kindness made up some of the drab circumstances .
 She had neither telephone nor refrigerator, and kept milk and butter in the cold pantry . She had no phone nor refrigerator .
 Murray's greatest pleasures was to sit and admire the roaring coal fire, her only source of heat, she said . Murray's great pleasures were to sit in front of her coal fire .
 I doubt she would part with that coal fire if central heating were given her free of charge . She would rather part with her coal fire than central heating was given to her .
 Murray never ceased to be amazed that I went to sleep under five blankets in addition to the three hot water bottles she placed in my bed each night . Murray was amazed that she had five blankets, three hot bottles and five hot blankets .
 Ashburne Hall is a women's residence hall at the University of Cambridge . Five Tea Breaks A Day is a daily feature of the Daily Mail's weekly Newsquiz .
 Ashburne was an ideal vantage point from which to view the study and leisure habits of girls from all corners of the British Isles and the world . It was the perfect vantage point for girls studying in the UK .
 Since each girl received a daily supply of milk and bread, there were often five tea breaks a day .
 Over tea and "biscuits" friends plied me with questions about nuclear disarmament and the number of maids in an American family .
 In addition to being exposed to an educational system, the methods and goals of which often differ from our own, I gained insight into the different ways of living which exist between us and the English .
 Bates Combines Summei Work, Language Study In Overseas Plan . Plan includes language study in the U.S.
 Bates is a Bates man interested in working in Europe next summer . It could happen to you next summer if you are interested in living in Europe .
 Bates College will pay part or all of the fare to Europe for men proficient in the language of the country in which they will work . Through the gift of an anonymous donor, the college will pay the fare for part of the trip .
 The program itself is not new, having been in existence for three years .
 At present, only men are given financial assistance through this gift, because it was donated in the hope of encouraging men to become more proficient in foreign languages .
 Wright stressed the point that this program is not limited to language majors . Wright stressed that this is not only for language majors, it is also for other students .
 Due to the success of Bates students who have worked in Europe in the past three years, it is now much easier to secure employment . Bates students have now been able to secure a job in Europe .
 This employment is to last seven or eight weeks and varies in remuneration with the type of job and its location . This employment will last for up to eight weeks .
 Every man will acquire a wealth of experience and increase his knowledge of the language spoken in the country he visits . Regardless of earnings, however, every man will acquainthood .
 Interested men should inquire about these opportunities as soon as possible with Dr. Dr. John Defterios .
 It would be much to the benefit of the students and the college to stimulate an active interest in this program . The college needs to stimulate interest in the program .
 Harrison got his job through the IAESTE. or the International Association for the Exchange of Students for Technical Experience . The organization helps students find employment and transportation to Europe .
 Alfred Wright has extensive material, and the feature department recently received information from the American Student Information Service . The feature department has received extensive material from Alfred Wright .
 It is possible for a qualified Bates student to spend a summer in Europe with minimal expenditures . Student Visits Germany Under Bates' Program .
 The program applies to any European country; having studied German for two years, I visited Germany . The program is available to students in Germany and other countries .
 For two months I was a factory worker at Bayer Leuerkusen, a giant chemical factory near Cologne, Germany . I spent two months in a factory at the chemical factory .
 Many former Nazi soldiers or East Zone refugees were former soldiers or refugees . Many of the workers were friendly and interesting, espe-. cially .
 During his last month he stopped work and toured Germany, using money earned there and haved from living expenses . During the last month, he used money earned in Germany to cover expenses .
 On a motorcycle that cost about $60, I motored nearly two thousand miles through middle and south Germany . I visited The Black Forest, Lake Constance, the Alps, Eifel, and the Alps . Dozens of small cities and towns with cobblestone streets, ancient houses
 Throughout Germany, I was impressed by the hospitality of the people and the general atmosphere of prosperity and uneasy optimism . Germany is a country with a history of economic and social tensions .
 I spent a week in Berlin on a student bus trip and visited the Communist sector . I spent the trip in the Communist part of the city . The Communist sector is one of the world's largest cities .
 Here in the East zone lies Germany's greatest problem, and also one of ours, says the German president .
 This whole summer was made possible through a Bates fund, which will help a student travel to Europe under two conditions . The fund will help students to travel under conditions .
 He must be a male student with some language proficiency and he must have lined up a job for the summer in the country he visits . He must also be a student with language proficiency .
 Several programs exist to find jobs, ranging from private or ""Batesy"" connections, to giant exchange programs . IAESTE, a giant exchange program which finds jobs (usually in Science* or Engineering) almost anywhere .
 It involves some paperwork and special language practice that is time consuming, so if you are interested, talk to Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter: "I'm looking forward to seeing people with special needs"
 The faculty grants the studentry a vacation on the day of the Maine game for one purpose — to see that game . That students should hire a bus to head southward is a reflection upon their school spirit .
 For students who care enough of the school and the fine team which represents the school a word of warning . For the students who . care enough . of the . school, the school's fine team . represents themselves . The school has a history of bullying .
 Friday is the last day that you can purchase tickets at the reduced rate of a dollar at the Athletic Office . The last day is Friday that tickets can be purchased at a dollar .
 Your dollar ticket must be accompanied by an I.D. card at the visiting students' gate at Orono . O.S. students must also have a valid ticket at the entrance to the school .
 As all upperclassmen know the 'Cats in three years have not yet won a series game . The 'Upsiders have yet to win a series in three seasons .
 This year for the first time in the past four years the Hatchmen are clear favorites to annex the title . The Hatchmen have won the title four times in the last four years .
 Bowdoin, Colby and Maine want to knock us off, not only because we are favorites, but because they have won only one game all season . It also means, however, that they also want to knocked us off . Between them, they have only won one game this
 Coach Hatch has repeatedly mentioned the spirit and leadership of this year's Garnet squad . Coach Hatch said the Garnet team will be a strong contender for the title . The Garnet girls' spirit has been mentioned by Hatch .
 A glaring contrast to the Bobcat gridsters, and all Garnet teams, was afforded following last Wednesday's Nichols soccer game .
 A person following the Nichols players after the game saw the following . The Nichols players were followed by a person following them .
 As soon as the final whistle whistle, several players lit up cigarettes . Several players lit cigarettes after the game .
 Nichols squad emerged from the locker room wearing their traveling uniforms of sweaters and open shirts . The Nichols squad was wearing the traveling uniforms .
 Even before the campus was left behind, the players, traveling in private cars, had their elbows bent in the characteristic pose of a veteran of Lou's . Finally, even before they were leaving the campus, the students bent their elbows .
 Faculty members and eol.ege libraries oivO eligible, when subicribing themselves . Faculty members are eligible to sub-subscribe themselves . Subicribing is a form of form of permission to submit .
 P-CN DeWITT HOTEL Nearest the College $1.00 Luncheon and Dinner Specials 7 Days a Week DINING COCKTAIL ROOM LOUNGE Tel.4-5491 Norris Hayden ] Laundry t Modern Cleaners Campus Agents .
 Bates Bobcats defeated a good Middlebury team 12-6 before a large Homecoming crowd for their fourth win in a row . The Bobcats led by Paul Planchon's running, kicking and pass receiving .
 The junior halfback scored the winning touchdown on a 23 yard pass play in the fourth quarter . He set up the first score with a booming kick that died on the Middlebury one yard line, and iced the game with a 27 yard end sweep late in the game .
 Fullback Paul Fava gained most of the yardage through the middle, finally scoring from inches out on a fourth down play, despite the efforts of the right side of the Bates line . Fava scored the touchdown from inches from inches .
 Bates didn't seem to seem to click until the second quarter when a Planchon punt rolled dead on the Middlebury one and the Blue's offense was stopped . The Blue didn't score a touchdown until the end of the first quarter .
 The Panthers punted to their own forty yard line and Bates punted . The Bates offense went into high gear . Bates punter punted the ball to the Panthers' own forty-yard line .
 After a five-yard penalty, Bill Davis dodged his way to the 25 for a first down . After a fumble, Davis dodged a five yard penalty, he made it to the . 25 for the first down. After a . five . yards penalty, Davis made it into the 25
 Planchon picked up 8 yards to the 17 and Tom Carr gained another first down on the Middlebury 12 . Tom Carr picked up another first-down on Middlebury's 12th down .
 On second down David moved the pigskin to the 1 foot line and fullback Tom Carr bucked over for his eighth touchdown of the season . The score came from the 1-yard line and Carr buckled over for a touchdown .
 Middlebury threatened late in the second quarter on the Bobcat's twelve yard line . Middlebury also threatened late on the second half on the Middlebury line .
 Dave Stockwell singlehandedly stopped this threat with a tackle of quarterback Craig Stewart on the thirty yard line . Stockwell's tackle of Craig Stewart stopped the threat from the quarterback .
 After a series of downs Jim Callahan fell on a Middlebury fumble near the mid-field stripe . Middlebury won the game by a score of 14-14 .
 Fullback Tom Carr carried half the Middlebury line with him to the Mid 28 win . Fullback Carr, previously held in check, carried half of Middlebury's line .
 Paul dodged the last two Middlebury defenders to pay-irt . Davis hit Planchon with a pass and Paul dodged them to paydirt .
 Mid tried to get an offensive attack going from the Bates 46. Penalties and yards lost 5-23 2-10 . Penalties were also lost for Midland .
 Stewart, the best part of the Panthei ground game, picked up a first down on the 34. Stewart picked up the first down of the 34 .
 The right side of the line stiffened and two plays later Stewart fumbled . Tom Carr fell on the ball to kill Middlebury's last threat . Red Vandersea led the defense to the win .
 Planchon's 27 yard dash from punt formation drove the last nail in the Panther's coffin . Planchons' 27-yard dash drove the final nail into the Panthers' coffin .
 Pete Kullberg and Paul Fava led the defensive charge for Middlebury holding Carr in check and throwing Davis out for losses .
 Dave Holmes intercepted two passes and picked up eighty yards in 18 carries . Dave Holmes was another thorn in the Garnet side as he intercepted two of his passes .
 Paul Planchon has been selected as Bobcat of the Week for the second time this year . For the second year in a row he has been chosen as the Bobcat for the week .
 Planchon also had his toe in % the outcome of the game as he boomed a kickquick to the one yard line which set up the first Garnet score . Planchons also had a kick quick to set up a score for Garnet .
 Paul Castolene was named Bobcat of the Week . Bob Lanz scored four goals for the University of Washington in the win over Nichols .
 The pregame rally this week /as unique in one very special way . Sixteen former Garnet players, Local Coacji, comprise the Scouting Staff .
 Two men, J Donalc Barrios and David Harkins, who in fulfilling their roles for the Bates College Athletic D< artment are mostly unheralded and unrecognized though rhese men along with two others, Arthur Belliveau and ing staff of
 The assistant coaches, Walt Slovenski or Chick Leahey, work in nil teams of two, usually accompanld by one oi the assistant coaches . One may ask why are scouts so* important to a football team and the answer is multifold .
 Imagine the situation of a team that knew absolutely nothing about the team they are to oppose . Imagine a team knowing nothing about a team they're to oppose. Imagine a situation like that in the U.S.
 A scout has to observe some of the major points a scout must observe during his afternoon at the football game . The scout says he will be able to watch the game for the rest of the season .
 Considering his job in full he has a twenty-four page report that has to be filled out in minute detail .
 He has to miss nothing for a single mistake may be the difference between victory and defeat . He has a chance to miss out on a crucial moment in the game .
 Coach Hatch on the Sunday folfudges the physical condition of lowing the game . He gives his sugges the ions on their passing game and d e _ deas on which moves by Bates two sections .
 In revould hurt or confuse this opporting the offensive strategy everything is covered. In . In . Revould hurt . or confuse . this . opporting an offensive strategy . Everything is covered .
 Scout defense of an is again diaately and classified to height . In covering the Dpponent a scout defense is again classified as height .
 A team's exact formations are me nts they make in a passing diagramed along with their mostjj s i tuat i on or w hen a team needs effective plays . He weight, speed and effectiveness.) is care ful to show any adjust .
 A lineman who pulls out of the line to lead a ball carrier on his run is an example of a key . A lineman pulling out of th line is a key to a player's success .
 A scout has to be observant to catch these mannerisms . Sometimes a player will tip his intention of doing a certain thing by some action or movement . Scouts have to be very observant in order to spot a player's intentions .
 A football scout has a big job in the stands on these crisp autumn afternoons . The scout has been in charge of a football scout for more than a decade .
 He is a big part of a team's effort and a partner a coach is lost without . He is also a partner in the development of a player in the game .
 At Bates the scouts are paid on a per game basis with their traveling expenses added . At Bates they will also be paid for their travel expenses .
 Rally Speakers on Staff at the rally Friday night . The two scouts we all had a chance to hear at the event . Rally speakers on staff: Scouts, scouts and scouts .
 Lewision in Worcester, Mass., now makes his home with his wife and two children in Auburn, Massachusetts . Lewision now lives in Auburn with his family .
 He attended Cushing Academy where he was a three-letterman . He starred in football, baseball, and basketball .
 On his matriculation to Bates, with the class of 1953, Don resumed his roles in three sports, this time for the Garnet . Don continued to play for Garnet at Bates . Don played in three different sports, including football and basketball .
 Barrios is a football and basketball official for the Maine Athletic Association . He officiates many college contests in the state . Barrio is an official for many college games in Maine .
 Dave Harkins was born in Lewiston, Maine, and now lives with his wife and three children . Dave was born here and now has three children in his native Maine .
 He starred here at Bates as a varsity football and baseball player until his graduation in 1953 . He starred in football, baseball and football .
 EL Coach Arthur Belliveau is the senior member of the Garnet scouting staff, graduating from Bates in 1941 . EL Coach Billie is the most senior scout on Garnet's scouting staff .
 Belliveau returned to the local scene .'ollowing his war service and is now head football coach at Edward Little High School . Bellivesau is a former football coach .
 He is a member of the State Athletic Officials Association and the Coach es Association . He is an official in the state of Florida .
 He entered Bates this year with the class of 1966 . He is married and of his three children, his oldest daugh ter entered Bates . He's married and three children .
 David Higgins of Falmouth, Maine, is the newest member of the scouting department of Bates . Higgins is a member of Bates' scouting department . Higgins was born in Maine .
 Mr Higgins graduated from Bates in 1955 after four years of football and baseball experience . Mr Higgins was born here in Lewiston, Lewiston .
 Married and three times a father, this is Dave's initial campaign as a Bobcat scout . Dave is a married father-of-three .
 Approximately 30 girls are practicing for their field hockey contest November 17 against Maine and Colby . The field hockey team will play each other in a game at Maine-Colby .
 The Black Bears regained the winning touch by trouncing Vermont in the third game . Vermont was previously unbeaten in the previous game .
 Last period U of Conn, pass gave the Nutmeg staters a 14 to 6 victory . The Black Bears almost spoiled the party, but a last period pass gave them the win .
 The saying goes here in the Maine woods that when the college powers of the Pine Tree State meet on the gridiron the performances of the past mean nothing and all caution is thrown to the wind in the quest of victory .
 The Black Bears of Orono are a key team in the state of Maine . The team's long history of winning makes them the key to the Maine state . They have a long history and a long winning streak .
 The Bears feature an outstanding senior fullback in Bill Chard who also holds down an end slot on defense . Chard is a senior fullback who also plays a slot slot on offense .
 The brother duo of Tom and Ray Austin as alternating quarterbacks makes Maine a team that can move via the airways with surprising effectiveness . Maine's defense is strong enough to keep the team from being eliminated from the playoffs .
 Earle Cooper and Dave Brown are junior halfbacks who are learning fast after playing great Dave Cloutier . The pair have been reunited at halfback camp in New Zealand .
 Maine forward wall is a tough, veteran-studded cast with co-captains Alton ""Bump"" Hadley at right guard and John Roberts at the right side tackle . Maine have a tough line-up in the back .
 Phil Soule and Roger Bouchard are returning starters from last year's undefeated Yankee Conference and State Series champion Maine football team . The Black Bear is returning to the top two spots on the field .
 Last Wednesday, Bates soccer team entertained JNichols College at Garcelon Field . Lanz's four goals Paces Cat Booters Past Nichols; Bears Drop Squad 4-1 . Bates was an eighth-grader in 1962 .
 The Bates team followed up its 8-0 win over Nasson with a 6-2 win over Nichols . The team then followed up their win by beating Nichols 6-3 . Bates won the game 8-1 at Nasson .
 The Bobcats went into the lead within three minutes of play on a goal by Lee Nute . Lee's goal was the first of the game's three minutes .
 Lanz started spraying the Nichols goal with shots, four of which went in . Four of the shots went in during the first half .
 Dick Danosky also scored one goal and set up Lanz for two of his goals in the win over the Mets .
 The defense did a good job of containing Nichols' attack so that only one goal was scored on Don Mawhinney . The defense was good enough to contain Nichols' attacks .
 On Saturday, Bates went to Brunswick to play at Bowdoin's Homecoming . Bates played at the Homecoming of the year .
 This game was very different from the first two games of the season in that Bates was unable to get its scoring attack going and its defense was lax . Bates had a strong start to the season but struggled to find a way to get back on the field .
 In the first period Bates drew first blood when center forward Dick Danosky scored the first goal of the game . The game ended in a 1-1 victory for Bates .
 It was a good first period, and going into the second period it looked like it was going to be an even contest . It was the first time the two teams had a game in the first period .
 Bates defense became lax in the middle of the second period . The Bowdoin front line put strong pressure on Bates' goalie Don Mawhinney .
 During this period, Bob Lanz made several good shots at the Bowdoin goal, but all of them were caught . During this time, Lanz's shot was caught .
 Although this was the Bowdoin goalie's first game, he played very well . The goalie played well in the first game .
 With ten seconds left in the game, Bowdoin scored its last goal and the final score was 4-1 . The final goal was scored with ten seconds to spare time .
 Bates now has a two and one record, having beaten Nasson and Nichols, and having lost to Bowdoin . Bates has won two of their last three matches .
 Garnet harriers take on the highly-rated Maine hill and dalers at 3:00 today on the new cross country course shown in last week's Student .
 The squad has been working hard the past week, putting in extra sessions both on Saturday and Sunday, in preparation for today's meet . The squad put in extra training sessions both before and after the meet .
 Support from the student body will be greatly appreciated and could play a part in the outcome of i the meet . Support will be much appreciated .
 There were two coiests won by forfeit, one played to a draw, and one played a draw . There were also two wins by forfeit and one by forfeit .
 East Parker and J B. appear to be the powers f the strong ""A"" league, a loaded West Parker teams and ssquad representing Roger Bill are the major threats in the ""B"" division, and J. B. and West Parker continue to dominte the ""
 In the ""A"" league last John Bertram jumped into the championship picture with a 12-6 win over East Paicer . In the 'A' league last last John Bertram won the title with a win over the Paicer team .
 East beat East 12-6 a week before with a similar victory over the same team . East and East have both won the last two games in the league .
 Bell System's Telstar relays electronic signals of many types - television broadcasts, telephone calls, news photographs, and others . Since that summer night, Telstar has relayed electronic signals from many types .
 It is the reflection of Telstar's success that glowed brightly on the faces of all who shared in the project . Their engineering, administrative and operations skills created Telstar and are bringing its benefits down .
 Pete Graves and Ron Vance went in for touchdowns in leading J.B. Bell Telephone Companies' victory . Pete Graves, Ron Vance and Pete Graves scored touchdowns in the victory .
 Graves made a terrific catch in tallying the first touchdown . Vance skirted end for what proved to be the margin of victory . Graves caught a catch in the first quarter .
 Steve Egbert was outstanding for East as he chalked up their lone score of the day . East were awarded just one wicket in their first innings of the match .
 J.B. also defeated Smith South 12-6 to wind up their week of successful play . J.A.B.'s team also won a 12-4 victory over Smith South .
 Bud Spector scored for Smith after Kibe churned to the one after taking a Peqinoit pass at midfield in this closely contested battle . Kibe made it 1-0 in the first half of the game .
 East Pdrker came back strongly after their upset at the hands of J.B. B. to down Smith Middle 206 . Smith Middle came from behind to win their first game of the season in 206 .
 Pete Swanson starred as he scored fourteen of Parker's points on two touchdowns and a safety . Steve Egbert again added another tally of points for the team .
 Ted ""Pinstripe"" Foster scored for Middle to present the possible shutout . Foster scored the only goal of the game .
 East Parker beat Smith South 14-0 to end their week of campaigning . The busy East Parker squad also defeated Smith South on Friday night .
 Pete Swanson and ""The Brow"" scored the touchdowns and Steve Egbert added a safety in leading their dorm to the victory . Pete Swanson scored a safety and a touchdown .
 Smith South defeats Smith South over Smith Middle . Smith Middle forfeits to Smith South . Smith South also defeats Smith Middle in other league contest .
 Cowboys Undefeated ""B"" league action saw undefeated West Parker move closei to their division championship with two victories .
 Pete Oberndorf scored the touchdown and Earl added a safety in edging Smith North . Earl added the safety in the victory over the Smith North team .
 Park er's safety proved to be the margin of victory . Bill Shannon tallied for the losers, but Park er was the winner .
 West West continued their winning ways by the four touchdown victory over Smith South . West West won the game by four touchdown victories .
 Roger Bill defeated Smith Middle by forfeit in the third ""B"" league game of the week . Roger Bill remained undefeated as they also remained undefeated . Smith Middle Middle defeated by forfeit .
 Tom Henderson caught a aerial for the West Parker touch down, and Oakes of J.B. brough an intercepted pass all the way back to account for their six points . Tom Henderson of West Parker caught an aerial for West Parker .
 Robinson Players Describe Activities On Backstage . 'Baubles, Bangles, and Beads,""* — the flapper era comes to life in the Rob Players production of Jean Anouilh's comedy, Ring Round the Moon .
 In accordance with the styles of the twenties, dresses are characterized by straight lines and long waistlines . While skirts are of the ""knee-tickling"" variety .
 Dangling beads sparkle against luxurious furs and feathers . Cloche hats covering escaping ringlets and spit curls complete the illusion . Clockeys cover escaping ringletlets and spitting curls .
 The Players have con suited their library of Theater Arts Monthly magazines . To assure authenticity in cos turning, the Players have a library of theater arts magazines .
 Advertisements of French designers of the twenties have been obtained from these publications . Advertisements were obtained from the publications of the 1920s .
 The costume committee is now designing a number of the play's costumes . From these models the costume committee has designed some of the costumes .
 People in the community have also donated authentic clothes of the era for use in the production . The production is set to take place in the next month .
 This month's program includes Professor John Tagliabue of the English department presenting a poetry reading . The regular monthly meeting of the entire drama group is planned for November 6 at 7:00 .
 John Strassburger '64 will offer a pantomime on Age demonstrating techniques learned in acting class . He will also demonstrate techniques learned from acting class.
 Musical entertainment for the evening will be provided by Charles Love '66, singing folksongs, and Deborah Perkins '64 performing a comedy number .
 Malcolm Mills '65 will deliver an improvisation of two Columbia and Barnard grads at a coffee house in Greenwich Village . Also, in the comical vein, Malcolm Mills will deliver a play of Columbia grads .
 The program concludes with a choral reading on ""Bates Life,"" a parody on Stephen Vincent Benet's John Brown's Body .
 Another facet of the Players' abilities is determined in the workshop plays .
 Dark Lady of the Sonnets, by George Bernard Shaw, is set for December . The first of the series of plays will be performed by Shaw in December .
 The action conveys us to a midsummer night at the end of the sixteenth century . The scene is the palace of Whitehall overlooking the Thames . The film is set in the backdrop to the end-of-the-16th century .
 Two mysterious ladies (Abigail Palmer '65 and Kathy Lysaght '66) complete the scene . Two mystery ladies complete the set .
 Nils Holt and Chris Chambers are wprking on the set and background music . The set is set in New York City, New York, at 8pm ET .
 The policy of the United States demands that the U.S. stop the spread of communism and that we prevent the installation of offensive weapons in Cuba . Bates, represented by Robert* Ahern '64 and Howard Blum '63, took the affirmative and said that the policy was to
 This objective can be achieved, they stated, through economic controls . This is the aim of economic controls, they said .
 The Bates position was generally that we can not let the threat presented by Russian control of Cuba, go without challenge . Bates: "We can't let the . threat presented to Cuba go without . challenge"
 Oxford researchers understood United States action in Cuba as indicative of general U.S. policy . Madel and McDonnell of Oxford understood that the U.N. action was indicative of a general United States policy .
 They presented their arguments in the form of a direct denunciation of U.S. methods against Castro . Castro was assassinated in 1961 .
 The U.S. created the problem in the first place by giving Castro the ""cold shoulder" at the outset of his regime, they said . They stated that the United States gave Castro the "cold shoulder"" at the start of the regime, thus driving him .
 McDonnell called the present U S. action ""a violation of international law"" and ""piracy on the high seas,"" which are cries ominously reminiscent of those issued towards England preceeding the War of 1812 . McDonnell calls the U.S. action an 'violation of
 United Nations of Poetry held its first meeting last Sunday night . The United Nations Of Poetry meets in New York .
 Honorary President Professor Tagliabue conducted the organized confusion . The program proved to be most interesting .
 Walsh observed that out of a world population of about three billion, over half go to bed hungry every night . Walsh said that of the world's three billion people, about half of them are hungry . Walsh: "Out of a global population of three billion"
 The U.N. is trying to alleviate this suffering, but lacks support from countries that could well afford to contribute much more to aid underprivileged peoples .
 Some economic aid is now being supplied through the United Nations, but the U.N. is racing against a deadline which becomes increasingly oppressive .
 Future meetings will probably be held at Jewish Community Center on College Street .
 The first item on the program was a short puppet play written by Professor Tagliabue . A Halloween Puppet Play was performed by seven students .
 Three of the students manipulated the puppets, while the other four read the parts . The puppets were manipulated by the students, while four read parts .
 After puppet play, Professor Tagliabue read some of his own poems, with a special tribute to the late cummings .
 He was assisted by John David, an admirer of the precedentsetting poet . John David was a friend of the poet .
 The consequences of poverty in new countries could be serious to the free world, he said . He pointed out that the consequences of new countries are serious to free world .
 Walsh said he believed America had no choice but to react to Cuba's situation . Walsh said that he believed the U.S. had 'no choice' in reacting to the situation .
 He expressed hope that U Thant's proposal of a cooling-off period would help solve the problem .
 In conclusion he stated that the United ' Nations will not fail if every country which has a problem pertaining to world peace consults the United Nations instead of trying to solve it by war . He said that the U.N. will not failed if every . country which had a problem with
 The area to be covered was vast and the speakers digressed at times to topics which, while related to present events, confused the original issue of whether or not the U.S. should tolerate the Russian build up in Cuba .
 His remarks were presented with emotion and he stressed a deep concern over what the result of the U.S. action would be .
 Madel's rebuttal speech was enthusiastically received with a well-deserved ovation . Madel received an ovation from the crowd .
 This was the point which caused the misunderstanding between the teams through most of the evening . It was the first time the two teams had met in the Premier League on a level level .
 In closing remarks, Blum pointed out that the United States, after 17 years of ""backing up,"" has finally taken a stand and we can not change our course . Blum said that the U.S. has taken its own stand .
 He said that we must take a stand now, for to take one later would more likely result in war . He said: "We must take one stand now"
 Russia might defend her shipping with nuclear weapons . Russia might also use nuclear weapons to defend its shipping from Soviet bases .
 Ahern delivered the final rebuttal and stated that the opposition had failed to disprove the facts and arguments presented by the Bates team . Ahern said the opposition failed to prove the facts or arguments presented .
 Bates Names Candidates For Graduate Fellowship . Carolyn Berg, David Hosford and John R Wilson will represent Bates in nationwide competition for the Woodrow Wilson Fellowship .
 The size of the college determines the number of candidates for Woodrow Wilson Fellowships . The Danforth Foundation selects recipients from two candidates nominated by each college . Each college has two candidates for the fellowship .
 Dean Healy, together with a faculty committee nominates candidates according to instructions from the national foundations . The winner of the Nobel Peace Prize will be announced at the end of the year .
 Both fellowships require that the candidate intend to teach at the college level . Candidates must also intend to attend college level level level .
 Bates College has nominated winners of both fellowships in the past and hopes to do so again . Bates College hopes to nominate winners of the fellowships again .
 Students who wish to enter college teaching should investigate opportunities for fellowships and inter-departmental work . Students should also look at opportunities for inter-disciplinary work .
 Give To UNICEF At Dinner Today . Celebrate Halloween by giving to the United Nations Children's fund . Give to the UN Children's Fund .
 Tonight there will be a CA member sitting by the entrance of both Rand and Commons to collect your contributions . The CA member will be available to collect contributions .
 Each Bates student has a chance to support the activities of the UN . The UN is the organization in which the hope of the world rests .
 Robert Pickus, former OSS man in Asia, is a representative of the ""Turn Toward Peace" organizations . Join with millions who are giving to UNICEF tonight .
 Pickus was a Fullbright scholar in the Middle and Far East . He is known to those studying the problems of peace as one of the more creative and effective men in peace movement .
 Mr Pickus and his colleagues have in the past and will continue to bring to light information that can have a profound effect on our attitudes concerning peace and international understanding .
 Brunswick Film Society began its 1962-63 season on Thursday, October 25, with the presentation of Hiroshima, Mon Amour . The Brunswick film society began its season on October 25 .
 Season tickets for the remainder of the season are on sale, and may be obtained by mailing a self-addressed, stamped, stamped envelope with $3.00 enclosed, to Mrs. Mrs. Smith .
 The Seventh Seal, Sweden, Ingmar Bergman, Wednesday, November 14; The Ghost Goes West, England, 1936, Rene Clair, December 13; The Love Game, France, 1960, Thursday, January 17; Gate of Hell, Japan, 1954, February 13; My
 The complications presented by recent events broadened the field to such an extent that the debators found it difficult to arrive at common issues to debate . Notice Oxford-Bates .
 Both teams showed much preparation and the presentation of their arguments was well executed . Both sides showed well preparation and presented their arguments .
 The men from Oxford showed a marked deviation from the traditional style in English debating . English debating is usually characteriezd by humor throughout the course of the debate .
 Oxford should be commended for taking an appropriate attitude toward a most serious problem . Oxford should take a more serious stance on the issue of racism in the UK .
 Residents of Hampden County, Massachusetts, are eligible for the Walter S Barr Fellowships made available by the Trustees of the Horace Smith Fund . Residents of the county are eligible to receive a Walter Barr fellowship .
 The grants are for the scholastic year 1963-64 in the total amount of $5000.00 for advanced study or research . The grants were given to students in the same year as 1963 .
 As a rule, the fellowship awards will be not less than $1000.00 . They will be made for one year, with the expectation that they will be continued if it seems warranted .
 Candidates who look forward to careers of definite social usefulness are preferred . These careers might be in politics, in scientific research, in teaching, in the ministry and in other learned professions .
 The fellowships will be awarded on the basis of the scholastic records of the candidates, of financial resources available to them and of all other pertinent information . The awards will be given to students from around the world .
 Preference will be given to those who have not had previous professional experience, particularly those now in junior classes . Preference to those with no previous experience will also be given .
 Application forms are available in the Guidance and Placement Office . Application forms must be submitted by January 15, 1963 . The application must be completed by January 17, 1963.
 The New England Mutual Life Insurance Company offers a summer seminar program . It combines a practical job with weekly seminars to introduce you to the life insurance industry .
 The company is looking for men with general administrative or mathematical ability interested in a career in life insurance . Life insurance is a life insurance company looking for people with administrative and mathematical ability .
 All interested students should sign up immediately at the Guidance and Placement Office . Students are encouraged to sign up as soon as possible .
 He first read in the original dialect, then translated into English . He then translated his words in English .
 These meetings, held once a month, usually consist of poetry readings and a play .
 Next month's offering will be a production of The Lesson, by Eugene Ionesco. Next month, the production will be the production of the Lesson .
 The Bates C.A. offers an antidote to the pressures and anxieties of the times in its programs of weekly Wednesday evening vespers . As the academic period rears again its ugly but necessary head on the campus .
 The C.A. conducts vespers every week the college is in session . Students who want to escape from the noise of the dorm, the hush of the libe, or the confusion of the campus in general .
 The service consists of organ music, and three short readings designed to assist the worshipper in his quest . Organ music is played by organ music and short readings .
 The act of worship is as simple or complex as the worshipper himself wishes it to be . Here are the images of the most beautiful and most beautiful sculptures .
 Vespers was designed and initiated by Bates students some years ago to fill a need and provide an atmosphere in which the religious sympathies of the students could be expressed in the manner the student desired them to be expressed, an atmosphere not provided by any of the ordained services of the college
 This is still the primary function and purpose of the Wednesday evening services . The Wednesday evening service is still a primary function of the service .
 From time to time, all of us need to remove ourselves from the pressure of ""academic continuity" and ""Denism"", says John Defterios . He says he needs a bit of spiritual refreshment, not of the pulpit style, but of the personal form,
 Wednesday evening vespers' sole reason for existence is to offer this refreshment . Vespers will meet at 7 p.m. ET on Wednesday night .
 Professor Singh Speaks To Social Science Conference . Bates College was host for the Maine Conference of Social Scientists on October 25, 1962 .
 The program for the delegates to the conference was managed by Professors Thumm and Williams . Professors Williams and Thumm managed the program .
 This conference is an annual affair held at one of the colleges in the state . The conference is held at a college .
 The Maine delegates are teachers and professors, economists and professional authorities on political science from the entire state of Maine . They are teachers, professors and economists from Maine .
 Political science determines political events by using precedent and law as bases . Political science is based on precedent, law and precedent . Political events are based on historical precedents and law .
 The first afternoon meeting, held from 3:00 to 4:00, consisted of a welcome to Bates by the Dean of Faculty, George R Healy . Anne Bancrofl Patty Duke fliiiiiiiiiiniiii .
 Three Politically Minded French Students Demonstrate Concern For Algeria .
 Parliament had succeeded in pink-slipping the premier, and now the attack is turning on De Gaulle himself . He threatens, if he does not get the support he wants in the upcoming referendum, to resign the Presidency, leaving France .
 We had hoped, for a time, that France had finally found herself a stable government . But the French government has been overthrown in the last few years .
 Until the spring of this year De Gaulle had been bragging that the Fifth Republic had had only one premier, contrasted with the dozen or so under the Fourth Republic . Until this year he had boasted of the number of prime ministers under the French Republic .
 The French student is better reflected than in the French student, especially in Paris . Nowhere is this or any state of affairs, better reflected in the student in Paris, says the author .
 When American students get together, talk usually turns to what one did last Saturday night, the World Series, or the English test next week . "When you go to school, there's a lot of talk about what you do, whether it's a game or a test, a game
 Sometimes it may seem to the foreigner in France that the life of the French student centers around politics . The French student is studying in France at the University of Cambridge .
 He talks about pot with some of his friends at the end of a class . That is what he talks about when he gets together for a pot with his friends .
 Almost any day one may see the cafes along the Boul Mich crowded with students tearing apart the government and pasting it back together again over a demi.
 The French student is usually quite well defined in his likes and dislikes . He has a long list of things to do with his French studies .
 "He likes to talk, he likes American music and American slang and pinball machines," he says . He likes pinballs, pinballs and pinballs machines .
 At a rather early age his political likes and dislikes are also well defined, in his thoughts . He is a keen observer of his political views .
 It gives one rather a shock to see a student standing on a street corner selling a com munist student newspaper . It is not the first time a student has been selling a student newspaper in the UK .
 Save on the going prices of going places at Sheraton Hotels . Get used to almost any of the world's most expensive hotels .
 Special save-money rates on singles and greater savings per person when you share a room with one, two or three friends . You can save money on singles or share rooms with friends .
 These groups often have as much political influence as a lobby would here, says CNN.com's John Sutter . These groups have as little influence as lobby would have, he says .
 Several times, coming out of the Student restaurant, I was given handbills, sponsored by one party or another . The handbill is sponsored by a political party or other .
 They called for a manifestation of all students at a specified locale, at a . specified time, for a specified purpose . The students were called to a specified location and a specific purpose .
 Usually the time was after classes before dinner, the locale was the Place de la Bastille, and the reason was the Algerian crisis .
 The students weren't too happy about what was going on in Algeria, and how the problem was being handled by De Gaulle . The students were not happy about the situation .
 A manifestation in Paris usually results in something like a semi-controlled riot . Unfortunately, this is not the first time it has happened in Paris .
 "I went out to watch it, and was severely criticized for that sottise afterwards. I went out, and went to see it," he said . "I was very proud of that, and I was very pleased with that," he added .
 Students, workers, and shop owners massed by the thousands on the Boulevard Beaumarchais . Students massed on one of the large streets leading to the Place de la Bastille .
 Another group was assembled at Boulevard Richard Lenoir, and was trying to join the others . Another group of people was assembled, and tried to join them .
 Paris police had cordoned off all of the streets leading to the Place and were trying to keep the groups apart . The Paris police are trying to separate groups of protesters .
 There are too many side streets in that area, and after a few abortive attempts, the entire group managed to assemble on the Boulevard . After a few aborted attempts, there were no more attempts to assemble .
 It was a long time before they broke up, but not before smashing a lot of windows and a police wagon which was left on the street . The pair smashed windows and smashed a police car which had been on the road .
 Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET JEWELER 73 Lisbon St. Headquarters for DIAMONDS members .
 Lewiston better not to involve oneself in these student demonstrations . Lewiston is a better place to stay away from these demonstrations. Lewiston should not involve itself in these demonstrations .
 He is willing to interest himself to a far greater extent in things which concern his country than is the American student . He is, for example, interested himself to an even greater extent, than he is in his country .
 One of the best ways to meet students was simply to enter a cafe and start playing a pinball machine . The best way to meet up with students is to play pinball machines in a cafe .
 "Pretty soon, you'd have a coaching staff clustered around you, from one interested student to half a dozen," coach says . "You'd have to be a coach. Pretty soon you'd be coaching staff," he says .
 Sometimes he studies, but he'd rather do his reading during the day and just before exams . He says he's not always studying at the time of exams, but studies .
 He prefers to gather with his copains around small fairs which one finds in all seasons scattered all over Paris .
 The average American student is far less apathetic than the average student, he says . But he has learned to accustom himself to many things Americans would find annoying at least and terrifying at worst .
 He has lived through gov ernments which change every two weeks or so; he lives in city which was recently shaken every day by bombings . He lives in a city which has been shaken by recent bombings .
 He has learned to live through the greves de transport, or transportation strikes, which occur almost every week . He has lived through the strikes, or transport strikes, since he was a student in the 1970s .
 Not finding any of his friends in the cafes, he may simply go down into the subway . He may also go to the subway to find his friends .
 "They exit cursing the street cleaning department for its negligence."" — from A Cool Million. "They leave cursing the city cleaning department"
 The job is a circulation stunt and the whole staff considers it a joke. The whole staff consider it a bit of a joke, he said .
 He welcomes the job, for it might lead to a gossip column, and anyway anyway he's tired of being a leg man . He welcomes it, for the job .
 He too considers the job a joke, but after several months at it, the joke begins to escape him . After several months, he begins to think the joke is a joke .
 He sees that the majority of the letters are profoundly humble pleas for moral and spiritual advice, that they are inarticulate ex pressions of genuine suffering .
 For the first time in his life, he is forced to examine the values by which he lives . He also discovers that his correspondents take him seriously . The film is set to be shown in cinemas in London and New York .
 "This examination shows him that he is the victim of the joke and not its perpetrator."" — from Miss Lonelyhearts.com .
 Nathaniel West wrote during the confused and disillusioned time of the late twenties and early thirties . Nathaniel West was born Nathaniel West in 1926 .
 His condensed, im passioned style, a style that grasps the deepest of feelings and, with simple honesty, expresses these feelings unceremoniously, makes clear to the reader that the Great Depression was not wholly economic .
 The book is satirical, and does have a number of ironic laughs . It is a satire of the Depression, of the prejudices and suspicion that grew out of fear, says the author .
 "The satire ceases to have humor, but becomes so ruthlessly savage it hammers rather than pin-pricks" The film is set to be released on Friday at 8pm on BBC One .
 West's obsession with the inherent tragedy that is painfully revealed in a ""sick joke"" (the result of selfishness and insensitivity) reaches its most vivid and complete expression in his best work .
 The theme of this novel is stated by ""Miss Lonelyhearts"" himself in making dates, because the girl can't get away between stops . The theme was stated by the character in the novel .
 If he is a little short of cash, he simply brings his guitar with him and sings in the corridors for a few francs . If you are short of money, you can sing in the halls of the building for a franc .
 When he was chased out by the officials, he boards the train and rides to another stop . When he is chased out of the station, he board the train again and rides . The train was stopped at a stop at another stop at the end of the line .
 He can't stand the responsibility of his position, and he strikes out in anger at the suffering before him . He strikes out against the suffering he has caused, and strikes out at it .
 Instead of pity and fear as in tragic catharsis, there is pity and rage . Here, instead of pity, fear and fear, there are rage and rage. Here, here, is the anger of the world .
 The accidental suffering of the frog was a result of his own doing, but he refuses to acknowledge the fact that it suffered because of what he did, as if the frog had no right to ""blame"" him . The frog was not the victim of the accident .
 The tragedy of the people he replies to in his column are like the frog; they suffer and he can only answer them with unfeeling, stereotyped advice . The tragedy is that he can't help them, he says .
 He feels anger because he knows he can't help them, and one of the main reasons that he . can't is because of his own suffering, he said .
 The replies he writes in his column become a distorted reality for him . He finds it all but impossible to have any true and positive feeling for others, especially in his ""love"" relationships with women .
 'Only once does he come close to a guiltless experience — that when he and his girl friend Betty go off into a dream-escape into the country,' he says . 'Only one of the guiltless experiences is when Betty goes to the country'
 "He can't forget what lies back at the city, and he realizes that he can't ignore or push out of his mind the reality of those letters of suffering," he says . "He realizes that . He realizes . He can't . ignore . or push the reality out of
 Lemuel Pitkin is killed when he achieves his Christ-like love . He is like the ""hero"" of A Cool Million . He was killed in the film .
 Although dreams were once powerful, they have been made puerile by the movies, radio and newspapers . Dreams are once powerful but now they've been made 'puerile' by the media, TV and radio .
 A trinket shop rather than a bookstore, suffering from a surplus of beer mugs and a paucity of paperbacks, succeeds only as a textbook supply house .
 Jacobs sympathizes with the efforts of -those who in the past have attempted to reorganize the store . Jacobs, sympathizing with the . efforts of . those who . in the . past have . attempted to . reorganize . the store, Jacobs says .
 Proposals have been proffered to the administration, but have not borne fruit . Proposal proposals have not been accepted by the administration .
 The Student Governments are organizing a committee to examine the situation and suggest improvements . With student and faculty support this committee may succeed .
 The bookstore should be so reorganized as to eliminate the glass counters and the useless window between the store and the Den . The store should be reorganized so that it can be easily accessed by the Den.
 The sweatshirts and other paraphernalia, as suggested in last week's editorial, could be kept in stock and displayed upon request .
 Removing the glass counters and extending the textbook shelves would liberate the entire store . Removing glass counters would liberate entire store from glass counters to shelves .
 If all the wall space were designed with bookstore owned shelves (thus eliminating the need to carry one company's books in certain racks) the cluttered center aisle could be cleared .
 The course books, now kept hidden behind the counter, should be available on display to those not taking the course books .
 There are hundreds of interesting and stimulating paperbacks which the store does not carry . Hundreds of interesting paperbacks are available at the store .
 Downtown Lewiston offers a paperback store which makes the Bates store look like a kindergarten library . How many students realize that downtown Lewiston has a paperback book store?
 Rows and rows of books, displayed open-faced, from mysteries to Plato, line the aisles of this Lewiston store . The bookstore is inadequate. The store is located in Lewiston, Maine .
 The increase of paperbacks has priced books within the realm of most students' finances . Paperbacks have increased the cost of books in the past few years .
 No convincing arguments have been advanced against the suggested changes in the past . No convincing argument has been made against the proposed changes .
 Perhaps the powers of the powers that be need only witness student and faculty interest before acting . Perhaps they need to see student interest in the school .
 Faculty Advisor David A Nelson published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, during college year .
 Entered as second-class matter at the Lewiston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar.i, 1879. Entered as a second-grade matter at . the Lewist Post Office . Entered as . 1913, it was entered as a . second class matter at
 A member of the Associated Collegiate Press. A Bates Student . Bates Student. I would like to offer the following comment .
 Robert Burns felt it would be the greatest of gifts to see ourselves as others see us . Robert Burns said it was a gift to be able to see others as ourselves as ourselves .
 The problem may be the inability of others to see us as we see ourselves, says Boyd and Foster . With respect to the views on U.S. relations with Cuba, they say .
 We wonder why other countries don't realize our attempts to beg, bribe or bully their support against an enemy they professed to consider more ours than theirs are motivated by our concern for their freedom .
 Even within our own country there are individuals suffering from this same blindness . Even within the UK, there are people who are blind to this blindness .
 By eliminating concepts of morality and justice from the conduct of international affairs, we have at last experienced the evolution of Democracy to a workable stage by elimination of the traditionally accepted weakness of the system .
 It must be obvious that we cannot defend freedom against the Godless forces of Communism if we continually lose the initiative in every encounter by the hesitation and uncertainty which enmeshes those who feel obliged to confound action with questions of value .
 There is no greater mistake than the assumption that acceptance of a moral code is a prelude to easy decision. Acceptance of a morality code is not a long-term solution to problems in the world, says David Cameron . Acceptance is not an easy decision, says Cameron .
 The man or nation of morality or principle is one for which every decision is a knifeedge walk . The nation's morality is a matter of principle, the author says .
 In a way it is a triumph for ""the American Way"" to arrive at such a simple solution to a complex problem, says CNN.com .
 There is excitement almost akin to artistic creation or scientific discovery to have arrived at such an elegant solution and find it applies not only to our own country but to other countries as well .
 We can not claim to have discovered this solution for years, we have been claiming for years that the Russians discovered it first . We can't claim to be the first to discover this solution, but we claim it was discovered by Russians .
 The position presented by Mr Boyd and Mr Foster seems to be a fair rendition of current American attitude toward international affairs . However, their presentation does suffer from this ""cake-eating"" fallacy .
 "In accord with the realism they favor, their argument should be followed to the end," the authors say .
 We would be silly to be diverted from our objectives by such quibbling after ends and means, values, legality and morality . Some might argue that the end is less desirable than it might be, but the warmth derived from knowing you are ""really right"" is so comforting we would
 I submit to you an answer to the editorial recently published in the Student concerning hazing . I submit a question to you about hazing. I submit an answer .
 If the opinion expressed that "becoming an upperclassman provides ability to discern what is best for the freshmen" is accurate, then I'm afraid I have grossly misinterpreted the function of hazing . My opinions are, of course, my own, but I do feel quite confident
 "I was in contact with sophomores who had only thought of getting to know more about me as an individual," he says . "My sense of humor, philosophy on such profound subjects as men, college, free love, and my reactions"
 I benefitted greatly in being able to demonstrate my personality to the upperclassmen in our dorm in a period of three weeks, whereas normally it might have taken a full year before my many idiosyncrasies were understood and tolerated by all . The student says he benefitted from being able
 Three classmates were admitted to the infirmary after undergoing the ordeals of hazing . I'm uncertain as to whether it was the hazing activities that induced it, or other factors .
 If hazing on the women's side reached such manifest proportions of physical harm, I have yet to hear of it . The hazing of women's sides has never been reported in the UK .
 The upperclassmen's bad taste is definitely among the minority, and, similarly, the freshmen who received bodily harm are few compared to the many who were spared the tortures of the sophomores .
 "I feel that the friends one finds and the acquaintances one makes during the course of hazing more than makes up for the few interrupted evenings and one day of haphazard concentration during classes," she says .
 I'm for it, all the way, and if we frosh as next year's sophomores can do as good a job for our freshmen as our upperclassmen have done for us, they will benefit from hazing as much as I have. I'm all for it
 19621963 WRJR Fund Drive has drawn to a close . Freshman Orientation oyer the years has been a very cofrtroversial subject .
 "Operation of a radio station for one year is an expensive proposition. As you may know, operation of a station for a year is a very expensive proposition."
 We set a goal of $1,000 this year; our minimum to remain broadcasting was $600 . We set our goal this year to raise enough money to stay broadcasting .
 WRJR had received less than $600 from the Fund Drive . WRJR has received $600 less than expected .
 It is only thanks to two concerned students that we were able to reach our minimum amount . The school was able to raise enough money to cover the cost of the school year .
 WRJR will have to curtail some of its more expensive activities for the coming year . WRJR is sorry to report at this time it looks like it will be curtailed some of the company's expensive activities .
 We sincerely hope, though, we shall be able to maintain the high quality you are used to . We are happy to announce that we will not be changing the quality we're used to.
 WRJR Executive Board and staff of WRJR thank all those who helped keep campus radio station on air for the next year . "On behalf of the Executive Board, I would like to sincerely thank all the people who helped to keep the station on the air"
 A special congratulations to the winning dorm — Mitchell House — for their tremendous effort . Also, Bob Borland who won the free record album won the prize .
 WRJR is still far from being completely financially well off . Any contributions anytime in the future will be most appreciated by the station .
 Sincerely, Robert L Livingston '63 Station Manager. small minority have expressed a view not held by the great majority. Sincerely .
 Few will deny that bibs and beanies are essential part of maintaining the friendly atmosphere of Bates .
 We feel that every part of Freshman Orientation laid out by the Student Governments has a definite purpose and meaning . We are happy to clarify the purpose of the Orientation .
 Each Frosh gets to know her roommate better between 10 and 11 a.m. The time between the girls have to be in their rooms is a time for them to get to know their roommates better .
 Being into bed by 11 requires them to organize their study habits and > provides a good night's sleep . Also, being into bed at 11 provides them with an organized study habits . Being in bed by eleven requires them with good sleep habits, they say .
 There are only four times during the three week period that are exception to this rule . Only four times in three weeks that are exceptions to the rule .
 We also feel that Orientation parties go a long way to create dorm spirit . The Orientation Parties are a great way to get the dorm spirit back in the dorm .
 The parties give the girls a chance to show their originality and ability in the quick preparation of skits .
 The overwhelming majority of Bates women regard these first weeks as some of the most memorable of their college careers . Bates women say the first weeks of college are the best they've ever experienced .
 Orientation is a way to show the Frosh that college is not all studying — a social as well as an academic experience . Orientation will be a way for upperclassmen to show them that college isn't all studying .
 A bearded lecturer-poet drawing lazily on his pipe, legs outstretched, was waiting expectantly for the first idea to be tossed out by one of the eight students . They hoped that the sheer intensity of their stares would inspire them with fresh ideas .
 The tutorial, that peculiar product of English education, had its roots at Oxford and Cambridge . The tutorial is a product of education that has its roots in Cambridge and Oxford .
 ""Oxbridge"" still maintains a ratio of about two students per tutor . The tutorial Manchester style has from four to twenty students .
 The discussions can be heated and stimulating or boring and a ""fag"" as my English iriends would often refer to them . The discussions are often heated or stimulating and boring and boring .
 The value of a tutorial for the individual student depends on the popularity of the topic under discussion, the tutor's ability to inspire interest in it, and the student's own preparation . A tutor's success depends on a student's interest in the topic and preparation .
 Large lectures result in formality and I found them to be a handicap in making contacts with both students and lecturers . Large lectures end up being formality, and formality is a problem for students .
 "I'm sure that one of my tutors did not know the names of the ten students gathered around him. I'm sure one of the tutors didn't know that he was there," she said .
 Of course I speak on the basis of only ttuo tutors and my limited experience in one department of one university . Of course, I speak out on the fact that I have limited experience of tutoring .
 In addition to the tutorial, there are many other differences which distinguish a Manchester university education from our own . Manchester University is a major city university in the UK .
 Readers, senior lecturers, lecturers and assistant lecturers make up the rest of the staff .
 Students applying for admission to department of their choice rather than to the university as a whole . De-centralization is the norm with students applying to departments of choice . Students apply for admission at department of choice, not to university as whole .
 Exams are given at the most twice a year; quizzes, daily check-ups, and other such aids are non-existent . Exams and quizzes are given only once a year, quizzes and daily check ups are not available .
 Anxiety drives them to sedatives, therapy, and unseemingly panting after the diploma that wins white-collar status . Anxiety drives some students to take sedatives and therapy .
 I found that Manchester university student was rather nonchalant about his education . I found him 'nonchalant' about his studies .
 He was unrushed, relaxed, and more passive than his American counterpart .
 English students undisturbed by the stifling competitive atmosphere of the race for the highest grade . There was not as much concern for the grade — for that sought after A, but more often found C . The English students are relatively undisturb by the competitive atmosphere .
 Manchester City are the only club in the world to play in the Premier League . The club has been in the top flight for more than a decade .
 Discussing English literature, with English tutors, and English students in tutorial enabled me to gain the English point of view . Discussing with English students and tutors helped me gain my English point-of-view, she says .
 The most important contribution that the tutorial system can make is to stress individual thought and expression of ideas . The tutorial system should stress that individual thought should be valued at the most .
 Many of them know more about American history and government than I do, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "Many of them are more than I know," he says . "They know more than me," he adds .
 The French student, more than the American, seems to know what he's doing and where he's going, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "The French student seems to be more than an American"
 It seems to me that the American student could use a little of this same attitude . It seems that the U.S. could use some of this attitude .
 Dr. Chute Explains Research Under Grant; Mentions Peace Movement Activities . After many years of study in various sections of the country from Maine to California .
 He was born in J^aples, Maine, and attended the university of Maine where he majored in zoology .
 He is presently head of the division of biology, geology, and mathematics at Bates College .
 To determine the effect of host hibernation and reduced host body temperature upon natural and experimental infections with animal parasites. The study was carried out in order to study the effects of hibernation on animal parasites .
 To determine the seasonal variation of incidence of infection with animal parasites in hibernating mammals, the study was conducted in a bid to find out seasonal variation in incidence of animal parasites . The study was carried out in order to identify the seasonal variations of infection .
 To investigate the physiological and biochemical basis for the adaptation of hibernators to their hosts, we will look at the physiological, biochemical basis of the adaptation .
 Chute lives with his wife and two children in Turner, a small town north of Auburn . He plans to do some duck hunting and sailing with his family .
 An avid poet for some twenty years, he has composed a great number of works . He has composed numerous works of poetry .
 Many of his poems are being published and some of his compositions can be seen in Bitter Root which is a new literary journal . Many of these poems have been published .
 There he headed a faculty group which took part in the famous Washington Demonstration . He headed the Washington demonstration .
 Nancy Marshall '65 and John Olson '65: Cilia Bonney '65; Cilia . Bonney and Doug Finley '65 . Nancy Marshall and John . Olson '64: "I'm a hero of the night, I'm not afraid to die"
 Lloyd Lux sparked a drive to make Physical Education courses academically respectable in the early fifties and sixties . The Physical Education Department led a drive for a new set of facilities with equal zeal .
 Many visitors to our campus notice the facilities bordering Franklin Street because they are there, and the underclassmen notice them because they cannot escape the P E. requirements . The facilities are there because they can't escape the requirements .
 The Cage has a history perhaps unique among the buildings on the college campus . However, the Cage is not the only building on the campus .
 In 1922, a special issue of the Bates Alumni Bulletin carried the completed plans for the complex . The old Gymnasium was then located just behind Hathorn Hall on the area that is now a plateau .
 It was evident even then that such a building could not be started without a substantial amount of money, it was evident . The building would not be able to be built without money .
 Its sides were each one and one-and-one-half times the altitude of Mount David . The floor space would accomodate five Roger Williams Halls .
 William Bingham II of Bethel, Maine, pledged $150,000 to build what was to be called the Clifton Daggett Gray Gymnasium .
 On a windy wintry morning in Demember, 1925, the cornerstone for the new building was laid . The cornerstone was laid on a cold, windy morning .
 A small army of men accompanied by seventeen dump carts, each drawn by two horses, labored to get the new plant ready . All through the winter the area opposite JB looked like something out of the Crimean War .
 At Commencement, visitors could be shown through the newest of the Bates buildings . With amazing speed the project neared completion so that by the following June, the project was complete .
 The previous graduates were well on their way to completing their campaign to raise one million dollars for the new complex . Indeed, the previous graduates had already raised enough for the project .
 The company also included a thirty-piece student orchestra, directed by Professor Crafts .
 The building has been host to rallies and field events, served as training areas for countless numbers of Phys Ed classes . It has provided indoor P E. areas unmatched in a college of Bates' size .
 The cage provided some of the most succe'ssful musical entertainment ever staged at Bates in connection with the now-dear Mayoralty campaigns . Also at a time when the Little Theater was years in the future, the cage was years .
 Theater historians point to such successes as ""Brigadoon" and ""Finian's Rainbow" in 1958 . Theater historians say they are proud of their successes .
 As the cage starts on its thirty-sixth year of service to Bates athletes, Dr. Dr. John Defterios has been in the cage for more than 30 years .
 Lux again announces that much use will be made of the building, especially for indoor winter track and baseball practice . Lux: "Much of the time will be devoted to indoor track, baseball practice" Lux again announced that much will be used for winter track practice and baseball .
 In the original 1922 plans were provisions for a SWIMMING POOL to occupy the area now carpeted by grass behind the connecting corridor between the WLB and the cage .
 Rows and rows of books, displayed open-faced, from mysteries to Plato, line the aisles of this Lewiston store . The store is located in the town of Lewiston, Maine .
 Norman Gillespie '64, Editor; David Williams '65, Carole Murphy '63, Assistants; Peter d'Errico '65; Margery Zimmerman '64; Martha Webb '63; Ralph Bartholomew '64 . Richard Rosenblatt '66, Richard Rosen
 I would like to offer a comment on the recent editorial and letters to the editor concerning Cuba . Bates Student: "I'm not surprised that Cuba is still Cuba"
 While the position presented by Mr Boyd and Mr Foster seems to be a fair rendition of current American attitude toward international affairs . Their presentation does suffer from this ""cake-eating"" fallacy .
 Freshman Orientation over the years has been a very cbfrtroversial subject . We feel that a small minority have expressed a view not held by the great majority . Freshmen Orientation has been very much of a controversial subject .
 19621963 WRJR Fund Drive has drawn to a close . The 19621963 Fund Drive is the culmination of much of which could have been avoided . The drive was organized to raise funds for the WRJR Foundation .
 The discussions can be heated and stimulating or boring and boring and a ""fag"" as my English friends would often refer to them . The discussions are often heated or stimulating and boring, but sometimes boring .
 I'm sure that one of my tutors did not know the names of the ten students gathered around him . Of course, I speak on the basis of only two tutors and my limited experience in one department of one university .
 De-centralization is the norm with students applying for admission to the department of their choice rather than to the university as a whole . Readers, senior lecturers, lecturers and assistant lecturerers make up the rest of the staff .
 He was born inJtfaples, Maine and attended the university of Maine where he majored in zoology .
 Britain's fifteen universities were built as local colleges in the 19th century . Most of the schools were built from red bricks, the bricks of which they are named .
 Many visitors to our campus notice the facilities bordering Franklin Street because they are there, and the underclassmen notice them because they cannot escape the P E. requirements . Underclassmen also notice they must comply with the requirements .
 Thousands of Maine fans roared their approval of the 20 to 0 Maine victory . A gusty winter wind did little to chill the enthusiasm of the fans .
 The Garnet Bobcat, after electing to kick to Maine to open the Garnet Line, went on to win . The many who journeyed lo Orono Saturday witnessed a fine ball game and a good showing .
 The Hatchmen were defeated by a good club, whose record failed to indicate their potentialities . They were beaten by a very good side, with a good side's record failing to show their potential .
 A Student headline last week mentioned the Black Bears as an improving clubhand that they were . The Black Bears were mentioned as an improvement clubhand .
 The Orono club jelled in time for its second series, State Series, and are now solid favorites to retain the title they annexed last year . The Oreno club won the title last year with a 3-1 win over the U.S.
 Looking back at the game, the 'Cats played well with the exception of a few shoddy pass coverage situations in the secondary . Looking back, it is always easy to do this, but it is easy to say they played well .
 The line and secondary held the Black Bears when the home club had a first and goal situation inside their own five yard line . In addition, the defensive line and the secondary held down the Black Bear when the game was over .
 Maine fullback Bill Chard forced to go over the line on his score from one yard out, as the fired up Garnet forward wall gave him no hole through which to score . Another indication of the superior play of the outweighed Bates line .
 The Hatchmen suffered their second defeat in six games . The pathetic lack of an offense and shoddy secondary play accounted for the Hatchmen's defeat .
 The visitor's attacking forces could, only muster a total gain of 92 yards as the famed spread, which had befuddled Maine the year before, failed . Maine's attack failed to gain any of their own yards in the game .
 Of the seven first downs gained by the Lewiston club, three came on first and five situations as the Westerman club was offside . Three of the seven were on first downs and five were offside situations . The Westerman side won seven of the first downs .
 Bowdoin won their first Series tilt last week and are stingy defenders . A reversal in form must be shown this coming Saturday as the Bowdoins take on the Maine side . Bowdoining won the first series last week .
 Bowdoin has a fine qb-end combination in Harrington and Drigotas . In addition, the secondary's pass defense must be sharpened up in addition to the defensive line .
 It will be a long week of practice sessions for the Hatchmen this week . The Hatchmen will be hoping to win a place in the Australian Open .
 What must be worked on most is getting the squad up for the two coming tilts . The squad must be prepared for the upcoming matches .
 The burden for this task falls upon the coaching staff and team leaders . The burden of this task is to coach staff and leaders .
 Seven seniors on this year's team will wind up their career never having won a State Series game . If this year holds true, the seniors will end their career with no State Series win . This year's seniors will be the first time they've played in the State Series .
 A 6-2 record and possible share in the Series title is a lot more impressive than a 4-4 record . A possible share of the series title would be more impressive .
 It must show 500% better support than it did last Friday night when the worst (this seems to be a year for superlatives) rally in the four years I've attended Bates was put on .
 Not only was this rally distinctive by its lack or absence of planning, but also by the lack of attendance . The rally was held in New York City, New York, on Saturday .
 In addition to the mass exodus of students, the remaining few on campus never made it over to the cage . The remaining few students on campus did not make it over .
 The team and participants in the rally outnumbered those in attendance . The rally outnumbered attendees .
 The sound of a bass drum marching through the campus is indicative of something more than a wandering minstrel . Perhaps it was because of the lack of publicity for the affair, but certainly it was indicative .
 It will be a challenge for those running it to make it worthwhile, and to get the apathetic studentry to attend . The event will be held in a bid to attract apathetic students to it .
 The Black Bear took over inside inside the Black Bear's fifty yard line as soph linebacker Steve Ritter recovered a Maine fumble . The Maine defense recovered a fumble inside the end of the first half .
 The 'Cats, working out of Coach Hatch's spread formation, seemed bound for paydirt . Tom ""Boxcar"" Carr pounded the middle of the Maine line for good yardage . Coach Hatch was Coach Hatch .
 The Garnet offense bogged down when an illegal procedure penalty forced Bates to punt . Bates punted a first down inside the Maine forty, forcing the Garnet to punt again .
 Bates stalled Maine's offense, but the Black Bear quarterback Ray Austin's booming punt rolled dead on the Garnet four . Bates stalled the Maine offense, and Austin's punter missed a field goal .
 The Garnet offense was never able to open up its attack in the first half of the game .
 The Black Bears were surging back as Paul Planchon's punt rolled out on the Bates 45 to open the second period . The Black Bear had a strong start to the second half .
 Maine was good for short yardage and a big fifteen yard personal foul penalty against Bates moved Maine to the Bates 3 yard line where the fired up Hatchmen again halted the Maine drive . Bill Chard was the sparkplug of the Maine ground assault all afternoon .
 A wobbly boot gave Maine the ball again, this time on the Bates 37, and the Black Bears were knocking on Mr Touchdown's door for the third time . Maine won the game for the second time in a row, with a score of 14 points .
 The Bears seemed to run out of steam on the Bates fifteen . Running through the air and on fullback Chard's short rushes the Bears seem to finally run .
 Maine quarterback Tom Austin found halfback Dave Brown all alone with his bullseye pass . The Black Bears had their first score of the game .
 The Garnet again kicked to Maine to open the second half and after holding the Black BOBCAT of the WEEK Bears, the Maine kicking game, so important in keeping Bates deep in its own territory, again gave the Garnet the ball in the shadow of their own goal posts .
 Fullback Chard hurtled over the piled up Bates line just far enough before he was hurled back to give Maine touchdown number two 9:65 deep in the second half . Chard's touchdown was the second for Maine .
 For the first time this season this season, the 'Cats as they sought | Bobcat of the Week laurels have vainly to put together a sustained scoring drive in face of the hard charging Maine line . Maine Line Tough. Key interceptions and the superior Maine kicking game .
 Black Bear fullback Don Darrah stole a 'Cat aerial on the Bates 23 and on the first play form scrimmage, hit second team halfback Dick Shaw for the touchdown . Substitute quarterback Dave Lippard hit secondteam halfback Dave . Shaw for a touchdown .
 Roger Boucher's try for the extra point was no good after two previous successful attempts . The Black Bear had downed the Bobcat 20 to 0 and was off-running in defense of its state series crown .
 Bob Lanz has been a soccer player for more than 30 years . Lanz was a member of the U.S. national soccer team . He has won more than three World Cup titles .
 The former Deerfield Prep school booter rifled two shots past the Brandeis goalie to pace the 'Cat squad to a mild upset over the Waltham, Mass., school .
 Bob was not selected as 'Cat of the Week' following his four goal output against Nichols . Much speculation and comment came over the fact that he was not named as the 'Cat' of the week .
 The decision was based on the fact that Nichols is a weak team, and in the light of the outstanding gridiron performance turned in by Paul Planchon, the decision was made .
 The modest sophomore also disclaimed the fact that he is first in New England in scoring because of the schedule we play, saying that if Harvard played our, schedule Oharii would have eighty goals . Harvard says he would have scored eighty goals if Harvard plays Harvard's schedule .
 Aspirants to the squad have been practicing nightly in the Alumni Gymnasium in preparation for the upcoming season .
 Maine is considered to be one of the best teams in New England this year . The score is heavily in favor of the Maine squad .
 Ellis of Maine won, breaking the course record held by Eric Silverberg . Ellis broke Silverberg's course record . Ellis won the race .
 Only boys to finish for Bates were Silverberg in seventh and Mike Gregus in eighth . Silverberg and Gregus finished seventh and eighth .
 All of our runners bettered their times by an average of 30 seconds . This is clearly evident when it is observed that all of us bettered our times by 30 seconds.
 Wolf of U.N.H. was 14 seconds off the Franklin Park course record . Wolf's time of 20:35 was only 14 seconds shorter than the course record set at Franklin Park . Wolf was the only person in the world to break the time .
 Bates' Silverberg's time of 20:35 was only 35 seconds off the winning pace . U.N. runner Rencou was second place .
 Coach Slovenski was high in his praise for the Bates squad . The coach was also high in praise for his team .
 In regard to the losses to Maine and New Hampshire, Walt pointed out that the Bobcats generally have strong New England state universities included in their schedule . These schools are consistently good in cross-country, Walt said .
 He was also happy with the number of students who turned out for the Maine meet . The new campus course worked out well for the onlooking spectators .
 Garnet meets rival Bowdoin at 3:00 p.m. Friday . Garnet fans will be able to cheer on the Garnet . The Garnet has a good cheer section .
 Coach Slovenski regards Bowdoin as a good team, that Bates will have to have its hands full . Bates coach Slovenski says he will have his hands full in the game against the team .
 The 'Cats drew first blood as Bob Lanz took a pinpoint pass from George Beebe and rifled a drive past the Colby goalie with only 12 seconds gone in the game .
 The Garnet squad's play was characterized by good defensive work and capitalization on the few scoring opportunities allowed by the fancy passing Judges . Garnet's defensive work was good enough for the Judges .
 Bob Lanz added to his New* England scoring title by notching two goals, the winning goal com ing early in the first period, and the final score being added in the fourth frame by the hard shooting sophomore . Lanz notched two goals in four frames .
 Senior Lee Nute added the second goal with a fine shot coming after Lanz's initial goal in the first period . Senior Lee Lanz scored the first goal of the game in the second period .
 The defense minded Bobcat club yielded only a dozen shots at goalie Don Mawhinney, who handled all the Brandeis scoring threats with ease .
 Bob Thompson and Todd Lloyd played outstanding defensive games for the Bates squad . George Beebe kept Garnet attack going with some excellent head-balls .
 Lanz led the offensive forces with able assistance from wing Lloyd Bunten . Lanz was able to lead the offensive force in the first half of the match .
 One difficulty experienced was that the Bates forces often failed to coordinate an attack . The Bates forces experienced a difficulty in coordinating an attack.
 The Judges dominated play with their short passing attack . The Garnet defense kept the homeclub's offense show at midfield .
 Polar Bear booters invade Garcelon Field . Somervillemen seek revenge of 4-1 loss inflicted by Bowdoin on Friday .
 The Brunswick booters came storming back from a 1-0 defeat . Former Ail-American Has Copped Three State Titles at Bates . Walt Slovenski has built an impressive track record .
 Walt's biggest thrills since coming to Bates were his first State Series Championship in 1957 (the first for Bates since 1912) and two thrilling home victories over the strong Black Bears from Orono .
 Wali Slovenski started his athletic career at a small high school in Cherry Tree, Pennsylvania . Walt started his high school athletic career in high school . Wali started his career at high school.
 Slovenski was nicknamed 'Slivers' by a coach who couldn't pronounce Slovenski . He was nicknamed "Slivers" by a Slovenski coach . Slovenski played for the Slovenian national team in Slovenia .
 After high school he went to Seton Hall Preparatory School where he gained national acclaim winning the national Prep school broad jump in Madison Square Garden . He also won the national broad jump championship in New York City .
 After one semester at Syracuse, Walt was called into the Navy . Walt was an All-American at the University of Syracuse .
 Slovenski returned to Syracuse where he gained athletic fame . After his sojourn with Uncle Sam, Slovenski went back to Syracuse .
 He became the first and only Orangeman to be chosen an Ail-American in baseball . He was the only orangeman in baseball to be named an American .
 Slovenski's name still appears under total punt returns and pass interceptions . Despite the rewriting of the record book by Jimmy Brown, Slovenski still has a name on his name in the book .
 Walt's record in track has been phenomenal, considering the male enrollment . Walt's track record is phenomenal considering the size of the school .
 His record in dual tracks approaches ninety per cent . His teams have annexed the state series in 1957, 1958, and 1960 . He has a record of 90 per cent on dual tracks .
 In picking his all-time greats Walt stressed that his selections were based on attitude and contributions to the team as well as ability .
 Bill Neuguth, captain of the 1958 team might well exemplify the use of track manpower at Bates . The team won the World Series in 1958 .
 Bill was ""discovered"" in gym class and after an awkward start became a star in the hurdles . Bill was "discovered" by a friend in gym and became an Olympic hurdler .
 Officials at home meets tend to keep the track meet moving and this contributes to high spectator interest . Secondly the officials at home . meet tend to . keep track meeting moving . This contributes to . high spectator . interest .
 The fact that 10% of the student body are out for one form of track or another emphasizes the third point — utilization of the track potential at Bates . Bates is one of the top three universities in the world, according to the report .
 Student interest is as high as in any other school in New England, the school says . The school is located in New Hampshire .
 The Bates booters lost their first defeat of the season in the cage . The two teams meet at the same venue on Saturday night .
 There will be a brief meeting of all junior varsity and varsity track squad candidates today at 5:30m. in the Bates field house .
 W.A. A The big thing nowadays is the hockey Playday coming up November 17 . W. A.A.'s Playday will be November 17, 2015 .
 Teams from Colby and Maine will come here for the day . The games will be played on the field next to J.B., and all spectators will be welcome .
 Miss Nell puts the squad through the usual drills of corners, drives, wings, tackles and tackles . When there are enough people we play a game. Miss Nells puts the players through the drills .
 Because of age and a few other frailities, the senior women are beginning to fade . The senior women in the U.S. are dying .
 Those still hanging on are Pokie Kestila, Sue Hermann, Les Jones, Nancy Mamrus, Ginny Erskine, and Judy Warren . Judy Warren: "I'm going to be a survivor"
 Judy Dietz, Penny Brown, Pris Clark, Bonnie Mesinger, Barb Remick, Sue Pitcher, Anne Cawley, and Pauline Spence are among the stars .
 Once Winning Polar Bears Face Bobcats Here In Toss -Up Battle . Saturday the Bobcats will clash on Garcelon field with Bowdoin College football team . The Bobcats are ranked 2-3771 4* Eighth Bates .
 Some sports writers rate the Polar Bears as a dark horse candidate for the Maine State Series title . The Polar Bears are expected to be dark horse candidates for the title .
 Four defeats came at the hands of Tufts, Wesleyan, Amherst and Williams, all formidable opponents . The team's four defeats came against Tufts and Wesleyan .
 Head coach Nels Corey lost 12 lettermen through graduation . Corey has lost 12 players through graduation this season . Corey says it is a 'building year' for Corey's coaching staff .
 Coach Corey Corey has had to build a team from 13 returning lettermen and some promising underclassmeen . Coach Corey has faced a tough start to the season with 13 returning players .
 The Polar Bear offense is built around the running of junior halfback Bob Hooke . Hooke is one of the team's top offensive players .
 Hooke was a key reserve on last year's club, averaging 3.3 yards per carry . Hooke averaged 3.5 yards per run last season . He is a key player for West Bromwich Albion since joining in 2010 .
 This year the Polar Bears depends a great deal on Hooke's performances . The Polar Bears are hoping to win their first game of the season . Hooke will be the team's star player in the 2014 Winter Olympics .
 Ryan is the steady type of ball player who gets the job done and makes no mistakes . Ryan is a native of Beverly, Mass., and is a steady ball player .
 Bob Harrington of Danvers, Mass., will probably start at quarterback for the Polar Bears . Harrington is expected to play for the team in the fall .
 The strongest part of Bowdoin's game is defense, though, and it is their line play which has kept them in most of their ball games .
 Co-captain Joe Hickey will hold down one tackle slot for the Polar Bears . The Polar Bears will play host to the U.S. University of Washington State in 2015 .
 Hickey started at center for the Polar Bears the past two years . Hickey is a native of Longmeadow, Mass., and started in 2011 . The Polar Bears are the defending champions in the U.S.
 Roger Bill over Smith South in the ""B"" league, and again for Roger Williams over Smtih North in ""C"" division . The SimitramOTal Seeini© by Don Delmore .
 Dual niter makes the difference J DUAL FILTERl QTCytOTl it our miildlr name <B » r the team emerging victorious .
 Teams in two of the three leagues finish the season with identical records . Two of the teams in two leagues finish with identical league records .
 East Parker and J.B. were tied in the ""A"" league, and East Parker, West Parker, and J.-B. all had similar records in the "C" league . East Parker was one of the last teams to win a league title .
 Loaded West Parker, the class of the ""B"" division, ran away from all opposition and held undisputed possession of first place . West Parker won the first place in the division .
 All of East's touchdowns were the result of passes as they capitalized on J.B.'s weak pass defense . East scored touchdowns in the first half of the game .
 East will next play West Parker for the ""C"" league championship and the right to meet West Parker's ""B"" champions . East will then play West for the championship . West Parker will then meet East's ""C" league champions .
 J.B. B. defeated East Parker 24-0 to reign as ""A"" league champs . Other playoff action resulted in J.A. defeating East Parker 24-0 .
 J.B.'s fast and talented backfield of Jeff Hillier, Pete Graves, Bob Blagg, and Ron Vance proved to be too much for East . Each member of the quartet scored a touchdown for the East .
 The one-sided score was somewhat of a surprise after these same two squads had split two games during the regular season by 12-6 verdicts . The same two teams had split 2 games in regular season . The result was a surprise as the two sides had split by 12 in the
 The playoff squads will resume action this week after being ""snowed-out"" of the games last week . The playoff teams have been snowed out of last week's games in snow .
 East Parker will face West Parker on Monday to settle their ""C"" league dispute . West Parker will play East Parker in the final game of the season .
 The winner of this contest will take on West Parker of the ""B"" division on Tuesday . The winner will be the winner of the contest .
 The ""A"" league champ, J.B.B., will play the winner of Tuesday afternoon's game on Wednesday . The winner of the game will play Wednesday's winner in the final .
 This is the part of the season for which the squads wait as now the dorms are able to pile up their Intramural points . It all adds up to an exciting week of Intramurals football .
 Tune in at the same time next week for a summary of the colorful playoff action. Tune in to see how the playoff action unfolded .
 On Tuesday, November 6, a five man committee will meet to consider a plan for using the Bates campus on a year-round basis . A five-man committee will discuss a plan to use the campus in the winter .
 Sadie Hawkins Dance is this Saturday . The committee includes Chair-* Sadies lurk in Den .
 This is your big chance to grab, hook, catch, trap, ambush, or apprehend that beautiful hunk of man you've been eyeing recently . All you Sadies, this is your chance to catch, catch or ambush that beautiful man you're eyeing recently.
 The dance is going to be a regular Dogpatch Holiday . Better get your bid in early .
 Sadie is a junior at the University of Columbia University . Sadie says she is nervous about the situation on the campus .
 Loud speakers, pools for the ""loser"", and liquid refreshment are just a part of the elaborate preparations made when the guys find the line for a change . Loud speakers and pools are just one of the preparations made .
 There might be quite a line of would-be newlyweds, but Sam will be there until the very end, 11:45 . Sam will appear at the end of the show at 11.45.
 Howie Davison will call the dances, and the Merrimanders and Frye House girls will provide extra entertainment . Merrimandandand girls will perform at the dances .
 George R Healy, and Professors Brooks Quimby, Walter H Lawrance, James V Miller, and Garold W Thumm. Find your craziest costume, and tickle your ingenuity into making a cool ^corsage .
 They propose to study a new college calendar from the academic point of view . The proposal is based on the idea of a new academic calendar .
 The most practical systems seem to be the ""Trimester"" — that is, dividing the year into three semesters with one coming during the summer; or the four-quarter plan, committee member Dr. Dr. David Perry says .
 Garold Thumm stated that the decision will not necessarily be on either of these systems, or even on a twelve month plan . The decision will be made on whether or not to purchase a new system .
 This is not the first time that the idea of keeping Bates open on a year-round basis has been considered . Bates will be open to the public in the fall .
 In the spring of 1961, a Faculty committee discussed the pros and cons of the Trimester system . In 1962 they discussed the plan of dividing the year into four quarters . The plan was approved by the Faculty in 1962 .
 President Phillips mentioned the arrangement in his welcome to freshmen at the fir$t assembly of Freshman Week .
 Under such an arrangement one-third more students could be educated in the same amount of time as now, but the student-professor ratio would not be sacrificed . He stated that under such a arrangement, one third more students would be educated .
 A three day exhibition is scheduled by the Bates Art Association beginning this Friday, November ninth . The Art Association Presents Three Day Student Exhibit is scheduled for November 9 .
 An Art Association member will be present to answer any questions one may have .
 The Bates League Discussion Contest and Debate Clinic will be held on Friday afternoon, November ninth . The annual session will take place at Bates on November 9 .
 An address on the U.S. Foreign Trade Policy by Mr Joseph Salerno will be presented in the Little Theater at three o'clock .
 Members of the debating team and argumentation course will act as moderators in the panel discussions . The debate team will be the moderators of the discussions .
 At eight o'clock there will be an exhibition debate in the Little Theater . The debate will take place at 8pm on Thursday .
 Morris Lelyveld '64 and Norman Gillespie '64 will argue the affirmative against the negative team . Norman Davis '65 and Ronald Snell '65 will argue against each other . The negative team will be made up of Norman Davis and Norman Davis .
 The program will be concluded by a brief critique on the debate by Professor Quimby .
 Portsmouth High School held a similar program for high schools enrolled in the Bates Interscholastic Debating League . Bates students, faculty, housemothers, and friends of the college . The debate team sponsored the program at Portsmouth High .
 Mrs. Goldat and Mr. Walsh are among the faculty members contributing to the show .
 Tagliabue has also created a linoleum block print used for the invitations sent to friends in the area . The print is also used to send invitations to friends and family .
 The Association has, in its short three year history, expanded both in numbers and in the types of art undertaken . The Association was founded in 2010 and has expanded in its three year period .
 In this, the largest collection of Baskin's ever assembled, were modern representations of sculpture in wood and bronze, inkings, and block prints . The largest collection ever assembled .
 Future plans include more trips and also speakers to instruct in the vast field of art techniques .
 Freshmen campaign for Class Elections at Bates College . Freshmen will elect their initial slate of officers .
 The positions of president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, and treasurer are open to the entire class . As many as eight students vying for a single position .
 Freshmen who sought eligibility returned the necessary petitions to Dean Boyce yesterday . Freshmen sought eligibility for eligibility returned necessary petitions yesterday . The necessary petitions were returned to Boyce .
 These pesitions required the signatures of twenty-five frosh to secure entrance in this Friday's primary . The students were required to sign up for the primary on Friday .
 As a prelude to the elections the prospective candidates will be presented to the freshman class after Friday's chapel . The prospective candidates are to be presented in the chapel .
 Each candidate will be allowed to state his qualifications in a short speech . Candidates will have to state their qualifications in short speeches . Each candidate is allowed to speak to the public about his qualifications .
 After this introduction, voting will commence in lower Chase Hall and continue until 5:00m. Voting will begin at 5:30pm .
 The three top candidates for each office will be entered in a runoff to be held next Tuesday, November 13 . Following the primary contest, the top candidates will face off in a twelve-month system .
 The present college structure cannot handle such a great number of students . The only solution to this problem seems to be either to build new colleges or expand the old ones .
 The division of the year into four parts, of which each student would attend classes for three ""quarters"", seems most practical . In order to keep Bates a small college, the division would provide for more students .
 Under these systems the classes would remain small enough to facilitate individual attention to each student by the professor . Students would be able to learn from each other in small groups .
 A system such a system such as this would utilize the facilities of the college which now stand idle during the summer months . A system like this would use the facilities which are currently unused during summer .
 The expensive buildings and equipment are less expensive to maintain when not in use . The point has been raised, however, that the expensive buildings are less .
 The committee must, decide whether the increase in funds obtained by using the facilities all year round would offset the maintenance costs . The committee has to decide whether, or not, to use the facilities year-round .
 The student could speed up his graduation if he wished to attend college in the part of the year during which he would ordinarily be on vacation, he says . The student says he wants to take on a more concentrated schedule .
 Problems would be created by the adoption of a twelve month plan that would have to be faced . Problems would have been created by adoption of the 12-month plan, says the mayor .
 We do not have enough students to offer every course in every period, for example . We have to offer more courses than we could have, says the head of education .
 If students were not on campus for a certain course which they needed or wanted, this would present a difficulty . Students would have to be on campus at all times to complete the course they need .
 Intercollegiate sports are established on the theory that students will be in college from September to June . Scheduled athletics would have to be considered to see if programs could be readjusted .
 Students who enjoy sports as extracurricular activities might find themselves off campus during the season of their favorite sport . Also, those students who enjoy sport as a part of their extracrural activities may find themselves away from campus .
 The committee will not report to faculty for at least several months, if at all this year . The committee is not expected to report to the faculty for several months or not this year.
 They have given no indication as yet on how soon their decision would go into effect . If they advocate a year-round program, they have not given any indication how soon they would be implemented .
 The arrangement, however, is being considered more seriously than ever before . It may very well eventually affect some students now at Bates . The arrangement is being seriously considered .
 One had only to recognize the demeanor and choice of language to realize that here were politicians — perhaps young of age, but old with indoctrination . "Here are politicians who are perhaps young, but are old, but indoctrination. One had to recognize that here are politicians," she said
 Jeffrey Rouault '65 ran through a denunciation of the timing of the recent Presidential action on Cuba on Cuba . Rouault: The timing of President Obama's recent action on the island nation was not the best timing .
 He pointed to the President's ""mixing of personal policy and national policy"" or in clearer terms the use of the office of President to win elections . He said President's use of office of president to win election was a mistake .
 David Williams '65 commented briefly that he didn't think that the way to win elections was to remain in Washington . He then pointed out the reasons for joining a political club, especially the Young Democrats . Williams'65 said he joined the club because he wanted to be a Democrat .
 He spoke of his party as ""the party of the future"" and then listed their past presidents to prove it . He then listed his party's past presidents in order to prove that .
 Many will consider the following comments unfair and unnecessarily harsh . Many consider the comments unfair, unnecessarily harsh. Many of the comments will be considered unfair .
 The consideration, however, is not whether what was said was funny, but whether it was meaningful, says CNN.com .
 The questions concerning the extent of presidential politics are a relevant point . The questions are about whether the president can be trusted to lead the country .
 Williams managed to bundle together a series of cliches, a few magic words, a personal attack and enough circumlocutions to speak for ten minutes . Williams was speaking for the first time in 10 minutes .
 As a parodist of contemporary Democrats, his initial comments were humorous . But he said that as a satirist, they were humorous. As a comedian, he said, "I'm not a Democrat"
 With the realization that this was not parody, but discourse that the speaker conceived as meaningful — with this realization came the disillusionment. However, with the realization . of this realization, with this . realization came . disillusionment . of the speaker .
 All interested students should sign up at the Guidance and Placement Office . All students are encouraged to sign up .
 All interested students should see Professor Kendall, Room 303, Pettigrew Hall, for information . Professor Kendall is a professor at the University of Cambridge .
 During the summer of 1963, the U.S. Information Agency plans to offer trainee programs in both its Broadcasting Service t (more popularly known as The Voice of America) and its Television Service .
 Applicants should be pursuing college courses in such fields as Communications, Government or Foreign Language . Applicants must be pursuing such fields, such as communications, Government, Foreign language .
 Information about application procedure is available in the Guidance and Placement Office . Applicants are encouraged to apply for the position .
 Camp Spruce Hill in Tolland, Massachusetts is in need of men and women counselors for the season July 1 to August 26 . Camp is open to campers for the summer and fall .
 Guidance and Placement Office will be receiving many letters concerning available camp positions for men and women . Camp positions will be available in summer camps throughout the year .
 Freshmen Elect Stu-GAndWAA Represen ta ti ves last week . Freshmen elected at Park and Main on the women's side of campus .
 Ruth Christenson, of Plainville, Connecticut was elected as the freshman representative to StuG, the Women's Student Government . Christenson was elected to represent the women's student government .
 The installation of freshmen to the honor system through the Honor Code is scheduled for this Sunday, November 11 .
 Proctors will be discussing various aspects of the honor system with freshmen . Women in the class of '66 may have questions regarding signing of the code .
 The Women's Athletic Association has selected freshman dorm representatives for the coming year . Another women's organization, the Women's Athletics Association, has also recently selected freshmen dorm representatives .
 Chase, Tenney Bennett; Mitchell, Sue Pitcher; Frye, Ann Cawley; Hacker, Jodi Lajaunie; Milliken, Barb Remick . Wilson, Nancy Munio; Whittier, Carol Brown; Page, Joan Folcik and C
 The women of the class of '66 elected Ann Cawley as their WAA Board representative . Ann was elected to the board of the WAA board .
 The big event looming in the near future for the WAA is the hockey sports day against Maine and Colby on November 17 on Bates' own field .
 The girls have been practicing for four weeks now under the direction of Miss Nell and Ginny Erskine '63 . The girls are preparing for the first time in four weeks . They are hoping to raise $1,000 in scholarships .
 About thirty freshmen petitioning for offices in their coming class elections . James Stewarl; ""SASKATCHEWAN "" Alan Ladd Class Of '66 To Conduct Primary Balloting Friday .
 It is quite possible that the Bates campus has not seen such interest and enthusiasm since the nearly-forgotten days of Mayoralty . The Bates campus is full of excitement and enthusiasm .
 This Friday the Class of '66 will get a chance to demonstrate their overall class spirit during the primary balloting which will be run until 3 in Lower Chase Hall .
 An important freshman class meeting after Friday's chapel will precede the day's elections . The elections will be held on Saturday .
 President: Marshall Snow Max Steinheimer Richard Verrill Douglas White Vice President: Allen Cummings Karen Hastie John Malcolm Peter Oakes David Russell Pauline Spence Secretary: Christine Carter Carole Cooper . Treasurer: Robert Borland William Dye Russell Reilly Alice Kaplan John Lewis Arthur Valliere Susan
 Garold Thumm spoke to the Government class on the nature of federalism, November 1 . Thumm: Federalism is a model of state sovereignty .
 Thumm described the federal system as a form of government characterized by a balance of political power equally distributed between the states and the central body . Thumm: Federal system is characterized by balance of power .
 Disputes arise between the state and federal government as to what powers belong to whom . It is almost inevitable that disputes arise between states and federal governments .
 A federal system is characterized by the existence of a written constitution and a court system to settle these power disputes . A federal government is characterized as a federal system with a constitution .
 In his discussion of court decisions in the mum EMPIRE EMPIRE NOW PLAYING SUN. niiiiii.iiii .iiiiiii . In the discussion of the court cases in the.m. of the . mother of . the baby .
 Many supposedly federal forms of government do not exhibit clear separations of power between the two levels of government . Yet many supposedly federal government forms do not show clear separation of power . The U.S. House of Representatives, the Senate of Representatives and the White House are among the most powerful
 A poll will be taken in a future chapel program . Student and faculty opinion will be a deciding factor in any changes in bookstore .
 The questionnaire will ask if students feel there are too many articles such as sweatshirts, jewelry, and things other than books on display . Students will also be asked if they feel the display is too many .
 Students will be asked if they would be satisfied if such articles were displayed only at certain times of the year, such as Back-to-Bates week-end, the beginning and the end of the school year, and before vacations .
 The items would be available at all times, although not constantly taking up so much space in displays . It would be possible to display the items at all at once, although they would not be constantly in display space .
 Poll will further try to determine how many students would buy books were there a larger selection offered . Poll will also try to find out if students would purchase books if there was a larger choice .
 The questionnaire will also ask for suggestions including the types of books students would be interested in buying . The questionnaire also asks for suggestions on what students would like to buy .
 The student committee investigating the bookstore has been attempting to find out how many of the complaints against the bookstore are legitimate and the easiest and most efficient way of remedying the situation .
 Members of the committee are especially interested in urging those changes which will accommodate student needs . The committee is especially interested .
 The committee is operating along the same lines as the successful student committee on library hours of last year . The committee realizes that any changes must come through the administration .
 Faculty members will be asked to fill out forms expressing approval or disapproval of the committee's activities . Faculty members are asked to make any suggestions they may have .
 The faculty poll will be used along with the student poll to support the committee's recommendations . The student poll will also be used to back the committee .
 The committee realizes that the bookstore could not be expected to be on the same level with those of larger colleges and universities . Other schools may be contacted for information .
 The committee does not intend to make any unreasonable requests . Recognize Limitations . The committee will not request unreasonable things .
 The members are fully aware of the limitations of space in the bookstore and the fact that there is a demand for articles other than books . The members of the bookstore are aware of their limitations .
 Much of the space now devoted to display of such articles could be used for books . However, they also note that the demand for such articles comes at certain times of the year .
 Many students have expressed a desire to see more books on display . In addition, they note that many students have asked for more books .
 In the era of the paperback, more space devoted to books in the bookstore is essential . In the paperback era, the bookstore should have more space dedicated to books .
 Glass cases for such articles as are on display are outdated, according to the museum . Glass cases are outdated and glass cases are also outdated .
 Simply because they would be removed would not mean that these articles would not be unavailable . Simply because of their removal would not stop them being published would not necessarily mean that they were unavailable .
 Anything accomplished by this committee must be done on the basis of student support . Once again, it must be stressed that anything accomplished must be student support, it is said .
 Those who will be called upon to complete the poll can give that support . The poll will be released on Friday .
 Each student should give it careful thought and use this method of making his influence felt, says the author .
 American Gem Society members are members of the Gem Society . The Gem Society is dedicated to the American Gem and Gem Gem Gem Museum .
 Lewiston | Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 BumnnnniuimiimnRinaftn imtumtnfflinnmiiuuwiimiamniHBmBaMiuiitaKl Al Marden '63 and Bud Spector '63
 One hundred and fifty miles separate Lewiston from Boston, the nearest cultural center . Lewiston is 100 miles from Boston .
 Students despair at the supposed dearth of cultural opportunities in the Lewiston area . However, before students despair, they should really take a closer look at the area .
 Victor News carries the largest selection of paperbacks in the state of Maine . Located on Ash Street directly across the street from the Lewiston Post Office is Victor News .
 Well over 2,000 different paperbacks on display at Victor's in Victor's showroom . Books put out by thirty different publishers .
 Victor's also carries hard-covered books and Barnes and Noble College Outline Series . Victor's is also carrying hard-coated books and hard-cover books .
 All types of literature ranging from cheap thrillers and westerns to the classics are included . Includes all kinds of literature including thrillers, westerns and thrillers .
 Victor's has tried to combine these various types of literature to satisfy many different tastes, thus making it difficult to draw a comparison between this type of bookstore and ouir own bookstore . Victor's is located in downtown New York .
 Victor's has two thirty-foot-long, five foot high open face racks covered on both sides with paperbacks . Victor's also has two 30-foot long open-face racks .
 There are seven rotating racks and one whole wall thirty feet long and eight feet high covered with books . In addition, there is also a wall that is 30 feet long long and 8 feet high .
 In the downstairs section there is a large assortment of newspapers and magazines . True Confessions to Harpers and the Atlantic Monthly are among the magazines .
 These are also arranged in an open rack, making it easy to poke around to see what you find .
 For those students who would like to keep abreast of new publications including the current best sellers. For those . Students who would . like to . read the latest best sellers .
 Victor's has a printed list of current publications and a special rack for the latest books . Victor's is a print-only store with a special collection of current books .
 If Victor's doesn't have a book immediately available, it can be easily ordered . If you want to buy a copy of this book, you can buy it online .
 If the -book can be obtained from a local distributor, it can be had within twenty-four hours . The -book is available from Amazon.com and other major retailers .
 This service can be of great help for students who would like inexpensive paperbacks for term projects as well as for their own enjoyment . This service is available to students who need to buy cheap paperbacks .
 He says he is glad to order books for professors as well as students if they will come and speak to him about their needs . The professor says he's always happy to buy books for students and professors .
 Reynolds is particularly interested in talking with seniors who might qualify for Peace Corps projects . All concerned students are advised to meet with him to discuss a possible Peace Corps future .
 Peace Corps provides service opportunities in nearly every skill area . The greatest need continues for teachers of all subjects and levels . Peace Corps offers service opportunities for teachers and students .
 More than 4,000 Volunteers are already at work or in training for projects in Africa, Asia, and Latin America . Volunteers have been volunteering for more than a decade .
 Plans call for nearly 10,000 Volunteers to be in service in more than 40 countries by the end of next year . Volunteers will serve in 40 countries across the globe .
 A major emphasis (faring the next year will center on community development projects in Latin America) A major focus will be in community development .
 Volunteers, who must be American citizens with no dependents under 18, receive two to three months of intensive training at an American college or university in the customs, history, culture, and language of the chosen country .
 Refresher courses cover the skills that the Volunteers will use on the job . Volunteers will be trained to use the skills they will need to be used to help in the field . Volunteers are required to take part in the training process of a volunteer .
 Additional training is generally given at the Peace Corps' training camps in Puerto Rico . The Peace Corps is based in the U.S.
 Volunteers serve for two years and receive a living allowance to cover housing, food, clothing, and other expenses, plus a termination payment of $75 for each month of service . Volunteers serve two years, receive a $75 monthly payment for each monthly service .
 Despite dire pronouncements, Peace Corps Volunteers have been remarkably successful . Volunteers are ambassadors of the U.S. Despite dire predictions that they could never succeed, the Peace Corps has been successful .
 With the exception of one or two incidents, the Volunteers have acted maturely and intelligently in assisting the less fortunate in underdeveloped countries . The Volunteers' actions have been "maturely and wisely"
 Volunteers inject a vigorous America into countries which hitherto had seen only rapacious American capitalism . Volunteers have not not the polish of many of our ""ambassadors"
 In considering any action, it would appear to many that I am expressing the opinion of the Women's Student Government Board . Let me hasten to say that this letter is representative of only one point-of-view — mine .
 The editorial which appeared was a well-written, organized and conclusive expression of an attitude at variance with that of the majority of women on campus . The editorial was an attempt to make a point for women in the U.S. college .
 As president of Stu-G, I, personally, feel orientation was successful this year .
 In support of this judgment, witness the general attitude among freshman women at the conclusion of the orientation period, witness to the .
 The thought underlying the editorial pertained to the general accomplishment of purpose, not the specifics . The editorial expresses the general purpose of the project .
 If one can accept the word orientation and all that it implies, rather than ""hazing"" and its connotations, one can see that the ""spirit and letter of the law"" account not only for the in elusion of all frosh but also for the elimination of any individually
 Consider a small dorm where one particular girl becomes the brunt of upperclass activity . Consider a girl in the dorm where she is forced to endure the most of the time .
 These pranks could conceivably continue all year with no provision for control . Pranks could continue to be carried out all year .
 There is no dis crimination at present dependent upon personality traits; all are included, made one of the group . All are included in the group; all must be included .
 The actual acceptance of orientation is a matter of personal desire . Orientation can be meaningful and helpful, or tiring and a chore, dependent upon the attitude of the individual girl . Acceptance of orientation should be personal .
 Remick Remick Unites Teaching With His Duties As Pastor by PEGGY PARTRIDGE '65 . Topsham, Maine, is a small town of about 4,000 known for its race track track .
 Topsham has more than a race track, it also has a church, the* United Baptist Church of Top Sham .
 More people than ever have been flocking to the church . The church's budget has increased by $10,000 . There has been an increase of interest and participation on the part of young adults .
 The driving force behind this new development is a new, young, energetic pastor, the Rev. The Rev. Rev. Michael Wright . The Rev Wright is a pastor who has been in the church for more than 20 years .
 Mr Remick had already assumed his position in Topsham last year, when he was asked to come to Bates . With his enthusiastic outlook, he had already been asked to join the company .
 Mr Remick consented to teach on the Bates campus three days each week . Realizing the need for an additional philosophy professor at Bates to help relieve the burden of Professor Joseph D'Alfonso, Mr Remrick consented .
 Mr Remick received his first formal education at Eastern College in St. George's College in Maine .
 Remick became interested in philosophy during his high school years, motivated by participation in debates and the idea of what forms good argument .
 It was also during these years that he received his first taste of William Henry James . He was also given the opportunity to learn from his father .
 A study at Eastern Baptist Seminary in Philadelphia formed the next step in Mr Remick's education .
 Freshman Orientation has specific purposes which have been realized this year . While fulfilling In conclusion, I feel definitely that Freshman orientation has been successful .
 If anyone can suggest an alternative plan which would better fulfill our purposes, please feel free to share them . Please share your thoughts .
 A question has been raised; no alternative plan of action has been suggested . A question was raised, but no alternative plans of action was suggested . No alternative plans have been suggested.
 Women's Student Government must conclude that the program at present is worthwhile and beneficial . Until one is forthcoming, the program will not be available to students .
 Betty Anne Little '63 found time to teach Greek at seminary and work as assistant pastor at Drexel Hill Baptist Church . She also taught Greek at the seminary, and worked as an assistant pastor .
 He studied philosophy of religion under Paul Tillich and Nels Ferre at the University of Cambridge .
 Mr Remick was confronted with the dilemma of whether to accept a teaching position in a graduate school or to go into the church . He chose to focus on his Ph.D. at Columbia and Union .
 Because of a large church's similarity to a ""mass of organizational machinery,"" he decided to take a small church in his home state . Because of an aversion to large churches, he chose to move to small church .
 Remick: "Compassion is far more important than creeds, and love is more determinative than law" Remick says compassion is more important to compassion than law .
 "I also have the conviction that ritual is no substitute for righteousness," says author . "Rituals are no substitute to righteousness," he says .
 I have been given a great deal in life, and my sole purpose is to be provided with the opportunities to give as much as I've been given . My sole purpose in life is to provide people with opportunities to be able to give more than they have given .
 Martin Esslin's The Theatre of the Absurd is an invaluable and comprehensive source of analysis, interpretation, and background .
 Esslin gives an introduction to the plays to be discussed, then goes on to present in detail the lives and works of four of the major exponents of "The Theatre of the Absurd" Beckett, Adamov, Ionesco and Genet .
 Shakespeare, Joyce and Joyce have been strong influences on present drama, including Shakespeare and Joyce . After mentioning several lesser figures, he traces back the ""Tradition of the Absurd"" to Roman ""mimus"" theatre .
 Esslin: This new and contra-traditional theatre is, in essence, classical . One of the many theses that Esslin pronounces is that this new theatre is ... classical . Esslin says this new and controversial theatre is 'contraditional'
 The new playwrights are trying to get back to the fundamental problems of Aeschylus and Shakespeare, and express them in the light of 20th century life .
 They had no culteral bias as to what a play should be like, and when they saw it, they understood just what Beckett was saying to them .
 "They are more surrealistic reflections than philosophical problem solving," says the author of the book .
 Beckett was asked what is the meaning of Godot, he replied, "If I knew I would have said so in the play."" to find myself so susceptible to mass hysteria, Beckett said .
 President Kennedy's address was a premeditated and well-timed political move, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I believed that I saw in Kennedy's speech was a well timed political move. Those first few moments I believed," he says . Sutter: "
 Whether the blockade was needed or not seemed beyond my immediate question . What I believed so apparent became unutterable when faced with the horror of the horror that the courageous pronouncement foreshadowed .
 Last week Jeff Rouault and I agreed that the Kennedys had considered carefully the political value of timing this statement of policy at this juncture in 1962 campaigns .
 Kennedy administration has for weeks, possibly months, had the information on hand . Kennedy administration had the info for weeks or months .
 The President, who, days before was campaigning against Republicans, claimed that they had taken too firm a stand . The President claimed that the Republicans were taking too strong a stand.
 One of the points of the original announcement was that Lyndon and he would stop campaigning. Lyndon Johnson will not stop campaigning .
 Sen. Ted Cruz: "It would be one-sided and blind of me not to admit that some move had to be made" Sen. Cruz says the move would have the support of the American people .
 I am aware that while campaigning, the President couldn't tip his hand without making the situation more dangerous . I am also aware that . While campaigning, I'm also aware . that while . campaigning, it would be more dangerous if the President tipped his hand .
 The actions and recent statements of the administration, however, have led me to retain my first opinion, that politics influenced, in part, the Kennedy Brinkmanship .
 Some might argue that it is not hazardous or wrong to extract political value from such a situation . There might be some who will argue that such a thing is not dangerous .
 I'm unable to discern just what is wrong with such a policy . can only state that I experienced that same vague disgust with the Kennedy timing that I did with my own lack of emotional selfcontrol .
 While I reacted this way, my boyhood companion reacted somewhat differently . While he reacted to this reaction, he reacted differently . He said, "I'm not sure what happened to me"
 October 1962 A Swingin' Month For Bomb Shelters . JIMBO just thought I would drop you a few lines while I still had the chance .
 "I have been completely plastered since J.F.K.'s (Jobs For Kinfolk) momentous speech Monday night. I have been totally plastered," he says . J.K.K.: "Jobs for Kinfolk" speech was "momentous
 Thai's all I need after spending four glorious years participating wholeheartedly in the midst of a continuous Chinese firedrill .
 Now that we have apparently made our fat friend to the east and our bearded buddy to the south, it will only be a matter of lime before the situation calms down . The monotonous treadmill of the cold war continues for a few more precious months .
 Most of the ships have left Norfolk and we will soon be bobbing on the ocean blue . The ships have already left Norfolk, and we are now bobbing in the ocean .
 "When it reaches the point when they send for the ""Amphion"" , we're in trouble," says the author . "We are in trouble. We are going to be in trouble"
 One average size shell will send this old tub to the bottom before I can go from ""D"" deck to ""C"" deck . Tons and tons of lousy machinery to repair anything, and one average size .
 "Soon I leave this land of Miss Lonelyhearls and Jack Kerouac for the land of sun and glory," she writes .
 Faculty members and college libraries also eligible, when subscribing themselves . College libraries and faculty members are also eligible .
 In '62 Cats Cop First Series Win Since '57 The Garnet Line By Al Marden 1 .
 The freshman fullback has tallied seven times in four games to lead all state scorers . He has scored seven times already this season .
 The Bobcats never have performed well against top competition, and look what we did to them last year, coach says . "The Bobcats have never performed well," he says. "Look at what they did last year."
 Garnet seniors remember the past three years when the same Garnet team that did so well against Maine would allow an inferior Mule club to run wild over us . The eight seniors on the squad remember the last three years .
 Colby were beaten 47-0 by Colby last year . The team was crying to use freshmen, but Colby was crying for freshmen .
 They did dress freshmen for the game although they tried to save face by not using them against the Hatchmen . The Hatchmen did not dress freshmen .
 They remember well opposing players, many cases of far lesser ability, taking them out play after play . They remember how they took out opponents, taking out them play-after-play .
 Two individuals, that is the difference, Mr Sports Editor says . Finally, we have a team, you have two individuals, he says . That's the difference .
 Maybe you wrote them after having spent a long night in your fraternity moaning over your team's losses . Maybe you have written them after spending a night moaning about your team losses .
 This Saturday will be another long night in your fraternity, unless you find cause to celebrate that the season is over . This Saturday is the last Saturday of the season in the fraternity fraternity .
 It is often said that our campus is one of the most beautiful in the country . It is also often said to be one of our campus's most beautiful .
 Those who watched last Friday's Bowdoin cross-country meet will attest to the above two statements . The team won't be looking for a repeat of last year's race against the University of Maine .
 I watched from my English class deep in the recesses of Pettigrew Hall . I was a student at the time of the incident, but was not in the classroom .
 Others watched from similar vantage points, while others followed the team around the course . Others followed the race around the world .
 As the harriers made the circuit around Andrews pond their plodding images were echoed in the mirror-like surface of the pond .
 First, he moved the course where the meet could be viewed by more campus spectators . Second, he included a trip around the pond on the course so that such a sight was made possible .
 Bates booters covered themselves with glory by their fine showing against Bowdoin last Friday . Some of their members on the bench and some of their fans in the bleachers did not. Some of the Bates fans were not impressed with their performance .
 An official should have to warn members of the varsity squad to "keep their comments to themselves," an official says . That an official should warn that members of a varsity team to keep quiet is indicative of poor sportsmanship, an official said .
 The soccer team has come a long way to gain their present status . The action was witnessed by the official could make it a short road back to club status .
 Tom Carr was nominated to the E.C.A. team again on the basis of his outstanding offensive show Saturday . Carr has been nominated for the team again this season . Carr is the only player to be nominated in the league this year .
 Scatback John Yuskis rounds left end early in the game Saturday when numbers were still distinguishable .
 Bowdoin's Bob Hooke comes in to make the stop on the fleet halfback . Hooke will be Bowdoins' first halfback for the season .
 Bates College Bobcats came back in the second half to overcome a three-point deficit and defeat Bowdoin College 13-3 . Carr, Planchon Pace Bobcats, Line Outstanding; Tamis Stars by DICK LOVE . Carr . Bobcats come back in second half
 Freshman fullback Tom Carr and halfback Paul Planchon were the big guns for Bates on a muddy Garcelon Field . Freshman quarterback Tom Carr was the star back for Bates .
 The first half was a battle of the defenses as neither team could mount any kind of a sustained drive . Neither team was able to score a single goal in the first half .
 Bates was able to acquire the only first down of the half on a 19 yard scamper by Paul Planchon that put the ball on the Bowdoin 33 .
 A 'cat fumble at this point gave the ball to the Polar Bears though and the only serious scoring threat of the half was killed . The Polar Bears scored a touchdown in the first half . A fumble from a 'cat' fumble led to a touchdown .
 Poinier Bowdoin finally broke into the scoring column with only seconds to go in the first half . Milo Kicks 3-0 lead in the second half .
 After recovering the fumble the Polar Bears called time and brought in Jack Milo to kick a field goal . The Polar Bears recovered the fumble and called time on the field kick . After the field goal, Milo kicked a field kick for the Bears .
 Milo's kick just made it over the cross bar and the half ended with Bowdoin ahead 3-0 . The half ended up with a goal from Milo's side side side of the line .
 Planchon's kick was bobbled by the Bowdoin received and recovered the fumble . John Yuskis recovered the ball and recovered it on the 23rd .
 Bates made their only aerial of the game but it was just out of end Paul 'Castolene's reach . Bates made just one of the only aerial attempts of the match .
 Yuskis got the ball on a double reverse and sped into the end zone behind fine blocking . With fourth down goal to go, he scored a fourth down touchdown .
 Bates is in the lead 6-3 in the first half . John Curtiss' attempted conversion was blocked by Bates . Bates' conversion was also blocked by Curtiss .
 Carr got the next first down, then Planchon carried to the ten then fumbled but Bill Davis alertly recovered to retain possession . Carr got another first down but Plancho fumbled for the first down .
 Carr finally punched over on a fourth down play for the second Bobcat score . Carr's touchdown was the second for the Bobcat . Carr scored a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Bates looked like it might score again later in the period but Bowdoin recovered a 'Cat fumble to stop this drive on their own three .
 Bates' superior depth was evident in the second half as the right side of the Bowdo inline was continually ripped open by the 'Cat offense . The 'Cat' offense was constantly exploited throughout the game .
 Carr and Planchon were the offensive stars for Bates . The whole 'Cat' line played a fine defensive game, yielding only 3 first downs .
 Coach Hatch was far from a loss of words when asked to comment on the game . Coach Hatch praised the team for their performance .
 He said he was extremely pleased, not only for the win itself but because it was a victory over Bowdoin . The coach said he is extremely pleased with the win .
 In recent years, Bates teams have been reasonably good compared to Bowdoin teams they played but couldn't seem to win . Bates teams are reasonably good but can't always win over Bowdoins teams .
 Phil Tamis and Tom Carr were singled out by Coach Hatch as the two standout performers of the game . Coach Hatch singled out the two players in the game for their performance .
 He has been our most consistent lineman,"" was his statement concerning the senior tackle .
 Tom Carr gained 78 yards on a wet, muddy field as he helped pace the Garnet gridsters to a 13-3 win over Bowdoin . Carr is the second repeat of the Bobcat of the Week .
 Carr upped his season scoring total to 54, 11 points behind Amherst's Santelli . Carr is the leading scorer in New England, with Santelli leading the way .
 Saugus, Mass. r freshman would appear stopped for no gain but would slide off the line of scrim' The Walt Slovenski-coached Bobcat cross-country men powered their way to a second-place finish .
 Garnet placed five men in the top twenty and two in the first six . Central Conn. placed seven points behind Central Conn., the Garnet finished seventh .
 Central Conn. runner Tom Keith set a new meet record in 20 min. 40 sec. Eric Silverberg was the third-place finisher within breathing distance .
 Mike Gregus was sixth, Bill Dunham eleventh, Pete Parsons sixteenth and Finn Wilhemsen eighteenth . Finn Willemsen was eighth .
 Central Conn., Bates, Trinity, W.P.I., and Bowdoin. The first five schools in order of finish were Central Conn. and Bates . Central Conn.'s first five were Central . Conn. schools .
 Bowdoin scored two goals in the opening period of play, but Bates dominated in the final periods of play . Bates dominated the game, scoring twice in the first period .
 The areas around the goals were very muddy and the goalies had trouble keeping their footing . Goalies on both teams struggled to keep their footing in muddy conditions .
 Bowdoin scored once more in this period, and it looked like the Bears were going to have an easy time of it . The Bears scored one more in the second period .
 Steve Barron passed to George Beebe, who made an arcing shot at the goal, to make it 2-0 . Steve Barron then passed to Beebe in the first half of the second half .
 Bob Lanz trapped the ball and slipped it by the Bowdoin goalie for Bates' only tally . Bates scored the only goal of the game .
 Bowdoin's field play was very weak, but the Bear fullbacks played well . The Bear's fullbacks also played well in the game .
 On several occasions they kicked the ball away from the Bowdoin goal, saving possible scores . The team kicked away several times from the goal to avoid scores .
 During this period, Bowdoin had a good chance to score on a close-up penalty shot . During the first half of the second period, the team missed a penalty shot on the field . The team had a goal in the first period of the game .
 'Cats had SEVEN Winless Colby Mules Visit Lewiston In Season Finale . Todd Lloyd, Lee Nute, George Beebe, and Raphael Onemelukwe turned in standout performances for Bates .
 Bowdoin's fullbacks played well, and other blue blood players did very well heading the ball . Bowdoins played well in the first half of the game .
 The Colby Mules will be looking for their first win of the 1962 season when they clash with the Bobcats Saturday at 1:30 on Garcelon Field . The Bobcats are looking to win their first game of the season .
 Bobcats still have mathematical chance of tying Bowdoin and Maine for the State Series title . It will be an important game for the Bobcats .
 John Simpson, the new head coach of Colby, hasn't had too much success building a team around twelve returning lettermen . John Simpson has had too little success building up to twelve returning players at Colby . Simpson is the new coach of the Colby team .
 There probably are very few people on the Bates campus who know who John Lee Murray is . Colby is primarily an offensive player . Trainer Enjoys Working With Youth; Maine Native .
 He is the man who ""repairs"" the athletes you see performing on Garcelon Field, the Alumni Gymanisum, or the Cage . He is also the man responsible for repairing the damaged equipment .
 Personable Trainer ""Peaco"" taped the ankles of basketball and soccer players prior to a practice . He is a very busy man and this scribe was forced to interview him .
 Mr Murray engaged in an animated description of a tiddlywink tournament he had seen on television the night before . Murray had a short wait while he described the tournament as a 'tiddly wink'
 After he had pantomimed a few ""trick"" shots, Mr Murray was awarded the prize . Mr Murray said he was disappointed with the results .
 He attended both Northeastern and B.U.U., spending a year in each institution . He spent a year at each school .
 The Maine native then went on to say he was in the sporting goods business for 16 years before leaving this field for greener pastures . He then said he left this field 16 years ago to get into the sport goods business .
 Before coming to Bates, Mr Murra ywas employed by the Bath Iron Works as a production engineer for ten years .
 ""Peaco"" discovered that even though he is an ""old jachelor"", he could sit around inactive for days in end .
 At this point he saw an advertisement in the local paper saying Bates was looking for a trainer . Bates saw the ad in a local paper and decided to take it up .
 Mr Murray likes to work with the younger generation so he applied for the job . He was soon hired as the Bates trainer and soon became a trainer .
 I C. C. is an expert at taping ankles and caring for the minor, and some major, injuries that athletes are bound to receive during a season . C.C. is also a master of taping ankle injuries .
 The classy halfback led the state series in rushing in 1960-61 with an 8. yard average per carry . He sat out last season but sat out of last season . The senior halfback was a standout halfback in 1960s .
 Binky averaged 9. yards per carry against Bowdoin but was stopped cold by Maine's line last week . Maine's offensive line stopped Binky's 9.5 yards per play .
 Junior Dick Robbat apparently has won the starting quarterback position from senior letterman Bob Whitehouse . Senior letterman Whitehouse is a junior at the quarterback position .
 Riss, not even listed on the Colby roster, will complete the startng lineup at left end . Riss is not listed on Colby's roster .
 The number to watch though in the Colby line-up is 29-year-old Binky Smith . If the Bates line can contain him they should emerge victorious Saturday .
 The purpose of these workouts is to acquaint Coach Ullom with his players . The workouts will be part of a week-long series of workouts .
 "Ketball tends to limit both the team and the individual player,"" declared Coach Ullom. "It tends to ... limit both team and individual player"
 Coach Ullom hopes that this type of offense will utilize more players on a regular basis and give the fans an exciting brand of basketball . The coach hopes to use more players in the offense to get more opportunities .
 The ""A"" league champions from John Bertram fought off a last quarter surge from a determined West Parker squad last week to win a close 14-6 decision for the Intramural Football League Championship .
 Parker ""B"" league champs failed to contain J.B.'s strong passing attack and thus came out on the short end of the low scoring game . The upset minded Parker ""A"" league champion failed to stop the passing attack .
 Don Palmer led the spirited West squad in tallying two touchdowns . Quarterback Paul Sadlier brilliantly directed their attack against the Pandas . Don Palmer also scored two touchdowns for the West .
 Revoir was outstanding in the losing cause as he accounted for both of East's touchdowns . Revoir scored both of the touchdowns for East .
 West hopes to meet talented J B. J. for the championships . The next step for West was to win a place in the competition .
 Matching once-* beaten J B. and undefeated West Parker could only be the ingredients for a great game . The result was the hard-fought 14-6 victory for the ""A"" division champs .
 Left end Pete Graves of J B. proved to be the difference as he tallied twice on long tosses from quarterback Ron Vance .
 Jeff Hillier and Graves were the main targets of Vance throughout the afternoon . The passing game was superb for the hosts as they dominated the midfield .
 A safety also accounted for two more points for the winners as hard-charging linemen Bob Segersten and Pete Rae blocked a punt in the West Parker end zone which J B. recovered .
 Halfback Pete Oberndorf scored the lone touchdown for West in their heartbreaking loss . Halfback was a chief reason for West's very successful season .
 John Bertram has won the Intramural Championship for the first time in his dorm . Bertram won the tournament thanks to their great play throughout the campaign in bringing the tournament to their dorm .
 West Parker's powerful ""B"" league entry, fell barely short n their attempt to record the biggest upset of the season . West Parker fell just short of their attempts to record an upset .
 Alan is a Staff Assistant for Data Communications Sales in Southern New England Telephone Company's New Haven Office . Alan is the staff assistant for data communications sales in New Haven .
 He began his three years with the company as a Commercial Representative recommending communications services to businesses .
 He handled an assignment that taught him what he needed to know about computers . Later, he handled a computer assignment that helped him learn more about computers, he says .
 Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America . Alan Dann and other young men like him helped bring the best communications service to the world .
 Eric Silverberg finished first in 23:35, considerably bettering his Maine time . Silverberg's time was considerably better than his time at the same time .
 Teammates Gregus and Trufant timed 23:47 and 23:55 respectively . Following close behind in second and third places were teammates Gregus, Trufants and Gregus .
 The only Bowdoin runner to finish in the top six was Babcock, placing fourth in 24:04 . Babcock was the only runner to reach the top five in the race .
 After the next three Polar Bears was Parson of Bates in tenth, with the time of 24:47, only 77 seconds off the winning pace . Parson was the only person to break the course .
 Coach Slovenski was highly enthusiastic about his team's efforts . He said that the Bobcats' performance mproves with each meet .
 Both the time gap and the pack-running have performed progressvely better . The time gap has been much improved in recent years .
 Walt continued by saying that the Bowdoin meet was expected to be close, that both were regarded highly highly . Walt continued to say that both teams are highly regarded and expected to win .
 The results being heavily in favor of the Bates squad emphasizes the fact that our competition hasn't allowed us to show the full worth of the team . The results show that the Bates team has not been able to show its true worth .
 Our schedule includes several New England state universities . These schools are generally powerhouses in crosscountry crosscountry .
 Our sole losses to date were at the hands of Maine and New Hampshire . This point is emphasized when it is observed that our sole losses are at Maine and N.H.
 The two teams finished second and third respectively to the highly-talented Massachusetts contingent . Against all the other Yankee Conference teams last Saturday, the two finished second .
 Walt applauds this squad as his best since crosscountry was formalized here seven years ago . Walt: "This squad is the best of all time" The team has a record of six straight wins, including a 1-0 record .
 The press selected the freshman fullback as the E.C.A. back of the game as he led the Hatchmen to their first state series win since 1957 . The Hatchmen won the state series first in 1957 .
 He has been an instructor at the Puerto Rico training camps for Peace Corps Volunteers . He is now involved with the Public Information division of the Peace Corps .
 Peace Corps is a government sponsored organization with a two-fold purpose . The Peace Corps was instituted by President Kennedy in 1963 .
 Its first objective is to help educate and increase the living standards of under-developed countries . It also aims to help raise living standards in the developing world .
 At present more than 4000 volunteers are working, or training for work, in many of the countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America .
 Plans are under way to increase the Volunteer staff to 10,000 members 1963 . Peace Corps has been highly successful, despite attempts to discredit it .
 Peace Corps aims to instigate a feeling of good will between the U.S. and the countries in which its members are working . Peace Corps is based in Washington, D.C. and San Francisco .
 It is in this area that our country stands to gain something which all our foreign aid and economic handouts can never buy . It is something which our country can't buy. It's in this case that we stand to gain from foreign aid .
 Peace Corps Volunteers may not have the polish of our Ambassadors, they do have a sincere desire to work with and for the general population of a country . While many of the Peace Corps volunteers may not be the polished, they have something far more important .
 Diplomats are necessary to communicate on the official diplomatic level, but connection with the people is needed if we are to stimluate friendly relations between the U.S. and foreign countries .
 Volunteers must live with the people they are working with in order to un derstand them and be accepted by them . Volunteers need to live with people they work with to be accepted . Volunteers must also live with their friends and family .
 Unit B was the affirmative team of Norman Bowie '64, Robert Boyd '64; and the negative team of Jeffrey Rouault '65, Kenneth Woodbury '63 . Unit A comprised unit A, unit B, unit A and unit B . Unit B comprised the affirmative and negative teams
 Unit A emerged undefeated, while each team in units B and C was defeated once . Unit C was unit C, unit A, unit B and unit C were unit C . Unit A was unit B, unit C was team C .
 There will be classical music, folk music, and dance drama music . Tered three units in the tourney and emerged with nine victories .
 Four freshmen were awarded a certificate as the outstanding team at the Tufts Novice Debate Tournament last Saturday . The Tufts team was awarded the trophy for the outstanding debate .
 Max Steinheimer and Linda Lash argued the affirmative while George Strait and Richard Rosenblatt defended the negative position . George Strait defended the positive position in the second debate .
 Harris Kleckman of Deering High School was the runner-up and Lester York of Cheverus High School in Portland received honorable mention . Lester York was honorable mention in Portland .
 Biology students are finding it difficult to complete required lab work in the available time . Chute Expresses Objection To Limited Availability Of Labs .
 keys were given to each lab assistant, who unofficially opened the building to other students . No keys have been issued this year, and keys have not been issued .
 Chute, head of the Biology Department, offered three main objections to the present situation . Chute: "I don't want to see the situation as a joke. I don't like it."
 Needed sources of material in biology library are inaccessible . Books may be circulated for one night only, from which books can be circulated .
 The work assigned to each student requires more time than the regular lab periods provide . Second, especially when an outside project is involved, requires more work than lab periods .
 Some students are preparing projects which demand periodic checks at definite intervals . Third, some students prepare projects which require periodic checks on definite intervals.
 Honors candidates, who need more time than the four-hour weekly minimum expected of all Biology students in the more advanced courses, are particularly limited . Honors students are required to take up to four hours a week to complete the course .
 The Department and the students hope that the need for more time will be recognized and met . Since two nights a week are obviously inadequate, the Department hopes that more time is met .
 Outing Club has rented a Lee Polski lodge at Sugarloaf Mountain from the Abernacky Ski Club . Students have an option to buy the lodge at the end of the year .
 The lodge will be open on Saturday nights, thus allowing students an uninterrupted weekend of skiing . Located near the top of the beginner's slope, the lodge will also be open Saturday nights .
 From Saturday noon until Sunday night trips, at a charge of fifty cents per night plus transportation and meals, will be sponsored during the winter . During the winter, trips will be available from Saturday noon to Sunday night .
 The project, now on a trial basis, will continue only with student support . If interest develops, the lodge may become an OC cabin .
 Jane Downing '65, who was instrumental in getting the lodge, asks all students who can help with transportation or cooking to lock, Bob Peek, or herself .
 Three performances of Jean Anouilh's Ring Round the Moon will be presented in the Little Theater .
 The curtain rises at 8:00 for each of the next three nights . The show is set to be shown on each night for three consecutive nights .
 "It is a combination of the ""piece noire,"" a serious, pessimistic tragedy, and the "piece rose,"" the theater of the never, never land . "It's a mixture of the "pieces noire" and "pieces rose" "Theater of the
 Caron discussed themes which pervade Anouilh's plays, including Ring Round the Moon . Caron, in his preplay lecture, discussed the two themes .
 The first is money; disgust for the tyranny of money and love harassed by money . Love is the first of two things: love and money . Money is the only thing to be disgusted with money .
 The second is non-conventional purity; the effort of the protagonist to restore meaning to a world that has lost its existence . The film is set to be released in cinemas on July 28, 2015 .
 The characters in the world of tissue paper and bright lights are archetypes of people found everywhere . The characters are archetypical of people everywhere .
 Mother is the person who is always claiming to want something for someone else, yet, underneath wants something for herself . Mother is a person who claims to want to help someone else but also wants to help herself .
 Frederic, the most sincere member of the cast, is always insecure, due to his supposition of his brother's superiority . Frederic is the brother of Frederic . The most sincere character in the cast .
 Messerschmann, the peasant who worked so hard to gain status, is only the unhappy millionaire . "Messerschman" is only an unhappy millionaire, he says .
 It is a play which appeals to the mind rather than the emotions . It requires a deft, sophisticated touch, for it to appeal to the minds rather than emotions .
 Baskin Exhibits Sculpture, Wood Cuts At Bowdoin Art Museum . Baskins expresses modes of men with precise interest .
 "He avoids careful delineation of the human figure, for it would restrict him to a particular expression in time of a single emotion," he says .
 "He represents states of being which allow for no single physical manifestation in its expression," he says . "He's a state of being that allows no one physical manifestation"
 Tne expression of a face, for example, is primarily given by a sensitive and subtle exclusion of detail . The expression of an expression is primarily . given by an expression that is . primarily . shown by a subtle and . subtle exclusion .
 The figures appear rooted to a particular spot with only slight indications of any bodily movement . The figures are rooted to the same spot in the video .
 "Because of this physical immobility I am drawn to an inner activity, a tension," says the author . "Because I'm drawn to a tension, I'm attracted to the inner activity," she says .
 In addition to Baskin's sculpture, the exhibit includes an ink drawing, ink wash, reliefs and block prints of wood cuts .
 Baskin's owl, which he calls the bird of the night, is a favorite of his friends . Women at '66 rn Honor Code In Chapel Sun.
 In impressive Chapel program, freshmen women were formally welcomed into the Honor System last Sunday night . Freshmen women were officially welcomed into honor system .
 The ceremony marked the culmination of almost two months of living under the code . The girls well realized the freedom and responsibility they were being offered .
 Betty Anne Little, president of Student Government, opened the program by introducing the Stu-G Board and the advisors . Little also introduced the board of advisors .
 She then spoke briefly on the significance that the Honor System will have in the future lives of the girls .
 The freshmen were not there because they had to sign the book, but because they were expressing a sincere desire to do so . The freshmen did not want to sign it, but wanted to express their desire to .
 Over the years this system will become a part of their thinking and experience, and soon they will not be able to imagine living in any other way . The system will be part of the way they think and experience their lives, says the author .
 Peter Gomes' own special brand of organ music played by the organist . The girls came forward, two by two, and signed the Code .
 Following this they were welcomed as card-carrying members of the school . Following this, they will be allowed to continue their studies at the university .
 The ceremony was concluded with the Alma Mater, and the women of '66 left that hallmark of the campus to take their places as Bates citizens .
 The American Mind; Background and development of American thought and philosophy . 8:30m. ET. ET .
 George Peters, painter and lecturer, is host for the series from the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston . The Artist's View is a weekly series of interviews with the artist .
 Supreme Court decisions of recent history involving questions of constitutional interpretation . Supreme Court cases involve questions of interpretation of the Constitution .
 Science Reporter; Interviews with leading scientists and engineers on significant topics related to science and technology . Science Reporter: "Science Reporter"
 Three weeks ago an organizational meeting was held in which the constitution was presented, amended, and approved by prospective club members . The constitution of the new club was presented and amended .
 Libbey Forum is the first official meeting of the Libbey community . The first meeting was held yesterday evening at 7:00, the first of its kind in Libbey .
 The meeting was devoted entirely to the election of club officers and two program committee members . The election was held for the first time in a year .
 He discusses party organization, first on the national level, and then on the local level . After commenting briefly on the recent national election, he went on to discuss the party organization .
 Nichols says the Republican party is not highly organized on the national level . Nichols says it is not a national party . Nichols: The GOP is not very organized .
 The Republican Party is represented by one large committee composed of a man and a woman representative from each state and the party chairman from states where Republicans have been successful in winning many elections .
 Due to the size of this committee, it is not an effective legislative body, says the committee . The committee is not a legislative body .
 In contrast, party activities of the local level are highly organized . Party activities are organized at local level, the party says .
 A state committee, which chooses national representatives, is composed of a man and a woman from each county . The state committee is comprised of two men and two women . The committee is chosen by a state committee .
 It is the duty of each of these committees to provide a Republican candidate to oppose each Democrat, to keep the voting population aware of this candidate, and to provide funds .
 Nichols chose the Maine Republican party as an example of how this organization works . Nichols says the Maine GOP is a model for how it works in the state .
 Up to this time, the Republicans had experienced difficulty in getting their share of Maine votes . Republicans had struggled to get their share in Maine .
 State committee chairmen could be at fault for apathy or lack of vote-earning know-how on the part of state committee leaders . This difficulty could be due to atfessors, and guest speakers, tributed to apathy .
 Maine Republican party adopted a workshop system to counteract this condition . Maine Republicans adopted the workshop system in response to the problem .
 Once a year, three separate work-shops are held for the chairmen of the county and city committees and for the candidate himself . The candidate's work-shop is held once a year .
 Lectures are given on topics of interest to each of these groups of men . Lectures will be given to each group of men from around the world .
 For example, the chairmen of the city committees might learn how to organize voting districts for an election . The chairmen will also be able to learn about voting districts .
 Incentives are provided for those men who might represent a solidly Democratic district . The district is considered a Democratic stronghold .
 Each district is required to turn in the number of votes predetermined by the state chairman . Each district must turn in a number predetermined by state chairman to vote .
 A second incentive is the conference system, whereby the State chairman holds a conference with each chairman before an election . The conference system is a second incentive for the election .
 State chairman can make certain that the particular county or city chairman is working to capacity . In this manner, the state chairman can ensure that the local chairman works to capacity.
 Fellowships are offered again this year for advanced study and training in basic and applied science, including certain areas of the social sciences . The social sciences is a focus of interest in the sciences and the sciences .
 Selection will be based on academic records, recommendations regarding each applicant's ability to carry out the proposed program, and scores achieved in examinations designed to test scientific aptitude and achievement . Selection will also be based upon academic records and recommendations .
 Fellowships for the study of languages are awarded under the National Defense Education Act .
 Program A supports the study of numerous languages of Africa, Asia, and Europe . Program B deals with the studying of languages of Latin America . Program A focuses on languages of African, Asian, and European languages .
 Fellowships are awarded to students who are preparing for teaching the selected language at an institution of higher education in the United States . Students who plan employment in a professional or technical activity in which proficiency in the language is highly desirable .
 Further information concerning these two programs is available in the Guidance and Placement Office . Further information about these programs is .
 International Voluntary Services recruits and sends teams of young men and women to remote villages . Volunteers are willing to live in remote villages and work directly with local people .
 IVS, established in 1953, cooperates with the Peace Corps and complements that newly developing agency in situations where our special interest and competence is needed . IVS was established by 1953 and is based in Washington, D.C.
 Those interested in such a program should consult IVS pamphlet available in the Guidance and Placement Office .
 The U.S. Information Agency is interested in receiving applications from qualified individuals who desire jobs either in the Foreign Service or in the Agency's Washington offices . The agency is looking for people who want to work in the foreign service .
 Persons considering this type of employment are urged to consult the Agency's pamphlets in the Guidance and Placement Office .
 Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Company, Hartford, Connecticut, is seeking men with leadership qualities . The company is looking for leadership qualities in its leadership role .
 Career plans offered by the Company provide an initial training period before moving into full sales activity . Career plans provided by the company provide an early training period for sales professionals .
 Guidance and Placement Office offers career plans and related information . Career plans are available in the guidance and placement office's guidance and placement office .
 Student Council Meetings Vespers, 9-10 CA Meeting Thursday, November 15 Sports dinner Ring Round the Moon Friday night .
 Amongst the intellectual existentialist movement there seems to be a misinterpretation of life . Augusta, Maine Bates STUDENT, NOVEMBER 14, 1962 Crater's Edge .
 Beatniks who run around with hair on their* faces are attempting to assert freedom into their existence . The beatniks' hair-on-their-face hair is a symbol of freedom and freedom .
 "By asserting freedom, they deny an existential conceptualization that man exists as a determined biological and chemical being without essence," they say . However, by asserting freedom they deny existential conceptualizing that man .
 Freedom is essentially the stuff that makes life worth living — freedom to think, to live, to act, to think . Freedom is the stuff of life that makes it worth living, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 We must destroy those decadent souls who propose to live for the abstraction called state . We must also destroy those . Those decadent . souls who proposed to live . for the state .
 Unless we do, we will be sucked into the depths of the quagmire of life, we won't be able to find a solution to life .
 "The essence of true being is as a river flowing over the brink and into the sea," says the author . "True being is like flowing into the water," he says .
 It is neither like or really unlike the essence of the collective being, it is not like or not unlike the spirit of the human being .
 The allegorical imperative cannot be used to understand this magnificence, nor can it, in truth, direct us to the many paths which lead to it . However, it can be used as a guide to understanding this magnificentness, or to find it .
 It is either to attain or because we do belong that we can act that we are able to act . It is the only way we can be able to achieve or because of the fact we belong to us .
 The daily frustrations we meet then are the brink over which the river flows . "The daily frustrations [are the] the daily frustrations ... are the . frustrations we . meet then, the . daily frustrations . are then the . brink over . which the . river flows over which . the
 Finding the eternal question answered by our modern complex of mercantile interactions we may now pursue, as did Greek philosophers in the fruitful years of their post-natal search .
 Once on this road toward our individual College Bowl we are aware of light being emitted from the North Star of our pseudo-self . We are aware that light is emitted from our own North Star .
 "Still our Jell-o bodies quiver with this coherent light through our nicotine-stained fingers," says author . "We still quiver and quiver ... still our body quiver through the smoke," she says .
 Still there is the Madison Avenue peanut-vendor pushing us away from our destiny . Still, there is a peanut-seller pushing us out of our destiny. Still, still there is an issue .
 With a slow flow it overwhelms the last molecule of our pineal gland — Descartes' Butterfly — chair for the soul . Descarte's "Butterfly" is the name of the first molecule of the brain's last molecule, the last .
 We, in all our materialistic glory, sit back with a pusillani. mously contemptuous attitude, leaving the solution to others — those whom we superciliously dub ""eggheads"" or other uncomplimentary epithets .
 Ironically, however, its solution is not one which lies beyond the reach of any one of us of slightly above average intelligence . Even average-intelligence can be reached by even average-minded people .
 It involves a pensive and altogether serious look into a certain rather nebulously defined, yet, at the same time, quite clear-cut and definite area of reference .
 "The inevitable solution is by no means hidden on some occultly inaccessible and foreboding summit," says the author .
 The tree of ultimate insight is egregiously uprooted and arrested just short of its long-awaited and longoverdue fructification . Rather, the solution lies immediately in hand if only we can resist the urge to sit mundanely and resolutely by, while the tree is uprooted
 Bates Receives Gainsborough Portrait Members American Gem Socieiy CASH CHARGE BUDGET ifWE Baskin torment, exacts a toll from man's mind like that of Prometheus of Prometheus . Bates receives portrait of himself .
 I won't pursue the parallel further except to point out we eaoh may nurture our own bird of prey . We may nurture ourselves ourselves as birds of prey.
 Baskin deals with men's crises. Observing his work isn't an easy experience . Observing him is not easy .
 Working primarily in black and white, Baskin presents stark faces of intensity .
 A portrait of John Henderson by John Gainsborough (17271788) has been added to the Bates College Art Collection . Bates President Charles F Phillips announced today that the portrait was added .
 Actor holding half-opened book in his left hand, while gesticulating with the right . He is wearing a dark blue coat trimmed with red collar, white stock and fichu .
 Gainsborough and Nattier's Mme Adelaide, given by Mr and Mrs. Phillips, was presented to the President of the United States . President Phillips said the painting was the best painting in the world .
 An important collection of photographs is being built up at the College of Art in London . The images were taken by Dr. Schmutz several years ago . They are the nucleus of an important collection .
 The gallery will also be open before and during the intermission of each presentation of Ring Round the Moon . The Robinson Players will present the play on November 15, 16, and 17 .
 It is requested that those attending bring notebook, pen, and catalogue . Those attending will be able to use a catalogue and notebook .
 I suspect him to be one of the lesser treats residing in the Treat Gallery, Pettigrew Hall . The Treat Gallery is at the centre of the treat gallery at the end of the evening .
 His none-too-fetching smile suits well the round and rosy cheeks which find themselves beneath a curled coiffure . The actor has been married for more than 20 years .
 English artist of the 16th century, his other works declare that something be amiss in this, our newest Bates possession .
 Thomas Gainsborough prefers landscapes to the art of portraiture in which he so often indulged . The painter was famous for his paintings of landscapes .
 He left Ipswich for Bath, the latter being a greater center of life and fashion and therefore a city which could assign more opportunities for portrait-fame to an artist newly establishing himself .
 The story goes that success soon came to him, so fast indeed that he was able to . increase his price from five to eight and at last to forty guineas for a half-length and a hundred . for a full-length portrait .
 Mr Gainsborough was under an extraordinary handicap, that of an empty pocket in his early days . John Henderson was willing to pay an extraordinary amount to be preserved .
 She sits highly bedecked in fanciest clothes, a black and feathersome hat upon her head .
 The "Baillie Family" includes four children, Mother, Father, and four children . The family is one of six in all .
 A certain ""posedness"" being granted, I find an affection for the painting, for the humorous family who seem to assure everyone of a warm welcome . A certain 'posedness' being granted .
 Gainsborough's three ""Rustic Children,"" blending easily with the countryside about them, wishing they did not so much belong to it . The artist's three children are said to have blended easily with countryside .
 The portrait of ""Miss Elizabeth Singleton"" returns some of the most important portraits of the day .
 We remind the studentry that Bates offers them constant opportunity to prove their intellectual zeal . We remind them that Bates is a great place to study and learn .
 Many colleges erect new buildings frequently; most colleges work to improve facilities . Bates has other grounds for excellence, including Bates College of Technology .
 In another, more revealing competition, Bates will stand out among the list of winners . Bates will be one of the winners in the competition .
 In the final reckoning, when judges appraise the relation between effort expended and education achieved, Bates students must win . Bates students will be judged for effort expended, education achieved .
 Bates biology biology majors allowed into their building two evenings a week beyond class time . Yale science majors living on the top floor of their science buildings cannot complain of inaccessible facilities next to Bates biology majors . Bates biology students are allowed into the building two nights a week after class .
 Lest Bates offers an easy education, those doors to opportunity remain locked except during class time . The doors to opportunities remain locked during classes, but not during school time .
 Study rooms in the library now stay open for fifteen hours a day on week-days . Study rooms are now open for up to 15 hours per day on the weekends .
 These changes may be symptoms of a dangerous movement to lower Bates standards, Bates says . Bates says it's a dangerous move to lower standards .
 Down thte hall from the practice rooms, the music department keeps a well-stocked closet locked . Down the hall, the school's music department also has a closet full of weapons .
 Hundreds of records stand on the shelves; they are to be used only in conjunction with a music course . The records will only be used for conjunction with the course .
 Know that what you achieve you have won, for gaining an education at Bates poses a real challenge . Know that . What you achieve is what you have .
 Entered as second-clas» matter at the Lewlston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879 . Entered as a second-Clas­ matter . entered as a matter of second-to-third . Entered this month's issue .
 The longevity of any institution, be it religious, governmental, or educational, is largely dependent upon its traditions . The institution's longevity is dependent on its traditions, says author .
 Protestant churches rely heavily on traditional ritual while sending representatives to the Ecumenical Council . The Protestant churches use traditional ritual to send representatives .
 In election years our orators deluge us with the ideals of the founding fathers while urging change and progress . But in election years, they deluge them with ideals and progress, urging change, progress . In this year's election, they offer a glimpse into the future of America .
 We revere Johnny Stanton while we consider the Tri-mester plan . Here at Bates we revere him as a hero .
 Tradition gives the mass of people something to cling to in times oi change . Tradition gives people something they can cling to . Tradition is important in times of change, but it is also important to maintain tradition .
 Bates has rich traditional background to rely upon if it decides to move ahead . Bates has a rich tradition to rely on if it wants to move forward .
 History shows progress can be made on such a background without disruption of tradition, or that if such a disruption occurs those traditions which are lost are replaced with new and more effective ones .
 Perhaps this inconsistency could be resolved by an order for Beethoven, Bach, and Brahm sweatshirts, but I think there is a better solution . Bach, Bach and Brahms are not the only ones to wear a shirt .
 More progressive administration would encourage more dynamic student life, says student body president . Students would like to see more of a 'dynamic student life' at the University of Cambridge .
 Intellectual stimulation and hunger can keep the book store from becoming a trinket shop . Intellectual stimulation can keep that place from becoming trinkets shop .
 A more dynamic intellectual atmosphere can transform Coram library from a pile of tombs into a center of thought and inspiration . Coram Library is located in the heart of the city in New York City .
 The extension of library hours is a step in the right direction, in spite of the fact that administrative resistance to the extension was ironic in an institution dedicated to stimulation of thought . Library is dedicated to stimulating of thought.
 Men's dorms should be allowed to co-educate during the evening, says author . Men and women should be able to participate together, he says . Men should have recreation rooms in dorms, he adds .
 A more vivacious social life would boost morale and provide a greater opportunity for re-creation, not just recreation, says author . A more social life could boost morale, he says .
 The administration of Bates College has too long been content with the ""tried and true" approach . One can watch Old Faithful for only so long. Bates College is content with 'tried'
 The students of Bates College have too long been content to use tradition as an excuse for lethargy, rather than an opportunity . for progress . Bates College has too long used tradition as a excuse for . lethargemacy, not an opportunity for progress, says the writer .
 The mere consideration of the Tri-mester plan is a step in the right direction . The Tri-Menters plan is the first step in a long-term solution .
 Only when both the faculty and the student body recognize and utilize our traditional heritage can Bates College move forward with the assurance that its history merits .
 Many Bates students are aware, I am sure, of my continuous complaints of the illiteracy and unintelligibility pf most student writing . I'm sure, he is aware, he said, of his continuous complaints .
 "The Crater's Edge" is a shining example of writing which avoids the common failures of style and fallacies of thought . It gives me great pleasure to congratulate you on your column .
 This should set an example to all students for its development of subtle oxymorons and its anagogic reasoning . This should be an example of all students, including students from the U.S. and their parents .
 All students would be well advised to analyze how it is constructed carefully with special attention to the question that it develops a single clear idea .
 A great amount of campaigning was done on the basis of what the individual candidate could do or would do for our class . A great number of candidates were chosen to stand for their class, says senior .
 Not too much has been said as to how this forward action might possibly take shape . However, not too much was said about how it might take shape as a result .
 A challenge goes out to the newly elected class officers to rise to the occasion, so to speak, in order that they shall not slip into the doldrums of honorary apathy which past officers have tumbled .
 Take a little time to think over the class elections and what may or may not be the possible, or more likely, the probable results . Also, to the members of our ambitious Class of 1966, take a look at the possibility of the possible results .
 Recently, The Student published an editorial attacking hazing, Bates' traditional method of integrating its freshmen into college life .
 The author labeled this tradition as ""an unnecessary, embarassing, and dangerous affair,"" claiming it discourages academic zeal, breeds resentment and heralds the failure of our educational system .
 The author contended that hazing was merely an excuse for the upperclassmen to play the part of the all-knowing superior beings, whose sole function is to harass the freshmen . The author contends hazing is an excuse to harass freshmen .
 We feel qualified to proclaim that orientation indeed should remain an annual affair . With cherishable memories lingering in our minds of those first three weeks on campus, we feel qualified .
 It was pointed out that we returned nights just in time for noisy hours . It was said to be just a few hours before the noisy hours.
 Having to be in our rooms by 10:00, we had first use of bathroom facilities . We had to be on our way to our rooms at 10:30am .
 The author complained that upperclassmen couldn't sleep during hazing parties . The author also complained about the lack of sleep in the wake of the parties .
 There were not more than four haze parties in the three weeks, each no longer than one hour . Each haze party lasted less than an hour .
 We commend the sophomores for their superb work on redecorating our rooms . Commend Sophomores .
 The sophomores must have spent hours designing; a half hour and we'd wrecked their masterpieces . "The sophomoreants must have had hours designing," the author says .
 One, a sophomore, had the flu and was there a week; one had a cough; the other just didn't feel well . One student was there for a week, one was sick with a cough .
 In conclusion, we girls would like to thank the sophomores, the upperclassmen, and all others concerned who made orientation so memorable .
 "We realize that the time and work involved was tedious for them but sheer fun for us," said the team .
 " Especially touching to all of us was the debibbing ceremony and the traditional festivities thereafter," says CNN.com senior author .
 This sealed the night, creating an intangible bond between the freshmen and Bates College, one which could never be adequatetetet .
 A pipe is used to complete the scene as the class begins . It is the first time a class has been taught in a class of its kind .
 Professor talks like Jimmy Stewart and has the charm of Sherlock Holmes . He has encouraged, examined, and attacked the arguments of his students as they discuss the justification of Clytemnestra and Agamemnon .
 Niehaus comes to us from MIT where he taught the humanities course to undergraduates . He is the author of a new book on the humanities at MIT .
 After seven years in an atmosphere determined by scientific research, Dr. Dr. John Defterios says humanities are subordinate to science and technology . He says the humanities have been subordinate to technology and science .
 Niehaus spent four years in the navy, both as an enlisted man and a commissioned officer . He served in the U.S. Navy as a member of the Navy .
 For the following three years he taught history and humanities as a teaching Fellow at the University of Cambridge . For the next three years, he was a Fellow of the History and Humanities Fellow .
 He returned to teach at MIT and in 1958 received his Ph.D. in history from Harvard . In 1958 he returned to MIT to teach history at Harvard .
 Niehaus especially likes squash and at MIT he coached the freshman squash team . He coached the freshmen squash team at MIT .
 Right now his pet project is the schooling of a four year -old thoroughbred mare which he has just bought .
 Lewiston Healy Explains College Policy In Selection Of Faculty Members . Sabbatical program and process of securing faculty members present mysteries to all but a few Bates students .
 Dean Healy: The process of selecting a new faculty member begins when the administration is notified of a vacancy . Administration is notified when a vacancy will occur within a department, he said .
 Next, the Dean of the Faculty inquires of the department chairman if he can recommend anyone interested in the position . The Dean then inquires the department chair if anyone is interested .
 Graduate schools are contacted and a list of prospects are drawn . Then follows a great deal of correspondence, in which graduate schools contact and a selection is drawn .
 In some areas, Bates College receives unsolicited applications, and considers these as well . Bates College considers these applications as well as unsolicited .
 Whenever possible, a personal interview is conducted with the applicant . Interviews are conducted with an applicant .
 Following a rather hectic fund drive, WRJR is now in the process of spending your wisely contributed money . Members of the department in which the applicant is applying apply for the position .
 We will soon have a new turn table, a new microphone and many other items which will undoubtedly increase the quality of Bates College radio . Bates College will be using the new equipment to improve its quality of radio .
 WRJR has broadcast news as it happened with live coverage of the President's vital speech to the nation, followed daily by up-to-the-minute comments by our news department . In the past, WRJR covered the speech live on air, followed by live commentary .
 A week ago the station brought its listeners nationwide coverage of the November 6th elections . The station also brought listeners across the country to see how they voted .
 Any persons further interested in training for work on the air may see Bruce Cooper for . details . Bruce Cooper is Bruce Cooper, who is also a radio host .
 MitcheiJ House, winners of the grand prize of a steak dinner, and the Student for its great help in publicizing the fund drive . WRJR thanks the student body for helping to keep WRJR on the air .
 The man is not tested in any manner to determine his knowledge of subject . We might also thank faculty and administration for their contributions and assistance .
 This can be determined by consulting the applicant's record as an undergraduate and as a graduate student . Applicants' record can be judged by their undergraduate and graduate record .
 The extensiveness of the personal interview varies with the level of the position desired . Needless to say, the extensibility of the . personal . interview varies depending on the level . of the job desired .
 Healy said instructors and assistant professors generally sign a one-year contract which is renewed annually . Healy stated that instructors and assistants generally sign one year contracts .
 Instructors are reappointed a maximum of four times, after which they are either promoted to a higher level or let go from the college . Instructors must reappear at least four times before they are promoted to higher levels .
 If the results are satisfactory, these annual contracts are usually renewed without question . If the result is satisfactory, the contract will be renewed with no question .
 After a man serves a maximum of seven years at Bates, he achieves tenure . A man serving seven years can achieve tenure at the institution .
 Initial contracts usually run for three years, after which tenure is achieved upon reappointment . In the case of associate and full professors, the initial contracts run for 3 years . The contract is usually three years .
 Dean Healy: There are two ways faculty members can go on sabbatical leave . Healy says there are two options for faculty members to take a break from work .
 Sabbatical is required of a faculty member in the seventh full year of teaching after he achieves tenure . Sabbatical must be required in the 7th full year after he becomes tenure .
 Special provision is made for anyone in the continuous employ of the college for ten years . Special provision made for those in continuous employ for 10 years .
 This avoids any case in which an inordinately long period of service would be required before a man is eligible to be eligible for a medal .
 Under this program, Bates College will give the man one semester off at full pay, or a year at half pay . The man will be able to take a semester off or one year off at a half pay year .
 A statement of purpose is required on the sabbatical application, and a summary of achievements is required* on the man's return to Bates . A summary of achievement is also required* for the man to return to the Bates campus .
 The college can ask the man to take his leave earlier or later than usual .
 The sabbatical must eventually be taken, however, although this rule is not mechanically applied . The rule does not apply mechanically, but is not mechanical .
 When asked if Bates provides any retirement benefits for faculty members, Dr. Bates declined to say yes . Bates has no retirement benefits .
 Healy replied that the college subscribes to the T.I.A.A., the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association of America .
 This organization was set up in the early Twentieth Century by a large philanthropic foundation as a non-profit insurance program available only to teachers and administrators in private institutions .
 Each faculty member contributes a percentage of his salary to the plan, and the college matches this amount for the person . The college matches the amount for each person .
 Seventy is the mandatory retirement age, but it is possible to retire some years before that if one so desires . Seventy-year-old Dean Healy: "I'm not going to retire, I'm going to live in a retirement home, but I'm not afraid to
 Dean Healy concluded by commenting that the faculty is now nearly equally divided between M.A.'s and Ph.D.'s . Healy said that faculty members are now nearly evenly divided between Ph.A. and M.D.
 Healy's job is to insure the continued high quality of the faculty in the years to come . Healy: It's his job to ensure the quality of faculty .
 At that point we could truly feel that we belonged to our new environment . Perhaps we could sum it up by saying that at that point, we could . truly feel . that they belonged to their new environment. Perhaps that is what it is to say .
 Hazing, this means to an end, and that end but the beginning of our college careers and our future lives, should not be discarded or frowned upon . Hazing is not only a means to end, but that end is the end of your college career and future lives .
 MiDiker Barb Remick, Edwina Simone, Susan Feanley, Susan Coltrell, Eileen Sylvia, Linda Paquet, Susan Iverson, Susan Colleagues, Susan Littlefield, Susan Paquet .
 SMITTY'S Barber Shop is located at Bates College Sp. C . Hours Monday 8:30-6:00 Tuesday to 6:30 a.m. Wednesday to 6 p.m . Saturday 7:30 to 6 a .m. Saturday to 7:00 a
 Former Bates College Coach Dave Morey has been nominated to the Football Hall of Fame . Morey is nominated for the Hall of Famer for his coaching achievements .
 Inevitably injuries piled up, and Morey never entered the State Series with his team intact . Morey's team was eliminated from the state series after a series of injuries .
 Morey's teams at Bates, Middlebury and Alabama Poly played extremes of football, though generally they might have been described as emphasizing defense . Morey: "I'm not a football coach who doesn't like football, but I'm a football genius"
 The Bobcats won State Series titles in 1929 and 1930 . Maine allowed Maine rivals only six points in two seasons . Bobcats allowed only six of their opponents six points .
 When Bates held Yale to a scoreless tie in 1932 the mighty Eli eleven saw more different defensive formations in one game than it had faced in three years . The Eli 11 saw more defensive formations than they had faced three years before .
 Time helped Harvard defense hold off a late Middlebury march that might have produced a winning touchdown . Harvard defense held off a last-gasp Middlebury drive that might've produced a win for the team .
 Middlebury had a hard core of defensive specialists at the start of the season . This Middlebury team is known for its hard core defensive specialists . The team has a strong reputation for its defensive prowess .
 He was not irrevocably committed to the ""punt and pray"" offense, and when he had the boys who could run or throw the ball he produced an imaginative attack . But he was not . irreinvably committed .
 One of his Middlebury teams led the nation — in 1924 — for forward pass completions with 69 in 82 throws . His Middlebury team led the country in 1924 with 69 forward passes in 82 passes .
 Middlebury team gained almost two miles in nine games with a variety of offenses . Middlebury's offense included the straight T, the single wing and a short kick formation . The team gained nearly two miles per game in nine matches .
 Morey has worn out a couple of football benches since leaving Bates in 1939 . Morey never could be described as contained, at least during a football game .
 He coached nine years at Marblehead, Mass., High School before moving to Lowell Textile Institute . He suffered one of the great disappointments of his life when football was replaced by soccer .
 He coached soccer at Curry College in Milton, Mass. However, he coached soccer there until 1958 . He also coached the Curry College eleven at Milton .
 Dave was on hand for the Bates-Middlebury football game last month . He watched teams of colleges he formerly had coached and with which he enjoyed his most rewarding years .
 He has coached 45 years since his graduation from Dartmouth, where he was an Ail-American halfback . He was a halfback at Dartmouth and has coached since .
 Commander Max Eaton, who played football under Coach Morey, has been nominated for Sports Illustrated's Silver Anniversary All-American award . Eaton was nominated for the award by Sports Illustrated for the first time .
 Grant Farquar breaks up a White Mule touchdown pass in a Garcelon Field puddle after breaking up a touchdown pass .
 Farquar was caught for pass interference by the referee in the first half . He was awarded a yellow card for play-in-goal by the visitors in the second half .
 Binky stunned the die-hard Bates' rooters with a 92 yard run back of the opening kickoff . Binky's run back was the longest of the season for the Bates family .
 Smith ran down the left side untouched by any player on the Bates team . Smith waited for his blocking to form in front of him, then raced down the right side .
 This is even more remarkable considering the fact that the field was more suited to water polo than football . This is a more remarkable feat considering the size of the field in which it is more suitable to play .
 With thirteen seconds elapsed* on the scoreboard clock, quarterback Dick Robbat passed to end Gary Ross for the first of the deciding points after touchdown, and Colby led 8-0 . With 13 seconds elapsed on the clock, the game was over .
 After the ference play, the first of several costly penalties, gave Colby a first down on the Bobcats' one yard line . The Bobcats scored three plays later . Cox scored three play later .
 Colj Colby led 16-0 with still 3:35 left by still 3-35 left . Dick Robbat again struck for another score for another two points and Bates offense bogged down . ColjColby led by 16 points .
 On the next series of downs Binky Smith lofted a pass to Cox who made a fine catch on the Garnet 37 . Cox made the catch in the end of the first half .
 End Sweeps Colby, sending a man in the middle of the game, sending him to the hospital .
 Colby end Ross hugs the rain-soaked ball after grabbing a Robbat aerial . Ross then ate up large chunks of yardage for Colby . Colby ended up scoring a touchdown in the first quarter .
 Bob Whitehouse gained eight yards to the 29 and Dave Cox bulled his way to the twenty-five . The score was a touchdown for Whitehouse, Cox and Whitehouse . Whitehouse and Cox both ran for eight yards .
 The Bates team battled a pouring rain as well as the rain as the score came back to dominate the second quarter . The team battled through the pouring rain and the rain .
 Fullback Tom Carr picked up twelve yards from the Garnet 35 to ignite the drive . Fullback Carver picked up 12 yards from  Garnet 35 .
 Davis-Castolene pass clicked to the Mules' 35. After Carr picked up another four yards, Carr picked down four yards .
 Carr carried for four up the middle and Planchon gained the first down on about the twenty-five yard line . Carr ran for four . Carr carried . for four in the middle up the . middle and gained a first down .
 Two plays later Bill Davis bounced off two tacklers to nearly the fifteen . The play was the first play of the game . The score was nearly 15 points .
 The Bates fullback carried the pigskin to the four, Planchon squirted into the end zone . After the sturdy fullback carried it to the end of the field .
 Late in the second half a run by freshman John Yuskis to the Colby 46 and a fifteen yard penalty started another scoring drive . The Colby freshman scored a touchdown in the first half .
 The Bobcats penetrated to the 9 yaid line with less than a minute to go in the half . Planchon and Carr did most of the gaining .
 Bates scored on the final play of the first half as Bates ran the play without a huddle . Bates scored the touchdown on the last play of first half .
 Bates trailed at the half when the fake attempt for the extra point failed . The fake attempt failed and the team trailed at half time . Bates had a fake extra point attempt failed .
 Neither team was able to get their offense moving in the second half . Neither team managed to score in the first half .
 Colby had two glorious chances inside the Bates twenty but were stopped each time . Colby's chances inside of the Bates 20 were thwarted each time by the Bates team .
 On two crucial fourth down plays Carr was stopped by the middle of the Colby line to kill any Garnet chances . The Garnet quarterback was stopped on two crucial plays by Colby by the line .
 The elusive halfback nearly turned the corner in the second quarter of the game, but was finally driven out of bounds . He nearly turned around the corner but was eventually driven off bounds .
 Bates coach said Colby played a good game and the rain didn't help Bates' chances in the second half . He said that Colby was a good player and that the rain was a factor in the game .
 Hatch praised the attitude of the team and the leadership of Co-Captains Bill Davis and Howie Vandersea in posting the first winning season since 1957 . Hatch said the team's attitude and leadership was key to posting a winning season for the first time in 60 years .
 Nightly in the gymnasium, the 1962-63 version of the Bates College basketball team can be found preparing for the coming season . The team was coached by the men's basketball team at the time .
 Long practice sessions are devoted to running and conditioning to prepare the team for the fast-breaking and pressing type of game they are expected to play much of the time .
 These drills were designed to develop the speed and reaction of each player . These drills are designed to test the speed, reaction and speed of each one .
 On offense the drills emphasize both the zone offense employed much of last year and a faster paced free-lance offense . The drills are being used to prepare for the 2014 season .
 Defensively, the drills try and develop a switching type of man to man defense . The drills try to develop a new type of defense .
 On Fridays, the team holds complete intra-squad scrimmages in the hope that the week's labors will produce the necessary elements of a successful club .
 SEVEN Co -Captains Conclude Careers; Praise Coaches, Fellow Players . Co-Capt. Bates Stodent, NOVEMBER 14, 1962, was a co-captain at the time .
 Howie Vandersea was a tower of strength for three years in the Garnet forward wall, and Co-Capt. Howie . Vandersea, who was in charge of Garnet's forward wall during his time in the team, is now retired from the sport .
 Bill Davis, key backfleld performer for four years, has been relegated to memory of King Footbail . Six other senior gridsters have also been left out of action in recent weeks .
 Vandersea is a native of* Whitinsville, Mass., and a product of Northbridge High School . Vandersea entered Bates in the fall of 1959 .
 At Northbridge High, Howie was captain of the 1959 football team that compiled an 8-1 record and won the Central Mass. Mass. high school football team . Howie played in the 1959 season .
 Red also starred on the baseball diamond and the basketball court for Northbridge High .
 Three Time All-Maine At Bates, Howie Howie has become a legend on the gridiron in three short years . Howie is a three-time All-American at Bates, Maine .
 He has been a unanimous All-State football selection for three years . He has also been placed on the All-East small college squad twice this year .
 Howie Howie also has been a varsity performer in baseball, basketball and track . Howie has also been a standout in baseball and basketball .
 He was an All-Maine first baseman for the Bates baseballers . His long ball power and steady fielding assured this distinction . He was a standout in Maine .
 Red empha sized the spirit and drive of the Bobcat eleven and a great competitive surge among the players as the difference between victory and defeat . Expressing his great thrill at a winning season, Red said: 'The spirit of the players is the difference'
 Red was high in praise of the Bates coaching staff, saying, ""Coach Hatch's good moves and sound judgment have made him the most respected coach I have ever played under" The Bates line was a great improvement .
 Professional ball is an opportunity that would be a great challenge for Howie . Howie would like a shot at making the grade at professional ball .
 Red is looking Bill Davis Howie Vandersea forward to a successful baseball season with Capt. Howie . Vandersea . Red hopes to continue his football prowess .
 Ron Taylor, his teammate this past summer in the Cape Cod summer league, played in a summer league in Cape Cod . Ron Taylor was a teammate in the summer league .
 Howie Vandersea's words were Howie's words concerning Co-Captain and quarterback Bill Davis . Vandersea: "I'm not sure what happened to Bill Davis" Howie: "Bill Davis is not a good guy"
 Bill, a native of Gloucester, Mass., was a member of the undefeated Gloucester High School State Class B champs that went to Florida's Orange Bowl for the North-South High School Championship . Bill played in the Orange Bowl . Bill was the winner of the North and South
 Bill was the captain of his high school football team and also a member of the baseball team . Bill was also a captain of the football team .
 He was selected the Most Valuable Player on the football team . He won the Tom McCann Memorial Trophy symbolic of this . He was also selected as the Most Vocal Player .
 Bill entered Cushing Academy in the fall of 1958 and was again selected the Most Valuable Player on the football team . Bill entered the academy in the summer of that year . Bill was selected the most Valuable player on the team .
 Bill and Phil Tamis both chose Bates and entered with the class of 1963 . Bill and his Cushing teammate, Phil . Tamis, also chose Bates, both chose the same school .
 As a frosh Bill was a starter and during his four years of varsity ball he was to become the first man in Bates history to play all four backfleld positions .
 As a four-year starter, Bill has had the opportunity to play against some of the real great players Bates teams have faced . Bill has been a four year starter for Bates .
 Tufts fullbacks Dunk MacDonald and Ron Deveaux are two of the top fullbacks . Wayne Champion and Dave Cloutier are two Maine halfbacks who are considered among the top halfbacks .
 Worcester Tech tackle Dave Piesinki was Bill's choice as the top opposing lineman he has ever faced . Bill chose Worcester Tech lineman as the best offensive lineman he's ever seen .
 In addition to calling the signals for the Garnet football team Bill also plays for Coach Leahey's state champion baseball squad . Paul Castolene, Paul Planchon, Jack Fynn and Howie Vandersea were Bill's top Betes stars .
 Bill was thrilled with the winning season but looks back on tne Northeastern game as the season's high point . He also looks back at his touchdown pass to Paul Castolene, to tie Middlebury last year, as his biggest individual thrill .
 Bill is interested in pursuing a career in social work and looks forward to graduate school as a step in that direction . Bill is looking forward to attending graduate school in the fall .
 Coach Robert Hatch will surely miss these two great football players when autumn brings the smash of helmet against helmet into season again next year . Hatch's own words can speak of the qualities of these young men .
 Former Manchester City stars are the best players in the Premier League this season . They have been compared to each other but there are none better than these two .
 A football captain is not a mere token of popularity for when football men choose a captain they pick a leader and these two men were leaders in the finest sense of the word . The two men will be remembered for their leadership qualities .
 The Bobcats began the season with victories over Nasson and Nichols, the scores being 8-0 and 6-2 . The scores were the scores of both victories .
 They lost a close game to Bowdoin 2-1, but, in the final week of the season, they beat two strong clubs, Clark and Colby . They lost to Clark in the season's final week, but beat Colby and Clark .
 The squad's final record stood at five and three, the best record ever compiled by a Bates College soccer team . The team's final score at five-and-three is the best ever compiled .
 Last Tuesday, the squad traveled to Worcester, Mass., to play Clark . Nute Serves Twice .
 Bobcats beat Clark 5-4 in their first game of the season . Bobcats came on strong in the final moments to win the game 5-3 .
 Raphael Onyemelukwee and Lee Nute both had two goals . Bob Lanz had one goal for the U.S.
 In the closing periods of this game, Bates showed some of its best teamwork and passing of the year . Bates showed its best passing and teamwork of the season .
 The Colby game was the most exciting one seen at Garcelon Field this year . Colby's win over the Colby team was one of the most thrilling one seen this season .
 Bob Lanz bulled his way through the M u i e defense to score the first goal of the game . Bates got off to a fast start to the game in the first half .
 In the second period the Bates defense let down and the very capable Colby line scored three goals . In the first period, Bates defense failed and Colby scored three .
 Lee Nute put the Bobcats right back into the game, when he booted one out of a melee in front of the Bowdoin goal . The Bobcats won the game 2-2 in the first half of the game .
 Lloyd slipped the ball into the left corner of the Bowdoin goal . Raphael Onyemelukwee centered the ball in front of the goal, where Steve Barron sent the ball skimming towards the right corner .
 Lanz scores the tie breaking goal with one minute and thirty seconds showing on the clock . Lanz scored the goal in the final minute and 30 seconds of the game . The game was tied 1-1 at the end of the first half .
 A Colby fullback ricocheted the ball off the goal post after kicking the ball away from his goal . Colby won the game 1-0 at Colby in the first half of the season .
 The ball bounces back into a crowd of players directly in front of the goal . The ball bounced back into the crowd directly after it was kicked out of play .
 Bob Lanz trapped the ball and boomed it into the goal for the final tally of the game . The game ended 1-0 with a 1-1 victory for the Red Sox .
 This was the first time Colby has been defeated by a Maine team in a number of years . This was first time the Colby team has been beaten in a game in over a year .
 Lee Nute, Don Mewhinney, Raphael Onyemelukwee, and Pete Aranski played very well in the final match of their soccer careers . The seniors played well in their last match at home .
 Lee scored the goal that put Bates back into the game, and Raphael helped to set up the tying goal . Raphael helped set up a tying goal for Bates .
 Don made several key stops in the last two periods, and Pete hustled on defense . Don made a number of key stops during the game .
 Ensign Eaton received the M.S. degree in Meteorology . He was Project Officer at the International Institute of Meteorology, Stockholm, Sweden, and assigned to the American Embassy there .
 Commander Eaton was Head of the Technical Readiness Branch of the Office of Naval Weather Service, 1957-1959 . He was Meteorological Officer on the Staff of Admiral George Anderson, Commander of the Sixth Fleet, 1959-1961 .
 He is currently Officer in Charge of the United States Weather Facility, Miami, Fla. He is responsible for forecasts to the operating forces .
 Commander Eaton still finds time for athletics, and is currently sponsoring the Fleet Weather Facility softball team in the Hialeah Park League .
 Bates nominated for 1962 Sports Illustrated Silver Anniversary All-American Awards . Navy Weather Facility in Miami, Fla., has been nominated for the 1962 award .
 The candidates were judged for outstanding accomplishment in the 25 years following their varsity grid careers . The candidates are judged for . outstanding accomplishment .
 Commander Eaton played football for four years, lettering in his sophomore, junior and senior years . Commander Eaton was a member of the U.S. Army football team .
 During his Bates career he participated in the intramural sports program . He served the Varsity Club as its secietary . He was an active member of the Jordan Ramsdell Scientific Society .
 Max Eaton was commissioned an Ensign in the United States Naval Reserves in 1942 . Eaton received training in meteorology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . Eaton was a teacher, coach, and principal in the Massachusetts school system .
 Bates lost to a strong team, though finishing on top of M.I.T. and Tufts . The team also finished top of the poll .
 Co-Capt. Eric Silverberg finished just one second behind the winner . Co-capt. Eric . Silverberg was one second slower than the winner, and finished second .
 Bill Dunham's days of crosscountry competition at Bates have come to a close . Dunham was a crosscountry runner at Bates . Dunham is a junior at Bates and a senior at the University of North Carolina . Dunham: "I am proud to be a student at Bates"
 Bill has been highly regarded by both his coach and teammates as a talented and conscientious competitor . Bill has a reputation for being conscientious and a talented player .
 Ed Belden and Ed Margulies will be sorely missed on the team . His absence, and that of the other seniors to graduate, will be greatly missed .
 Before coming to Bates, Bill ran on the Kents Hill Prep crosscountry team for three years, and was captain his senior year . Bill ran crosscountry at high school in New Jersey .
 Bill has majored in history and intends to study law at Cornell next year . Bill plans to attend Cornell Law School in 2015 .
 At Cornell he plans to continue in cross-country A.A.V. ski racing meets . He plans to compete at Cornell University in the fall .
 Distance runners don't really get into their prime until after 20, according to Bill . Distance runners are a sport to continue with after college .
 Bill Dunham was high in his Bill Dunham praise for the team and its fine efforts . Dunham was proud of his best season with the team .
 He supported his coach in saying that our record could have been better if we played teams of our own size . As regards to the record of 10-4, he said that the record could be better .
 Easterns lost to Connecticut State by seven points in the Easterns basketball tournament . Coach says a few variables either way could have made a difference .
 Co-Capt. Bill applauded his teammates for their fine team efforts . Co-capt. Bill said that Co. Bill was proud of his teammates' efforts .
 Bill predicted that next year's team will be even better with our first four men, Eric Silverberg, Mike Gregus, Ken Trufant, and Finn Wilhelmson returning . Bill predicts that next season's race for the World Cup will be more exciting .
 He predicted good seasons for Pete Parsons, Karl Wolff, Basil Richardson and Basil Richardson . Marshall Snow, a freshman hurt early in the season, also predicted good season for him .
 High school hopefuls could join the Bates crosscountry team, coach says . The team is a crosscountry powerhouse .
 Bill also indicated the dualistic value of crossHockey Player Explains Game; Field Day On Sat. Saturday . Bill indicated that cross-hockey players can be cross-players .
 Our Bates field hockey team is striving this year to improve their ground skills in order to be more able to offset the ""brute"" power of Maine and Colby . Saturday -in a Field Day here .
 In years past, we have never had a chance against their stength (particularly that of Maine) but with new plays and an emphasis on precicountry, it is a fine varsity sport . It also prepares the distance runners for the winter season .
 There is a group called the ""club"" runners, composed of middle-distance men who worked out with the team . There is also a group known as 'club runners'
 Bill concluded with remarking as much he has enjoyed running here . Bill concluded that he had enjoyed running in the past year .
 He finds a great deal of pleasure in being in good shape, in competing with an outstanding team, and learning the values of self-discipline .
 Gay Blade: "Anyone on terra firma will agree Tareyton is a firma, fina cigarette-packed with tobacco bono. Says Gay Blade, ""Anyone on . terra . firma . will agree that Tareey is a fina . fina
 Field hockey, in its original form, was played by many men and even today, in many parts of Europe, men still play field hockey . Field hockey is still played by men even today in some parts of the world .
 Both games have teams with five forwards, three halfbacks, two fullbacks and a goalie . The game is very similar to soccer as both teams have five forwards and two halfbacks .
 The purpose in soccer and field hockey is to score goals — in soccer with the head or the foot — in field hockey with a hip-length stick . In field hockey, the goal should be scored with the hip or foot, in soccer .
 Forward line gets ahead of the ball without having at least three opponents between them and the goal after crossing 25-yd. line . Forward line can't be ahead of three opponents in the 25-yard box without having to be between the goal and the other side .
 In picking up a ball, a player can only turn to the right when he reverses its direction . A player only turns to the left when he turns the direction of a ball . A ball can only be picked up when it is picked up by a player in a position .
 The stick can only come as high as the player's waist — either in front or in back . The stick must be in front of the player or in the back of the stick . Sticks are only allowed to be in the front or back of a stick .
 The ball may not be hit off the ground high enough to be the occasion of possible injury . Dangerous Hitting may be dangerous to hit .
 When tackling, the person may not get between the ball and opponent possessing the ball . Obstruction — When tackling (taking ball away from an opponent) may not be between the person and the person possessing that ball .
 Free Hit — Opponent has a free hit to his forward line from the place where the foul was committed . Free Hit is a hit to the forward line . Free hit is given to the opponent from the point of play .
 Roll In — Opponent kneels at the side of the field and rolls ball (not more than one foot in air) to his forwards . Roll In is rolled in at the end of the match .
 These penalties are used for fouls occurring in area of cage (striking circle) They happen for various types of fouls . Long and Short Corner — These penalties were used for several types of incidents .
 Hockey, like most sports, requires strength, speed, intelligence, co-ordination and team interdependence . From that rather superficial synopsis, one can see that hockey is rather intricate and intricate .
 As a result, the hockey team hopes that you will support them at their games with Colby and Maine Saturday as you have supported the teams of other sports . The hockey team is hoping that you support them .
 It is well to give when asked, out it is better to give unasked, through understanding . To the open-handed the search for one who shall receive is joy greater than giving .
 Lerner was born in 1902 in Russia, the son of an itinerate teacher of Hebrew . Lerner came to the United States at the age of five and grew up in New Haven, Connecticut . Lerner is a Holocaust survivor and Holocaust survivor .
 He earned an A.B. in economics at Yale, and a Ph.D. from Robert Brookings Graduate School in Washington, D.C. in 1927 .
 During the '30s, Lerner was a quasi-Marxist (teaching at Harvard, Sarah Lawrence, Williams) and thought the U.S. ripe for Fascism . Lerner thought the United States was ripe for fascism .
 Five years ago, Lerner finished his 1036page paean, America As a Civilization . Lerner re-evaluated his adopted country, and five years ago he finished his book . Lerner: America As A Civilization is America's best-selling book .
 Some of his previous books include Ideas Are Weapons, Ideas for the Ice Age, and Actions and Passions . Some of the previous books have been published in the past .
 Bates College has filed a complaint with the Maine Public* Utilities Commission . Bates College is concerned about water rates established by the city of Lewiston . The college has filed the complaint against the city .
 "In so doing, it discriminates between classes of consumers and members of the various classes," the author says . "It discriminates," he says .
 Water meters have been installed in all buildings on campus, obtensibly as part of a program to be put into effect for all non-profit institutions throughout the city .
 The president and the trustees of Bates assumed that all such institutions were to be taxed equally . Bates was the first institution to have been taxed at the same rate .
 While the College's water rates have risen substantially, other schools, churches, and hospitals are paying reduced or merely token rates .
 President Phillips said the city has stated that it has a threeyear program to meter all nonprofit institutions . The city has said it has stated it has three years of meter meters .
 Bates filed a complaint to the Maine Public Utilities Commission . The commission has the right to regulate rates for non-competitive activities . The mayor has not given a satisfactory answer to Bates .
 "During the past several months we have tried in every way to avoid this step," he said . "We are very disappointed that we have not been able to find a solution to this problem"
 Water service will be disconnected by the city, residents say . Residents say they had 'no alternative' to having their water service cut off .
 Mayor Girard: College has been singled out to pay a higher rate while other nonprofit organizations are still paying the lower rate . As we wrote last August, "What we object to is that the College has ... singled out"
 Bates is not complaining about the increased water rates, but about the unfair application of this increase by the City of Lewiston . Bates is appealing to the Public Utilities Commmission, not the increased rates, he says .
 The Commission is expected to conduct an investigation and rule on the dispute . The Commission will investigate the matter .
 Thomas Reynolds was completing a two week tour at various colleges in the Northeast . Reynolds is stationed in Puerto Rico .
 The purpose of the tour was to interest and recruit people to fill some 6000 spaces which have opened due to the expansion of the Corps to 10,000 members . The tour was aimed at recruiting people for the Corps .
 The film had pictures of the training program as it was set up in Puerto Rico, and of language laboratories at foreign universities .
 There were also shots of the volunteers in the countries to which they have been assigned . Dave Garroway narrated the film; Sargent Shriver was interviewed, and a Presidential Press Conference was shown .
 Liberal Arts graduates are needed as well as those who are trained in a specialized field . He brought out the fact that Liberal Arts students are needed in the country .
 Volunteers also have to learn the language, laws, and customs of the countries in which they are working . Volunteers must also learn the languages, laws and customs in the countries they work in .
 Peace Corps is capable of training volunteers to do a job, but they cannot provide the genuine desire to help that every volunteer must have, he says . He stressed that the Peace Corps can be trained to do jobs, but it cannot provide a genuine desire .
 Reynolds also mentioned that the Peace Corps has the advantage of being a very flexible organization, its rules changing as the Corps grows and changes . The Peace Corps is a flexible organization .
 At the end of the program he passed out Peace Corps publications and cards to be returned indicating an interest in joining the Peace Corps .
 All are invited to bring their instruments and songbooks and join in the fun . All are asked to bring instruments and songsbooks to the event .
 Bates Debating Team compiled a record of 16 wins and four losses last weekend . The team won 16 of Twenty contests at Vermont University .
 Professor Quimby accompanied the squad which left early Friday morning and returned late Saturday night . The team returned to the UK on Saturday night after a three-day break from their base base .
 The affirmative teams, Howard Blum '63 and John Strassberger '64; and Norman Bowie and Robert Boyd '64, each won four debates and lost one . The negative teams, Robert Ahern '64 and Tom Hall '64 . Kenneth Woodbury and Jeffrey Rouault '
 "The non-communist nations should establish an Economic Community,"" squads came from as far west as Chicago and as far south as North Carolina . squads from Chicago to North Carolina came from non-Communist nations .
 Among the teams Bates defeated were Harvard, Dartmouth, Middlebury, MIT, Brooklyn, St. Johns Hopkins and St. George's .
 No official announcement of the winning team or best speakers was given . Individual speaker rankings and the composite score of the Bates teams placed Bates near, if not at, the top .
 The Christian Association announces a Thanksgiving Vespers Program tomorrow at 4:30 in the Chapel . Remick Remick To Conduct Special Vesper Services .
 This service will consist of quiet organ music and reading appropriate to the character of Thanksgiving . The service will be one half hour long .
 This Sunday, November 25, will be the first in a series of Sunday afternoon Vesper services in the chapel . This service, also lasting one-half hour, will consist of quiet organ music and a brief meditation by the Rev. The Rev. Rev. John Wright will lead the
 Mr Remick is minister of the Baptist Church in Topsham, Maine . He is also a new instructor in philosophy at Bates .
 This service is on a trial basis and will be continued only with student support . This service will be available to students on a limited basis .
 Both services are informal in attire and conduct, as well as nondenominational in character . Service is informal in clothing, conduct and conduct .
 "Alpine Holidays" theme of the 1963 Winter Carnival will emphasize outdoor activities . Winter Carnival begins January 24 and ends January 27 . OC plans ski, skate and dance activities .
 Directors for this year's Carnival have already begun plans for intersemester weekend . Paul Ketchum '64, and newly elected Karen ""Bambi"" Brown '65, directors for the Carnival have begun plans .
 The Friday ski trip this year is to Madison, New Hampshire, where there will also be ice-skating facilities . There will be ice skating facilities there .
 Sunday afternoon is tentatively reserved for snow games at Lost Valley in Auburn . Sunday afternoon will be the first time snow games have been held in the area .
 Opening night, Thursday, features an ice show followed by the traditional crowning of the Carnival Queen . Opening night is Thursday, Thursday .
 From Lake Andrews, all will proceed to the Alumni gymnasium for refreshments and a square dance .
 The Outing Club is arranging to have the King's Pine Ski Lodge in Madison, New Hampshire, for dinner and dancing . Friday evening the Outing club will be at the lodge in Madison .
 Buses will bring those still on campus to the Lodge for the evening, and will transport them back that night . Buses transport all back to campus that night, and buses will transport those still at the Lodge .
 Saturday morning will be the hockey game, followed by entertainment in the afternoon, and the formal dance in the evening . The formal dance will take place Saturday night .
 Bates College Apathetics took on the Podium Drones in what proved to be one of the most gruelling and time consuming contests thus far waged in the confines of Chapel Arena . The Carnival Committee as well as the Carnival Committee .
 Drones have had a distinct advantage in the past, having the length of the game at their convenience . Yet, we must admit that the Apathetics manage in every contest to put up a good fight .
 The Bates College Curriculum Committee staged the matches twice and sometimes three times a week . The matches have increased in intensity, if not in number, so that the Bates Apathetics are in tip-top condition .
 The contest is held in a large room, each team facing the other . One team stands; the other sits. One team sits. The contest was held in the large room .
 The contest is opened by an umpire who presents the challenger to the Apathetics . The winner of the contest will be announced at the end of the day .
 The object of the game is to eliminate any final response from the opposing team at the end of a given interval of time, usually twenty-five minutes . The game is played between the two teams, usually between 25 and 30 minutes .
 The Apathetics have shown time and again that ordinarily insipid speakers cannot conquer them, and they return the Drones efforts each time with a hearty round of applause . Drones have tried, in admirable fashion, to induce in the opponents that quality we call sleep .
 Bates College's chapel program operates on the assumption that the average student has no desire to acquire knowledge but that he is mainly here because every parent thinks that his child should have a college education . Bates College has a chapel program that focuses on the students' desire to learn .
 If college is to give us an appreciation of Sunday school sermons and core course nuggets, fine . "We got the sermons before we came here and we get the nuggets in class," she says. "If college is . to give students an appreciation, fine."
 Bates must accept the fact that most students are here because they want to get an education . To this end present chapel speakers in line with this desire, to this end .
 No objection to a compulsory attendance would be raised if the present sessions were worth our time and attention . No objection should be raised to compulsory attendance, says the author .
 Beckman Instruments, Inc., in California has several new openings for technically trained men interested in a sales or marketing career in the instruments business . The company is looking for a sales and marketing career .
 They are specifically interested in identifying potential candidates with undergraduate training in chemistry or physics . They are looking at potential candidates for the job .
 Those selected will receive training at the home office in Fullerton, California, following which they will be assigned to a regional office . Their duties will include coordination with dealer representatives in contacting leading scientists throughout a variety of industries .
 A descriptive brochure is available in the Placement Office, and any senior interested should send a resum^ and cover letter to Mr Roy S Holm, Corporate Employment Manager .
 On Tuesday, November 27, U.S. Civil Service wiU interview men and women interested in management and specialized training opportunities in federal government agencies .
 Senator Edmund S Muskie CDMaine) addressed the student body in Chapel Friday, concerning the U.S. form of government as a panacea .
 Thirteen small countries emerged under the Articles of Confederation . The Articles were aimed at restricting the central government . Thirteen countries emerged in the Articles, which aimed to restrict the central power .
 The function of the men at Philadelphia, then, was to find a way to make a democratic government work . Philadelphia's first city was Philadelphia .
 At the end of the summer, Hamilton and Jefferson, who held two divergent philosophies, could look at their work with a sense of accord . The pair's work was the work of a pair of men .
 From four million we have risen to a nation of two hundred million, we have grown up to 2,000,000 . From a . nation of four million people we have . risen to become a nation . of 2,100 million people, the country has grown to a million people
 We have reached an industrial peak in the world and established political, social and economic influence throughout the East and West . We have established political and social influence in the East, West and the East .
 As society changes in the future, the system will also have to change in order to survive . The system will need to change to survive in the long run of the future .
 We must find food, water, shelter, and transportation with a strong central government . We need to find food and water, and shelter, with the help of a strong government .
 After defining democratic government as that form of government in which ""the people participate, in some manner or other, in the formation of public policy,"" Dr. Dr. John Sutter defines democracy as that the people participate in public policy formation .
 Thumm discussed the various powers of the executive in such a government . Thumm also discussed the role of the president in such an executive .
 Thumm considered the federative powers of the President — Chief of State, Chief Diplomat, and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces . Thumm was considered the chief of state, chief diplomat, and commander in chief .
 When he examined the President's power of enforcement, the lecturer noted the trend toward centralization . The lecturer also noted that the trend towards centralization is becoming more common .
 Democracy caught between need for increased executive powers and need for individual participation . Democracy is caught between the need and the necessity of individual participation, says Julian Zelizer .
 President can influence legislation in the exercise of his legislative powers . Legislature, and with the power of veto, he can influence lawmaking . Legislature .
 As this transfer of power from the legislature to the executive continues, however, legislation is increasingly replaced by promulgation . Legislation is increasingly becoming more difficult to legislate .
 The role of the executive seems to preclude the possibility of individual participation in government . Further, the role of government seems to be to preclude individual participation, he says .
 In time of national disaster, it has become the ""duty"" of the President to intervene . The President has a duty to intervene in the wake of a national disaster .
 The problem of increasing executive power and keeping this power under the control of the people confronts the U.S. today . The problem is increasing executive powers and keeping them under control of people .
 Those interested in working on these committees are encouraged to see those in charge of committees .
 The United Nations of Poetry will present a reading of Eugene Ionesco's ""The Lesson" on Sunday, November 25 al 8:00m. in the Jewish Community Center .
 As far back as anyone at Bates cares to remember, much of the area between Page Hall and Smith Hall was sunken, marshy land fed by subterranean springs . Three Andrews Dams Marsh; Alumni Fund Finances Prexy's Skating Rink . The area was sunk
 Delbert Andrews, class of 1910, was a business manager at Bates College during the First World War . Andrews was the college's business manager during the war .
 Andrews was a skating fan, and after years of watching this marshy bog going unused, he decided to put it to work . Andrews was the owner of a skate rink in the marshy area .
 This little pond eventually became known among the students as Lake Andrews . The pond was known as a pond on the campus .
 A year or two later Delbert Andrews left Bates and soon after the water drained off . The water was drained off after Andrews' departure .
 Bates expanded and built three new buildings around the soggy plot . The new buildings were built in the 1980s and '90s . The site has been criticized for being too wet .
 If the swamp were filled in no one could guarantee that the water would not then back up into the basements of houses surrounding the campus . The swamp was filled in by the University of Wisconsin .
 The Alumni Fund helped finance the dredging and Prexy's Skating Rink was back in business . Alumni fund helped finance dredging of the rink .
 Puddle has been the object of pranks and practical jokes . The Puddle was the subject of a series of practical jokes and pranks .
 '63 Ring Round The Moon' is an entertaining evening at the theater, if a little fuzzy round the edges .
 Members of the company who are billed as less than ""leads" actually contribute the most to the evening . They deliver high comedy capably and consistently, the company says .
 Special applause goes to Ned Brooks, whose Butler is starched to the hilt and who convulses his audience .
 Holly Milius presents superb and well-sustained characterization . The play ranks with her best theater efforts on campus, says Holly .
 Lloyd seldom loses a chance to make the most of his minor role, with results that lift the entire play . Lloyd rarely loses his chance to play a major role in the play .
 Lloyd and Wendell dance their way through an Act Two scene that is one of the high points of the evening's hilarity . The pair dance together in the high-energy Act Two scenes .
 Malcolm Mills is not to be outdone, as he sustains a note of broad humor in his pathos . He effectively portrays Messerschmann, the wealthy melancholy financier .
 Romainville, played as the peripatetic arts patron by comedian Skip Butler, and Capulet, charmingly interpreted by sit on the shore and watch a boat or a bathtub riding the waves .
 American Gem Society members are members of the Gem Society . Members are American Gem Club members of Lewiston Gem Society, Maine .
 Lead Actor Nils Holt achieves the dubious distinction of creating the only characters that are quite colorless and almost as motionless .
 Frederic comes out as a sort of delicate candy-caned elf . He consistently loses chances4o make more of Frederic, who comes out of the role .
 Hugo, the debonair Master of Revels, in the hands of Holt becomes a slightly faded and nervous magician who fears he's about to run out of rabbits . And Hugo, who is a slightly older man, becomes a nervous magician .
 Anouilh is able to keep a constant distinction between the two men . In the Little Theater the first keeps merging into the second .
 The result is a mirrorlike character with about as much theatrical backbone as a sponge . The show is set to be released on Broadway at the end of October .
 Thankfully, however, things do not stand still for long . Thankfully, things are not standing still for a long time. Thankfully, though, things don't stand still in the world .
 As Holt bumbles along, he encounters Madame Desmortes, who is a far better social strategist with far less perspiration . As Holt tries to get around, he meets the social media queen .
 Abby Palmer's portrayal has the calm, sure, and relaxed touch of the professional . Abby Palmer is the calmest, sure and relaxed star of the show .
 Judy Mosman projects her Isabelle with symaphy and sureness as she arrives, becomes disillusioned, and finally achieves happiness at the madcap party . Mosman plays Isabelle in the series, which is set to be released in October .
 Norman West designed by Nils Holt, and it is displayed on a platform scheme intricately designed by Holt . Norman West is the son of Norman West, and his wife is also an artist .
 One is bothered as much by shadows on the set and cyclorama almost as much as the actors are bothered by the orchestra, which they have to fight .
 It is to be hoped that with the caliber of some of the talent available to her, Director Schaeffer would in the future plan to do more justice to it .
 This is possible by omitting absurd and amateurish blocking devices that continue, as always, to be forced on the script rather than growing out of it naturally . It is possible to avoid absurd blocking devices such as blocking devices .
 It is also possible by choosing to spend two months' time on a play that can be more than a high-school vehicle .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Friday .
 "In some of you that longing is a torrent rushing with might to the sea, carrying the secrets of the hillsides and the songs of the forest" "Some of you are longing for the sea. But in some of them you are a torrent of longing," says author .
 In others it is a flat stream that loses itself in angles and bends and lingers before it reaches the shore . And in others, it's a stream that lingers and bends before reaching the shoreline .
 MONIER'S TEXACO STATION offers these specials to you Lube, $1 Oil and ALL other accessories 10% off SEE United States FOR ALL YOUR CAR PROBLEMS .
 A string of unique characters bound the fragments of Jean Anouilh into a delightful bundle that reeled, sometimes ""bumpily"", around the moon .
 The cast of Ring Round The Moon fulfilled my every expectation — Anouilh did not . The cast did not disappoint me, but I was disappointed by it .
 There was something of pathos in the dress tearing and money eating scenes, but the disjointed equilibrium was still felt . True, there was something there, but there was still pathos .
 He says the nouveau-riche are cruel and climbing and that Diana Messerschmann is no different than her father . He says that Diana is not different from her father.
 Mr Anoulih did not achieve the desired combination and the ring was not quite smooth . The ring was intended to be smooth, but the ring did not make it smooth .
 The most exciting beams were the many wonderful characters, the many creations of genius, that brightened up the stage . "The most exciting beam of light was the creation of the characters," said the director .
 Joshua crumbled delightfully, and Skip Butler as a patron of the arts was great . Skip Butler was great, and his role in the arts is great. Joshua crumbles delightfully .
 She and the two mentioned above, not only created exceptional characters, they were damn funny . She and her colleagues created an incredible team of characters .
 When she and Holly took possession of the stage, when they came madly together, this nutty pahbrightened up the moony set . The pair were both very funny and funny .
 Judy Mosman, a petite combination of wit, beauty and vivacity, gave her usual fine performance . Judy was a combination of wintry wit and beauty, and her usual performance .
 "Madame Desmortes" was strongly and rather excellently portrayed by Abigail Palmer . The film was based on the life of a French writer in Paris .
 Tod Lloyd, Phyllis Porton, Malcolm Mills and Malcolm Mills also gave wonderful performances . Phyllish Porton gave a wonderful performance .
 Last Thursday night it boomed over the footlights carrying the pleas and plots of the two characters, the two different brothers to our pleased ears .
 Students, faculty, and administration dispute over use of Carnegie science building . Students and faculty are at odds over the use of the science building at Carnegie University .
 The channels of communication between the three groups are clogged with a mire of misinformation, mistrust, and mishandling . The channel of communication is clogged by misinformation and mistrust .
 The method of presenting suggestions for and against an extension of hours in the science building may be questioned . That the three groups undoubtedly have valid arguments may not be denied .
 Perhaps it's time for all interested factions to stop bickering and confer . Perhaps it is time to all interested parties to stop talking about it .
 Emotionally, shouting is more satisfying than a rational compromise; but the latter is far more effective . Emotional satisfaction is better than rational compromise, says the author of the book .
 Over thirty seniors now major in biology . Include physics and geology, and the figure rises to ninety .
 A significant portion of the studentry needs the use of the Carnegie library and labs . Quantitavely, a significant portion . needs to use the libraries and labs, according to students .
 Coram library is only open two nights a week; Coram Library opens six nights a night a week . The building, however, only has a two-night-only window .
 Many science majors find senior thesis work impossible or extremely difficult under present conditions . Science majors often struggle to complete their thesis work under current conditions .
 Experiments often have to be checked every twelve hours, for example . With the building so often locked, the difficulties become obvious .
 The library and one or two labs would ordinarily be sufficient, thus obviating the danger of leaving all the equipment unlocked . The library is normally sufficient, so obviaticity would obviate the danger .
 The cost of increasing the number of open evenings in Carnegie may not be disregarded, but seriously, how much does electricity and heat cost?
 And more significantly, is education determined in quantitative terms, by the ledger system of education . The ledger system is used to determine the quality of education, rather than just the quantity .
 We suggest that the student is the most significant element in the school, we suggest that it is most significant to the school's success .
 The salary of the faculty and administration is paid either by the students, or by those who, we hope, desire, not only new buildings and green lawns, but superior education . We hope that the salary of faculty and administrators is paid .
 That the emphasis is on the quality of the student is not always obvious, it's often not obvious .
 Carnegie's science building should be unlocked, but locked doors frustrate learning and creativity . The science building is there, because students need it, because locked doors frustrating learning . Carnegie should be locked doors for students to learn and use .
 This chained Prometheus serves well as a picture in the bulletin; it should serve the students as well . It should serve them as well as students, as well, as a photo of Prometheus .
 Entered as second-clasff matter at the Lewiston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 18T9. Entered as . 1913, entered as . Jan. 1913, . under the . act of . Mar.,18T9 .
 "My family, Gail, and I would like to thank each of . every one of . you for the compassion which you have so graciously expressed," she said . Her family and Gail would also thank each other .
 Your contributions, your kind words, and your silent concern shall always be sincerely appreciated . Your contributions are appreciated .
 I fail to see anything constructive (and I will be laughed at for saying it) in such an article . The purpose of the article was to attack pseudo-intellectualism . I will not be laughing at it for saying something constructive .
 Superiority is manifested by those who are too concerned about themselves to admit values of greater importance . Superiority can be manifested by people who are concerned with themselves, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 A truly intellectual person is admired by all because he recognizes his insignificance . A truly intellectual person recognizes his insignification by all . "A truly intellectual person" is admired because he recognizes himself .
 Rob Players will present the film, ""I'm Alright, Jack" tonight at 7 and 9 . Peter Sellers heads cast in Thanksgiving Day movie . The Rob Players present the movie .
 The movie itself takes a swing at British labor unions, represented as ridiculously bureaucratic, and the management . The movie is produced by John Boulting of Lion International Pictures .
 Sellers plays the role of a shabby union shop steward named Kite . Sellers won the British Film Academy's Actor of the Year Award for the role .
 The story concerns a wealthy innocent named Stanley Windrush who, incognito, is given a job in his uncle's factory . The story is based on the story of an innocent man who was given the job by his uncle .
 Inadvertently he shows a time-study expert how one man can easily do the work of several, forcing the union-leader Kite to strike the management again .
 When expelled from the union, Windrush's conscience sends him to work alone, behavior precipitates national publicity and sympathy . Windrush was expelled from union, leaving him with a conscience .
 English see in Windrush a hero, the last defender of individualism . Tired of union walkouts, the English see Windrush as a hero . Windrush is a symbol of individual individualism, says Windrush founder .
 Kite and the management are forced secretly and shamelessly to join and save face . At this point, however, his kinship to the management is exposed, and Kite is forced to join .
 The film is, indeed, a satire on target; it attempts to balance the shortcomings and merits of both sides . "The film is ... a satire of the film's shortcomings," the director says .
 Bernard Shaw once wrote that trade unionism would be the capitalism of the working class . Shaw said it would be a form of capitalism for the working-class . Shaw: Trade unionism will be capitalism of working class.
 "Here is, without question, a comedy about the new conflict between two kinds of capitalists," the film says . It's without question: "Without question, it's a comedy . Here is without question."
 The myth, like the dream, offers a story occurring in space and 'time, a story which expresses, in symbolic language, religious and philosophical ideas, experiences of the soul in which the real significance of the myth lies .
 They are not respected as a powerful form of expression as they once were. They are no longer respected as powerful forms of expression . They are now more respected as they are respected as well as others .
 The Bible is full of myths; most of the Greek tragedies are based on myths . Most of the if not all the Greek tragedy is based on myth .
 It is necessary that myths and dreams be interpreted correctly if they are to have any coherent meaning . It is because of misinterpretation that we have so many arguments as to what crucial works such as the Bible say, says author .
 'It Was his inspiration that Friday night the four of us sat about and frantically composed. It was his inspiration,' he said .
 I instructed my roommates to write a paragraph sounding intellectual, using big words, oddly coherent but saying little . I instructed them to write it sounding intellectual but not saying little.
 We took the four paragraphs, shuffled them, then arranged them in the order in which they were published . The four paragraphs were published in the original version of this article .
 Our good friend, Mr Walsh, gladly consented to write a letter which was placed in the Student to give a firm foundation for our edifice .
 Many students at Bates accept authority on the mere word of one individual, the school says . Students base the acceptance of something they don't understand on the word of that individual, it is painfully evident .
 Some have commented that they thought it good, although they didn't really understand it . Some have said that they were impressed by the performance .
 A few suspected it was nonsense to begin with; and some, honestly admitting no comprehension whatsoever, asked me to explain' it . Some of the world's most famous people have never been able to find out what is nonsense .
 There were those who, with a wink, said that they liked Walsh's comment, as if they had enjoyed the book because they read the introduction .
 Others claim they got a lot out of it — of course, they interpreted it their own way, they said .
 One of my roommates claims that with its strange coherency, it is truly a modern expression, constructed with the same principles with which a running Pollock is painted . One of his roommates says it is the same as a Pollock painting .
 This is very possibly true, but the article was not created with this in mind . This is not the case, but it is very possible true .
 It was written to show you, my fellow students, my flattering friends and faculty members, how we, all of us, trust too much our academic authorities . "It was written in this way to show how we all, all, us, you and I, you ... trust too
 Students are so used to accepting what is worded compoundly and phrased complexly as brilliant and as fact, that they are unable to contest Kiernan .
 No one has dared to put their hands in the five holes of the Crater's Edge . Thomas says he does not ask for doubting Thomases, but still .
 FIVE Hickories Club Sponsors Ski Tog Fashion Show Friday . Attention to snow bunnies .
 The show consists entirely of ski and after-ski clothes . Nancy Conway and Al Pollock organized by Nancy Conway .
 Prexy Meets Parents, Alumni On West Trip President and Mrs. Joyce Mantyla as commentator, will describe the outfits, modeled by Prexy . Joyce Mantya will comment on the outfits worn by the students .
 During the past week they met with alumni and parents of Bates students in Chicago, Ann Arbor, Michigan, Cleveland, Buffalo, Rochester; Rochester; Syracuse; and Albany .
 Phillips reviewed campus developments of the past year and outlined plans for the year just ahead . Phillips also outlined plans to expand on campus in the new year . Phillips: "It's been a great year for the university. It's a great time for the students and staff," he said .
 Bates President and his wife attended the State of Maine dinner in Boston, held in connection with the annual meeting of the New England Council, of which Dr. Dr. Bates is a member .
 Phillips is board chairman . Phillips is also the chairman of the board of directors .
 Ski-In, from Auburn, has provided both the costumes and a display of skiing equipment . Ski-in has also provided both costumes and display of ski equipment .
 There will be a wide variety of gear with prices ranging from ""budgeted"" to ""budget-less" Prices range from "budgeted" to 'budgeted' to "budgetless"
 According to rumor, it's going to be a long, hard winter . Learn how to keep warm and have fun in the latest style .
 Upstairs reading area will be open 8 to 1 1 1 as usual . Thanksgiving Day is Thanksgiving Day . Upstairs Reading Area is open as usual.
 On Monday, November 26, Bates students will be asked what they think of the College bookstore . Students will also be asked about their opinion of the bookstore .
 The purpose of the Chapel poll is to present a clear picture of the needs of the student body regarding the store . The Chapel poll will be presented to the students at the university .
 Committee has asked faculty to contribute their opinions and suggestions concerning the evaluations . At the same time, the committee has asked the faculty to comment on evaluations .
 Student opinion is an important factor in enabling the College to maintain and improve its present high standards of education . Student opinion will be an important part of the College's success in maintaining and improving its standards .
 Merrimanders, our well known women's singing sextet, acquired its name . This is how the Merrimander, a well-known women's group of women, got the name . The Merrimanders are known for their singing and singing prowess .
 In 1957, six girls at a casual get-together decided that they would enjoy singing and harmonizing together . Six girls decided to sing and harmonize together in 1957 .
 The girls made their debut at a Chase Hall dance . Introduced first as the ""Salamanders" The girls were introduced as the 'Salamander' at the first dance .
 The ""Merri's" are an active campus organization . They are sponsored by Professor Smith and the music department . The organization is sponsored by professor Smith .
 The frosh received a preview in their first assembly when Deansman Jim Curtis '63 and Debbie Peterson, a senior Merrimander, vocalized together to teach the ""newcomers"" Batesy songs .
 Group has performed for several church organizations and civic associations in the Lewiston-Auburn area .
 Their repertoire now includes popular tunes and old favorites, each with a novelty twist of its own . The band now has a new line of songs, including novelty tunes .
 The ""Merri's"" are comprised of two seniors, one junior, and three sophomores . The "Merri" team is comprised of 2 seniors, 1 junior, 1 sophomore, and 3 freshmen .
 Debbie Peterson and Bette Anne Barber are seniors in the chorus . The seniors are first soprano and middle sopran, respectively .
 Bette Anne plans to go to graduate school as a background for social work . Bette plans to study social work in the U.S.
 Best represented is sophomore class with Carol Bishop, middle alto, Karen Cunningham, second alto and Kathy Farnhan, second soprano . Best represented are Karen Cunningham and Karen Farnhan .
 Carol, from Chesire, Conn., and Kathy, coming from Mendham, N. J., both plan careers in biology . Carol and Kathy plan to study biology in New York City .
 Karen, studying psychology, could easily be called a ""rebel" since she comes to Bates from Gaithersburg, Md. Karen is studying psychology at Bates College .
 Merrimanders sponsored with the Deansmen a Close Harmony Concert last spring in which they asked other groups like themselves to gather and sing . The Merrimander and Deansman held the concert together .
 The Merrimanders are familiar to all Bates students . The songs recorded in recent years by the Merrimander have been familiar to students .
 Saturday, November 17, will find the Merrimanders at the United Baptist Church in Lewiston . The Merrimander will sing at the church in the church .
 Students would prefer having more books and less sweatshirts and jewelry in the book store . They will perform from 6Will 26 Chapel on Saturday night .
 The poll will ask if the student body would be satisfied with having these items taken out of the display cases (except for certain times of the year) and stored behind the counter .
 It should be noted that the sweatshirts, pins, and the like could be purchased at any time even when not on display .
 Poll provides an opportunity for the student to make any of his own suggestions pertaining to the improvement of the bookstore facilities . The poll also provides a chance to make your own suggestions .
 Library Committee hopes to be as effective in its results as Library Committee was last year . Providing students feel the bookstore could be improved, the committee hopes to improve the bookstore .
 This poll will be an indication of student opinion . Without the cooperation of the student body, the Committee can't do nothing . This poll is an indication that students want to know what they think .
 6:30m. at ""Harvest Time", a dinner sponsored by the senior high fellowship to raise funds to support its 1962-63 program . Only with its support can the objectives of the Committee be fulfilled.""
 Bates tickets cost $1.00 and may be purchased from Bette Anne Barber . Special Bates tickets are available for $1 .00 .
 Jung maintains that the dream is an exclusively rational production . Fromm maintains that dreams can be the expression both of the irrational and the rational functionings of the mind .
 This chapter has more value in the discussion of Freud and Jung than in Fromm's own theory, which is quite weak and undeveloped . This chapter, however, is more valuable in the discussions of Freud, Jung and Jung . Fromm: "This chapter is more useful in
 His criticism of Freud and Jung being ""one-sided and dogmatic"" results in a nice little dogma of his own, says the author . He criticizes Freud for being one-sided .
 It is here that Fromm is himself, and not a feeble synthesis of Freud and Jung . Fromm was himself, not an attempt to combine Freud with Jung, says the author .
 He uses quotes excellently (even though many of them are from books he wrote himself) He displays much creative insight, and displays great creativity .
 His other important works include Escape from Freedom, Man for Himself, and Psychoanalysis and Religion .
 Tamis, Davis named Award Winners . Garnet Line named Garnet line .
 Football, cross-country and soccer awards have been handed out this year . Many hands went into the making of the successes of the awards . The award winners were announced at the end of the year .
 Others, however, have received little credit until their mention in Coach Hatch's comments, the other night . Coach Hatch said that some of the players have been credited for their efforts .
 Coach Hatch was especially high in his praise for Dining Hall Director Wayne Steele . Steele also made it possible for the Garnet football team to practice late and still come in off the field to a hot meal .
 Anyone who journeyed to a Bobcat away game witnessed how fine a job Mr Ahern did by comparing him with other announcers . Anyone who went to a game with the Bobcat will be able to see how fine Ahern was .
 Doctor Horsman and sidekick trainer kept the Garnet gladiators in fine shape throughout their campaigns . The Garnet Gladiators were kept in shape throughout the campaigns .
 Miss Erskine is the first girl ever to be chosen as the outstanding contributor to Bates College athletics for the week . She is also the first female athlete to be named the top athlete at Bates .
 Ginny was outstanding in her duty as co-ordinator representing the Women's Athletic Association in the organization and operation of the field day activities that were held here at Bates .
 Miss Erskine, the fullback of the Bates field hockey team, was a stellar performer on the field as well . She was also a standout performer in the field hockey .
 She was the key to an inspiring defensive effort by the Batesettes . She repeatedly prevented Ginny Erskine the stronger Maine and Colby teams from scoring . She was key to the impressive defense .
 The outstanding work of Miss Erskine, a senior Rand girl from Wellesley, Mass., made her selection entirely in keeping with the spirit and desire that has typified the Bates athlete in victory and defeat .
 Miss Kathy Pease, a junior from Bloomfield, Conn., was also an outstanding contributor to the Garnet cause . Miss Pease was also a junior .
 Twenty-seven letters and ten senior award jackets were presented at the annual Fall Sports Banquet last Thursday in Bates Commons .
 Paul Planchon, Lloyd Bunten, and Eric Silverberg elected captains of next year's fall squads . Bill Davis and Phil Tamis were recipients of the Allen Goddard Achievement Awards at the annual steak dinner and awards banquet .
 Toastmaster for this season's* affair was David Higgins '55, who in addition to being a former Bates gridder, scouts for Coach Hatch .
 Higgins opened the award presentations by introducing William ""Chick"" Leahey who filled in for Harrier Coach Walter Slovenski in presenting the crosscountry awards . Higgins then introduced William "Chick" who took in for the role of presenting the awards .
 Leahey: 'this has been the most successful season since the inauguration of cross-country on this campus'
 Letters were presented to Edgar Belden '63, Michael Gregus '65, Peter Parson '65 and Basil Richardson '65 . Letters were also presented to Finn Wilhelmson '64, William Dunham '63 and Eric Silverberg '63 .
 Toastmaster Higgins mentioned the 1962 Bates soccer team had many firsts this year . Higgins mentioned that the 1962 team had a lot of firsts .
 It was the first time that the Garnet hooters were an official intercollegiate team . The Garnet Hooters were the first ever to be an official team in college football .
 It was the first time that awards were given to soccer players and they were the first team in the state to beat Colby . The team was first to win state soccer awards .
 Soccer Coach James Somerville summed up the booters' first inter-collegiate season saying, "It was a very good season for the first year"
 Coach Somerville presented letter awards to Robert Thompson '66, George Beebe '65, Richard Danosky '65 and Robert Kramer '65' Robert Lanz '65,. Steve Barron '64' Todd Lloyd '64, Peter Aransky '63, Colin Loader '63
 Head Football Coach Robert W Hatch preluded his remarks about the team with acknowledgment of . persons other than the team and coaching staff who had a part in the successful grid season . Hatch also acknowledged those other people involved in the team's success .
 "Before the season started I characterized this group as one that wanted to do well," says manager Mike Poyet . "Before this season started, this group wanted to be the best in the world," he says .
 Paul Planchon, Eric Silverberg, cross-country; and Lloyd Bunten, soccer. Elected as captains for next year's fall sports teams at Thursday's banquet .
 Prepschool teammates Bill Davis and Phil Tamis were named recipients of the Allen Goddard Achievement Awards . The award winners were honored by Football Coach Robert W Hatch .
 Coach Hatch emphasized that this is the largest group of letterwinners ever at Bates . Coach Hatch said this is a class of letters that have been presented at the school .
 Football letter awards were presented to Thomas Carr '66, Charles Lockhart '66 and Jeffrey Lewis '66 . James Brown '65, James Callahan '65 and Grant Farquhar '65 . Captain-elect Paul Planchon '64 was awarded captain-elect .
 Hatch individually congratulated the senior letter winners and spent time to praise each one to those in attendance . Hatch personally congratulated each one of the winners . Hatch: "It's a great honor to be able to do so," Hatch said .
 Seniors earning letter awards were Paul Castolene, John Curtiss, Webster Harrison, Phillip Tamis, Edward Rucci, Robert Williams, and co-captains Howard Vandersea and William Davis .
 It is presented to those who have achieved the most in a particular season . The award is given to the players who achieve the most during that season .
 Bates Student Sports Staff announces its selections for all-state grid honors . As has been the custom in previous years, this year's grid honors have been announced by the staff .
 These selections are based only on the three State Series games . Some of the players selected or not selected may cause controversy . We believe they have best displaced their talents over the course of State Series play .
 Five members of the Student Sports Staff were on the selection committee . Al Marden, Russ Henderson, Dick Love, Al Williams, and Nick Basbanes were also on the committee .
 Two points are awarded for first votes and one for a second team vote . Two points were awarded for each of the first and second votes of the team .
 Bates placed five men, Maine* three, Colby two, and Bowdoin one on the first team . The selectors considered the team one of the strongest in recent years . Maine* and Maine** placed three of their first team members .
 Selectors attached as much value to defensive excellence as to offensive ability . In most cases, selectors attached more value to defense than to offense . Selectors are more likely to select players with defensive excellence than ability .
 It is the second appearance on the all-Maine team for four of the men, Bonalewicz, Vandersea, Smith and Planchon . The third year Howie Vandersea has been selected by the Student Sportswriters .
 Vandersea was picked as a center the two previous years . Smith was a halfback on the All-State team two years ago . Vandersea and Smith were picked as centers last year .
 Frank Drigotas received three first team votes . Paul Castolene was an unani mous choice as a repeater to this year's squad at one end . Frank Drigotas was the leading pass receiver in the state as the for mer Red Eddie caught three
 Castolene caught the most passes of any Maine receiver throughout the season . Garnet end nabbed 14 passes over the rainy season as Garnet ended up catching 14 passes .
 Phil Tamis was another unanimous choice by the Student selectors . Colby's Dick Bonalewicz is joined at the tackle position on the first squad by Colby’s Dick Bonwalewicz .
 Tamis was a key performer in the Garnet's success story this fall . He excelled all year in the Bobcat line, both on defense and offense . Tamis is a key member of the team .
 Bonalewicz, like Tamis, was tough to move on defense and was twice selected to E.C.A. teams . The rugged defenseman was named twice to the league's top two teams in 2010 .
 Vandersea started the season at center, where he had been selected to two previous All-Maine teams . He was switched to guard where his speed and size could be utilized on offense . Vandersea is a senior at Maine .
 Garnet co-captain was unanimous selection for the Garnet Bowl . Garnet is a co-leader in the NFL's top 10,000 players .
 Bates girls move on offense as Penny Brown moves into position for Sue Herman's pass in front of Colby goal . At the other guard slot is Penny Brown, who moves for the Bates girls . Colby Hockey Title Champ Sue Herman also plays for Colby .
 Robertson, Robert Maine 1963 6 Ross, Gary Colby 1965 4 Severson, Daniel Maine 1964 4 Smith, Ernest Maine 1965 3 Ford, Robert Bowdoin 1963 5 Boucher, Roger Maine 1964 . Davis, William Bates 1963 5 . Brown, David Maine 1964 5 Yuskis
 Hadley received three first team votes to place him slightly ahead of Bowdoin's Bob Ford . Hadley was voted to the first team with three votes .
 Unanimous Choice Center Phil Soule of the Black Bears was the fourth unanimous choice of the Student Sportswriters . Soule was the 4th unanimous choice, with Soule being selected for the fourth .
 Soule led the Bears to a series championship with his hard defensive linebacker play . Soule's hard defensive play helped secure the Bears series win over the Redskins Redskins . He was named the best linebacker in the NFL history .
 Maine's quarterback Tom Austin was instrumental in bringing he Bears their second consecutive Series title . Maine won the title for the second time in a row .
 The Black Bear signal caller connected on seven of 25 passes thrown in series play for 62 yards and a Maine touchdown . The Maine touchdown came after a series of passes from Black Bear's signal caller .
 Frosh fullback Tom Carr edged out Maine's Bill Chard for first team honors . Carr and Chard were teammates for Maine . Carr was named first team leader for the first time .
 Carr's ten touchdowns over the season was tops among Maine ball carriers . Carr scored ten touchdowns in the season . Carr's 10 touchdowns were the season's top ten .
 Colby's Binky Smith was the final unanimous choice of the Student selectors . Smith was a unanimous choice for the honor of Colby students .
 Smith was second in the state in rushing with a 72-yard total . Smith was also second in scoring with three touchdowns . Smith is the state's leading rusher with 72 yards and 72 yards .
 The other halfback slot is held down by Paul Planchon who led all Maine carriers in rushing average with a seasonal 5. yard per carry average . Paul led the state's rushing average of 5.5 yards per carry .
 Planchon also was second in punting for the season with a 33. yard average . The punter was also the top punter in the NFL with 33.3 yards per kick .
 The girls of Colby College carried away the honors by squeezing by Maine 1-0 and Bates 3-1 . Colby won their first two games of the season .
 The Bobkittens beat Colby 1-0 and 3-1 against the state university . The state university beat the Bobkettes in the other two games . Colby won the other game 3-2 .
 The playday activity, beginning at ten in the morning and extending throughout the afternoon, was a well organized, spirited experience for both visitors and host .
 All three teams had played a half of the three field hockey games scheduled for the day . All three had played half of their three games before lunch .
 The Bates girls shut out Colby and allowed Maine only one goal during the first half games of the morning . Bates girls, featuring a rugged defense built around Kathy Pease and Ginny Erskine, stopped Colby .
 The girls of Maine and Colby battled to a scoreless deadlock in the morning half of their encounter . The match finished 0-0 in the second half .
 Colby 0 Bates 0, Maine 0, and Bates 0 Maine 0 . Maine 1 Bates 0 . Bates 0 Bates . Maine 0 Bates. Maine 0. Bates .
 Colby wasted little time, after returning from lunch, to go to work on the scoreboard . Colby scored the first Garnet score of the season in the first half .
 Bates scored three times while Garnet girls were held to one score . It was the fir§t time Bates has ever scored against larger Maine schools in field hockey .
 Garnet girls held Maine Bates scoreless in second half of Maine Bates game . Garnet held the young women of Maine scoreless at Maine Bates .
 Kathy Pease, Ginny Erskine, Pokey Kestila, and Les Jones led Garnet efforts . The Garnet effort was inspired by the efforts of four women .
 The second half of the MaineColby game was also a scoreless deadlock as the soggy field and cold weather gained the upperhand . Colby wins the title .
 Colby wins 3-1 over Bates and 1-0 over Maine . Colby won the overall title with wins over Bates, Maine .
 Maine was seeded first as a result of their abundance of talent and reliance on Physical Education majors . Maine defeated Bates 1-0 and lost to Colby, 1-1 . Maine finished second with a 1-2 record .
 Miss Janet Nell, coach of the Bates Hockeyettes, was full of praise for the efforts of the team in their games with larger Maine colleges .
 Following the competition, the girls were treated to a tea, organized by the Women's Athletic Association under Louise McCabe and coordinated by Ginny Erskine .
 Dual Filter makes the difference DUAL FILTER Pndmci of J&dm*>u*<m3i&u*>&y>aty3&u *o Tareyton, ‘w> it our middlt name"" e » '
 Hatch described the award as "not a trophy for a star, yet a star is not prevented from winning it" As described by Hatch, the award is not a trophy for a star .
 The Allen Goddard Trophies, this year were presented to William Davis and Phillip Tamis,. teammates at Cushing Academy as well as at Bates . William Davis was presented with the award this year . Phillip Davis and William Tamis received the award .
 Tamis becomes the second lineman on the present squad to win the Goddard Trophy, as Vandersea had won it in his sophomore year . Tamis is the only lineman to have won the award .
 Team Physician Donald Horsman presented a ""J&J award"" to senior tackle Bob Williams . Athletic Director Lloyd Lux handed out the Senior Honor Awards .
 Seniors winning such awards were Edgar Belden, William Dunham, Frank VanLaethen, Robert Williams, Phillip Tamis, Edward Rucci, Webster Harrison, John Curtiss, Paul Castolene, Howie Vandersea, and William Davis .
 Throughout the world, many students live in deplorable housing and eat inadequate and poorly prepared food while attending school . Many students in the world live in poor housing and often eat poor food .
 Numbering about one million, the student population has more than doubled in the past ten years . Many acute needs are acute needs, including medical care for students .
 Almost all institutions of higher learning are located in the crowded cities and towns and offer very limited accommodations, especially food . Almost all of the institutions in the country are located near crowded cities or towns .
 Students from indigent families must spend limited budgets on food from catering houses . Food is neither well balanced nor prepared under hygienic conditions, but is costly nevertheless .
 WUS committees in India have decided to establish cooperative cafeterias . To improve the nutritional state of students within given financial limitations, several WUS Committees in India decided to set up cafeteras .
 Cafeterias will strive to provide good food at the lowest possible prices . Run by staff and students, these cafeterias are run by students and staff .
 The employment of students will help reduce administrative costs while allowing students to participate in the project . Students will be employed by the university in order to reduce costs .
 Nagpur is one of the universities which is badly in need of such a co-operative cafeteria . Nagpur University of Nagpur needs to have a cafeteria co-operation .
 A sizable percentage of Nagpur's 15,000 students live in private lodgings and have to depend for their food on public restaurants . Many of the public restaurants thrive only on student bills .
 The cost of starting this project will be about half of the drive's goal which is $1000 . The goal is to raise about half the $1000 goal .
 The money that Bates students provide will help give the Indian students at Nagpur a beginning, and through their own initiative and work student conditions will be improved . The money will be used to help improve conditions for the students in Nagpur .
 William Worthy '42, foreign correspondent for the Baltimore AfroAmerican, was imprisoned for illegally entering the U.S. Last September, the United States government imprisoned a Bates graduate . Worthy, a Bates grad, Violates Ban;En ters Red China by entering China .
 The U.S. accused Worthy of violating the McCarran Immigration and Nationality Act by . illegally re-entering this country from Cuba in October of 1961 . Worthy was accused of violating . The U S. accused him of violating an immigration law by illegally entering this
 While at Bates College, Worthy was active in the Christian Associa1 . He was interested in non-violence activities, and a conscientious objector . Worthy is a member of the Christian Christian Association .
 In 1956 Worthy went to Com] ed some of the highest honors in munist China to report on conhis profession . In his essay, ""Defense ditions there for the A/ro-Amerthe courts, Worthy was award in 1956 .
 A joint meeting of Intergovernment Committee, Stu-C and StU-G, was held in Skelton Lounge . A meeting was held on Tuesday, November 20, at Bates College .
 The purpose of the meeting was to come to a decision regarding Bates' membership in the National Student Association . Bates was invited to a meeting to discuss the decision . Bates is a member of the Student Association at the University of Washington .
 Intergovernment reviewed Bates' two-year-long affiliation with NSA . Intergovernment had recommended that this affiliation be terminated .
 Stu-C members voted to support the Intergovernment proposal to disaffiliate . Following this, they voted for the disaffiliation .
 Stu-G members voted to postpone definite action on the matter of NSA and to continue the college's affiliation with the national organization for the remainder of this year . StuG members decided not to uphold the proposal, and voted to continue their affiliation with NSA .
 This brought any united action to a standstill, necessitated the joint meeting . This brought the united action at a standpoint and necessitated a joint meeting. This is the first time a united action has taken place in the past .
 Stu-C, in agreement with Intergovernment, believes that NSA has shown little ability to be of use in meeting Bates .
 The material distributed by NSA, when not entirely inapplicable to Bates' problems, has been insufficient to be of any real help . Bates: NSA material distributed to Bates is insufficient to help him cope .
 The high cost of membership in the organization is therefore unwarranted, and affiliation seems to be not only unnecessary, but burdensome . The high costs of membership are unwarranted .
 Bates has never given the organization an opportunity to do what it can . Bates has been criticized for not giving the organization a chance to help .
 By enlarging the committee of the campus NSA coordinator and making it more efficient, the full benefits of the organization could be realized . The committee should be enlarged and more efficient .
 Stu-G felt that membership in NSA should be continued for the remainder of the year, under an enlarged campus coordinating committee . For this reason, the committee felt that NSA membership should continue .
 NSA could be evaluated in light of what was done in their trial period . NSA could evaluate its effectiveness in the U.S. as a result of its trial period.
 Apart from the extraordinary act which Worthy has ""violated"" there are other aspects of this case which deserve consideration . Apart from Worthy's extraordinary act, there are many aspects of the case which need consideration .
 He appealed the denial, but in 1959 the Supreme Court handed down a decision dismissing the appeal . In 1959, he appealed the decision, but it was dismissed .
 There were two Look correspondents covering conditions in China at the same time as Worthy who did not lose their passports . The Look correspondent lost his passport at the time .
 There will be a supper meeting of the Canterbury Club at 5 o'clock Friday evening at 9 Arch Street . Canterbury Club will meet at 5 p.m. Friday evening .
 Under team teaching, scnool personnel are grouped, with two or more teachers co-operatively planning and carrying out an instructional program for a group of pupils larger than that in a classroom .
 This plan is characterized by flexible grouping of pupils with all the pupils brought together for mass lectures and demonstrations and then split into small discussion groups . The plan is described as flexible and flexible .
 Whenever possible, the elimination of grade level designations allows grouping students of similar interests, abilities, or motivations . The elimination of grades allows students to learn from each other .
 Each teaching team will consist of a varying number of instructors, depending upon the situation . Students will be taught by a team of instructors at the school .
 Team Leader, who takes charge of the group, is an experienced and especially competent teacher . A Team Leader is a Team Leader who leads the group .
 The remaining part of the team consists of beginning graduate students . The team is comprised of students who have not graduated from college .
 Graduates and seniors from universities and state teachers colleges receive training in the teaching field as members of these teams . Students and seniors receive training as part of the teaching team .
 Teachers are selected on the basis of their predicted competence for teaching . They are selected for the role based on the predicted competence of their teachers .
 The executive members of the Bates Student Education Association attended the fall conference of all Maine college chapters of the S.E.A. held in Augusta .
 The purpose of this annual conference is to check the progress of each chapter in the various programs planned for the college year as well as to discuss and exchange ideas .
 Pappanikou is the acting Assistant Superintendent of the Pineland Training Center in Pownal . He is also the acting assistant superintendent at Pineland training center .
 Pappanikou lectured about the problems that confront the classroom teacher . He lectured on how to deal with the classroom problems .
 He explained difficulties that occur in teaching a group of pupils with widely varying mental intelligence, relating also the complicated situations which give rise to the emotionally disabled child .
 The speaker pointed out that the teacher, in dealing with these situations, must be an educator, a psychologist and sociologist .
 He also won Freedom of Information Awards from the Boston Press Club and the Capital Press Club . He concluded his remarks by discussing some current trends that are underway in primary and secondary education .
 In July of 1961 Worthy sailed on a ship bound for Mexico, but instead, disembarked at Havana, Cuba, which was closed to U.S. citizens . Cuba was on the rapidlygrowing list of nations closed to United States citizens .
 Student Government Board held a short meeting at 7:00m. on Tuesday, November 29 . Robert Williams, Stu-G Considers Banquet; Rules .
 Diane Gallo '64, banquet chairman, called for the reports of the various committee chairmen . Diane Galla '64 was the chairwoman of the committee .
 Menu and seating, Nancy Nichols '64, Janet Soltis '65; entertainment, Marion Day '64; programs and decorations, Nancy Day '1964; programs, decorations, Joyce Killay '64 . Invitations, menus and decorations and decorations are all from Nancy Nichols and Janet Sol
 Intergovernment activities reported to the board . Bette Anne Little, president of Stu-G, reported Intergovernment activity to board . Little is the president of the board, and Little is a member of the StuG .
 All those interested in serving on the committee are requested to see Suzi H Smith '65 . Suzi is a member of the U.S. Senate Committee .
 A motion was passed to have the dorms opened from 11 m. to 11m. on Thanksgiving Day . The dorms will be open from 11 to 11 p.m. ET on Thanksgiving .
 It had previously voted to extend hours for freshman women from 10 to 11m. on Thanksgiving eve and night . It had been previously voted for hours to be added to freshman women .
 The Board then adjourned to Chase Hall, where the Student Council and Student Government Board met to discuss the possible withdrawal of Bates from the National Student Association . The meeting also discussed possible withdrawal from the association .
 All these will be available for you this coming Saturday night, December 1st . The event will be held in New York City .
 Aurora Frost invites one and all to the last semi-formal dance of the year — Aurora Frost — at 8:00m. in the Chase Hall Ballroom . Aurora Frost is Aurora Frost, the sophomore class .
 The snowy-wonderland ""of the winter scene invades the ballroom bringing with it all the crystal clearness of the great outdoors," says the author of the play .
 Superimposed upon this tableau will be the music of the Polar Bear Three . Superimposed on it will be a tableau of the music from the Polar Bears .
 This combo, originating from Bowdoin's Theta Delta House, includes in its repertoire everything from slow and sentimental to the rollicking rhythms of the twist .
 Later in the evening entertainment will be offered by the Deansmen and Merrimanders . Music will be played by the Merrimander and Deansman .
 Following individual numbers, the two groups will combine their efforts in a medley of their favorite tunes . Following their individual numbers they will sing together in the medley . The medley will be followed by a solo medley from each other .
 Aurora Frost is a must for all Bates students . Bates Debate Squad plans for Dec. 31 . Debate Squad Plans For Dec. 30 .
 Bates won 16 of the 20 debates in the Vermont debate tourney last November 16th and 17th . Bates wins 16 of 20 debates .
 This was the best showing for any school that participated in that number of debates . This is the school's best showing ever in the history .
 Four of the debaters who participated in the Vermont tourney will participate in a debate contest at Tufts on Friday and Saturday, November 30th and December 1st . Tufts debaters will compete in the contest .
 Robert Ahern '64 and Howard Blum '63 will compose one team . John Strassburger and Thomas Hall '64 will make up the other team .
 The teams will alternately debate the negative and affirmative positions . The debate will take place between the two sides of the debate .
 Grant Lewis '63, the former captain of the Bates debate team, will serve in Professor Quimby's place as a critic judge . Grant Lewis will serve as a judge for the debate debate .
 A critic judge evaluates the speakers and determines the winner in a debate between two schools with which he is not associated . The critic judge is a member of a school with no affiliation with the school he attended to .
 Four novice debaters will participate in a contest with Edward Little High School on the trade block topic . The contest will be held on Monday, December 3rd .
 Priscilla Clark '66 and Carl Johnson '66 will compose the affirmative team . Carl Johnson will also play in the affirmative squad .
 The negative team will consist of Norman Davis '65 and Ronald Snell '65 . Norman Davis will play in the negative team .
 All classundergraduate study in Europe es taught in German during the academic year 196364 . Institute of European Studies accepting scholarship applications for European history .
 Program intended for superior centers in Vienna, Paris, and j students . Program encomforts students in Freiburg, Germany .
 Each program embraces formal classes, lectures, seminars and field-study, and is designed to fulfill usual course requirements at its academic level . Each program includes formal classes and lectures .
 The programs in Vienna and Paris are open to college sophomores and juniors, while the Freiburg program is limited to juniors . The programs are open in Vienna, Paris, and Vienna, and Paris, respectively .
 Completed applications must be submitted no later than February 15, 1963 . Applicants are required to be submitted by the end of the year .
 Forms and descriptive literature are available from the Institute of European Studies, 35 E Wacker Drive .
 The application deadline for those programs is December 10 . The sailings are scheduled for early February .
 Preference is given to students who have a speaking knowledge of the French language, previous camp counselling experience, and the ability to teach one or more acivities .
 Those who serve in the camps in France are required to make and pay for their travel arrangements . Those who do so must make and travel arrangements for their service .
 They receive free board and room and remuneration of $35 to $50 per month . However, they receive free boarding and room .
 This is an excellent opportunity for those interested in French culture and in learning to speak the French language fluently . This is a French language immersion programme .
 Additional information is available in the Guidance and Placement Office. Additional information can be found on Facebook and Twitter feeds .
 The Jordan Marsh Company in Boston will not be sending a recruiting representative to Bates this year . Interested students are urged to arrange for interviews at the store .
 Executive Training Program brochures are available in the Guidance and Placement Office . The person to contact is Mr James I White .
 On Wednesday, November 28, Mr Harold Smith '61 from the Chicago Theological Seminary will interview men and women interested in graduate study and career opportunities .
 Department of Justice (Immigration and Naturalization Service) will meet with men interested in federal service career opportunities . The agency is meeting with men looking for federal service opportunities .
 On Wednesday, December 5, there will be a group meeting at 4:00m. of women interested in the Harvard-Radcliffe Graduate .
 Bergman Directs film at Theater Saturday night . Smiles of a Summer Night won Cannes Film Festival grand prix .
 A prominent Swedish lawyer, his young wife, his grown son, his ex-mistress, and the upstairs maid are interlocking triangles . The story quickly becomes complicated .
 Director Bergman intended to produce the best French picture ever made in Sweden . The film was directed by Bergman and directed by the Swedish director .
 His settings are in exquisitely bad fin de siecle style; his landscapes redound with swans and willows . His settings were in . exquisably bad fin . style .
 This Swedish sermon on contemporary sensuality will be screened at 7 and 9 p.m. Wednesday .
 December 4 Rob Players Meeting, 7-9 Sabatuu 8L Ooea Dailv 11-11:00 A.M. to 2:00 School program in business administration . December 4 is December 4 .
 Interested students should sign up' at the Guidance and Placement Office . Students can sign up for the program .
 Wright was once again able to observe from the student's point of view . Wright was able to see the student from his vantage point . Wright says he is proud of his students' success .
 Wright has been able to make some interesting comparisons between a thriving, throbbing, big-city university, and a small, friendly, co-ed, etc. university . Wright has also made a comparison between the University of Cambridge and a smaller, more friendly, more diverse city .
 Wright notes that students at Chicago seem more open to new ideas and have a keener sense of social concern . Wright: Students at Chicago are more open-minded about social concerns .
 Bates students come primarily from small New England towns, and have a more conservative background . Students come from a conservative New England town .
 Wright also feels that Bates students are more optimistic and have a little more ""good will"" toward each other . Wright feels that students are optimistic and more optimistic . Wright also said that students have more "good will" toward other students .
 Chicago students seem more interested in abstract ideas than Bates students, Dr. says . Bates students handle abstract ideas with more facility, Bates professor says .
 Wright and the girls especially bear a lesser burden of rules than their Bates counterparts . Wright is a junior at the Bates school . Wright says the girls are more likely to be allowed to leave the school .
 The library at Chicago is open at night attended only by student assistants . The stacks are always closed, except by pass, to prevent outsiders from wandering ' off with the books .
 With all their fine social connotations, the American Gem Society has a great social network . The Gem Society is an American Gem Club . The society is dedicated to its members, including the Gem Society .
 Wright felt a lack of warmth in many of the Chicago students — almost to the point of rudeness . Wright said he felt the students lacked warmth almost as much as warmth . Wright: "I don't think it's a good thing to say 'I love Chicago'
 Wright, are quite concerned with being individuals, and seem to conform in their individualism . Wright, as well as Wright, appear to be quite concerned about being individuals . Wright: "I'm not sure what I'm going on to say, but I'm happy to say that I
 A great number of men in the student body wear some sort of accessory whiskers, and sloppy dress is the rule rather than the exception . The student body is full of men who wear some of their whiskers .
 Like too many city universities, the Chicago campus is run down and ragged . "The grass is trampled and littered, and the administration seems indifferent," the author says . "Like too many cities, the campus is ragged"
 Liberal elements (which make up most of the student body at Chicago) express themselves in many ways . The liberal elements of the Chicago University student body express themselves .
 The Maroon is printed several times a week and takes definite stands on controversial national and world issues . The student newspaper does not limit itself to campus affairs, but takes definite stances .
 Chicago professors often leave their classes in the lurch for several days at a time to attend conferences . Wright also found that the professors at Chicago are often less conscientious than Bates .
 Wright also noted an impersonality and lack of warmth not present to such an extent at Bates . Wright said the impersonality at Bates was not present at such a high level .
 Wright will continue his studies next year in India under a Fulbright grant . Wright will teach a course in Asian governments, and is planning to continue studying in India .
 "Beds are to be made and rooms straightened by 10 except Sunday and during exams," says schoolgirl .
 This rule is part of the dormitory regulations governing the appearance of women's rooms . The dormitory's dormitory rules govern appearance of the rooms .
 The house-mothers enforce this regulation by checking each girl's room every day, as part of their duties . The house mothers are also required to check each child's room daily .
 These are two rules whose place and value in the context of higher education I question . The rules are important to students, but I question their value in higher education .
 The mere existence of a rule which attempts to legislate neatness is a regression toward the conditions of a girls' boarding school . The mere . existence of the rule is a . regression toward a girls’ boarding school, says the author of the book .
 The rule is meant to be enforced by the way it is enforced in the U.S. State Department of Education .
 Students accepted with a certain understanding that they are mature and can accept responsibility . Students are accepted with the understanding they must accept responsibility for their actions .
 If they are not mature, then the college should enable them to develop maturity . If they don't mature, they should be encouraged to become more mature, says the author .
 Guidance is necessary, but to give the individual the responsibility of seeking guidance and solving his or her own problems is a better way to allow the person to grow . Guidance may be necessary but it's necessary to give people the responsibility to solve their problems .
 Forcing students to accept certain modes of behavior will only lead to rebellion or quiet submission . It will also lead to the death of individualism and constructive behavior, author says .
 Cluttered rooms ar beds left unmade indicate very little about a person except that he is not concerned at the moment about his living quarters . Clutter rooms ar bed unmade indicates that a person's living quarters are not at all important . Clattered rooms are a sign of a person
 Making a bed or hanging up clothes doesn't indicate superior intelligence, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Rules (unless necessary) infringe upon the rights of the individual . Thirdly, rules (unless . necessary, infringed upon the individual's rights) are not necessary .
 A person is entitled to live as he desires as long as he does not impose on another . However, a person is not imposing on another, he says . A person should not be imposing on others, he adds .
 It is my intention to bring Southern Rhodesia face to face with Bates College so that the two may come to know and understand each other . It does not seem to be of permanent value, since no rule Africa Focuses on family's importance .
 The African people of Southern Rhodesia consciously and unconsciously take pride in their culture . They sincerely hope that they are not alone in this respect of their heritage .
 "In our culture the family is a very important institution without which the individual cannot function," the author says . The family is an important part of the individual's identity, he says. "Without the family we cannot function"
 The family has the obvious duty to perpetuate the human race and, in a special way, means a great deal to society . The family is a very important part of our society, says the author .
 The father and mother disseminate the culture of the society to all the members of the family by word and deed . Father and mother share the culture with all the other family members by word or deed .
 In many respects they have the final word, After Hows Q2J . John Holt '64: 'I feel a need to become pompous and subjective'
 It is often said of a writer that he is ""ahead of his time,"" and that he can only be appreciated after his death when the world has had a chance to catch up with him .
 The writer reflects in his writings the things that he sees in the world about him . The writer is, among other things, a person who reflects his own life, he says .
 Of course the writer must live in the present; he tannot five in the future. Of course, he must live . Of course . He must live the present .
 Rather than say the writer is ahead of his time, say that his readers are behind in time, for it is less difficult to understand what has gone before rather than understand what is going on in the ""now."" can truly command respect .
 Such inspections as are found on the women's side of campus are uncalled for and illogical . Such inspections are called 'uncalled for' and 'illogical'
 It is the old Puritan form of publicly enforced righteousness that does not belong in a liberal college . The advice on any aspect of life, if not taken, is considered with profound respect .
 Parents shoulder such a great responsibility that at times they find it both expedient and necessary to delegate responsibility to the eldest son . By this token, parents shoulder such an enormous responsibility .
 The oldest son received responsibility on the tacit understanding that he has not only a duty but also a human necessity to keep the name of the family alive . He received responsibility for the death of his father .
 The foundation on which this task is based is one of love and hope for a successful life . The foundation of the task is one, love, hope for the most successful life.
 Such occasions are endeared by the love expressed in the white wedding dress and crown . White wedding dresses and crowns are also endeared to the bride and groom .
 The whole spectacle is viewed with the enthusiasm of a college graduating senior . The whole thing is viewed as a college graduation .
 Success is viewed in terms of the family and every member has to be aware at all times of the presence and existence of other family members . Success is seen as a family and a family must always be aware of each other's presence .
 This is a team and operates with the force and vigor of a Bates football team enthusiastically cheered by the student body under the leadership of the cheerleaders . The cheerleaders are the team and cheerleaders. This is the team, the cheerleader says .
 On some occasions, however, non-cooperative elements develop among the family members .
 It is our firm belief that happiness emanates from good family relationships based on cooperation and confidence . It is the belief that good family relations are good enough to produce happiness .
 Many observers and pressing journalists may contend that our family scene is so close and tight that it destroys individual initiative and worth . Many careless observers may think that our . family scene . may . contend that it . destroys individual . initiative .
 In essence individuals are free to maneuver outside the realms of family counsel . Individuals should be able to maneuver out of the family counsel, says the author .
 We believe that this function is necessary and safe when individuals are old enough to stand on their own feet, that is, upon reaching maturity . We believe this function should be used only when individuals reach maturity .
 People are usually considered to be mature in their late twenties . This is the time when they are expcted to marry .
 At this stage individuals are expected to have had enough experience to the extent that they adapt themselves to a marriedlife situation with the least amount of tension . At the end of the process individuals should be able to cope with the stress .
 Individuals are expected to develop attitudes that have a tendency toward family orientation . In this light, individuals should develop attitudes toward family orientations .
 The restrictions and censorship of news imposed by the White House during the Cuban crisis and the West German Government's suppression of ""Der Spiegel"" create mistrust and portend the loss of freedom of the press . The White House imposed restrictions on news from Cuba during the crisis .
 During our welltimed power play against Cuba, the administration parceled information to reporters piecemeal . The news became a propaganda weapon, subject to the whims of the administration and the pentagon .
 The West German Government, reflecting the Gestapo activities of the Hitler regime, recently raided the editorial office of ""Der Spiegel,"" a frequent critic of the Bonn Government, and obtained the arrest in Spain of Conrad Ahlers, one of the journalists . Conrad Ahler was one of
 Absent are any of the post-Hitler freedoms proclaimed so loudly but adhered to so infrequently . Absent from this minor power play were any of those freedoms proclaimed by the Nazi regime .
 Adenauer made scapegoats of some of the officials involved in the suppression of the magazine . Fortunately the West German people awoke and yelled loud enough to make the government scapegoats . Adenauer's scapegoats were scapegoats, but they were not .
 The communist threat offers a flexible excuse for the suppression of freedoms by the U.S. and German Governments . The United States and German governments are suppressing freedoms, the author says .
 The secret war now being waged in South Vietnam exposes the power of Diem's puppet Government to rigidly suppress the news . It is now being fought in the hands of the Vietnamese Government .
 Diem allows few reporters access to the shifting war fronts; he imposes censorship on what little information our correspondents glean . Diem: "Diem allows little access to little information on shifting fronts"
 The Government's prosecution of William Worthy '42 (see story on page one) quickly transfers the problem from South Vietnam to this campus . Worthy was prosecuted in Vietnam for his role in the Vietnam War .
 William Worthy suffers because of the administrations dislike criticism . Because Red China exists not, because Cuba exists not . Because of the lack of criticism, he suffers in this case .
 This country supports dictators in Spain, South Vietnam, South America, in South America . Yet we refuse to support the right of free citizens to leave and reenter this country at will .
 Faculty Advisor David A Nelson published weekly at Chase Hall, Batea College, during the college year .
 Entered as second-clasK matter at the Lewlston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879 . Entered as . 1913, entered as second . matter at . the Lew .ston post office Jan. 13, 1913 .
 The Carnegie Science Building was closed for hours at the end of the night . The building was closed because of a dispute over the hours it took place . The incident shows the kind of opposition we are up against, says the author .
 On Friday, November 16, Natalie Shober, Ed Margulies and I, representing the senior biology majors, went to the Bursar's Office with the sole intention of asking Mr Ross the reasons why the building could not remain open .
 First, we wanted to be able to formulate correspondence reasons as to why the building should be open, and second, because professors in our department informed us that even they were not given clear reasons . We wanted to have clear reasons for the building to be open .
 As soon as we asked this question of Mr Ross, he took what seemed to us to be a belligerent, arrogant, and rude attitude, we said . Mr Ross said: 'As soon we asked him, he seemed to be arrogant and rude'
 He told us that he did not want to ""get in the middle of this"" and to take it up with our department . He said he didn't want to get in the "middle of this"
 When asked how the chemistry department felt, he became quite loud and said, among other things, that the chemistry majors do not try to tell him how to run their building . "Putting an article in the newspaper and sending students over would not get us anywhere," he said .
 In short, we finally left his office because we realized that talking to this man was like hitting our heads against a wall . "Talking to him is like hitting your heads against the wall," he says .
 Mr Ross is on the administration of a college that apparently has a very respected name in educational circles . What disturbed us so much was not merely the fact that Mr Ross had adopted this rude, arrogant attitude, but that a man like this is .
 This is a man who showed us that he is ready to ignore the needs of the student if it interferes with the efficiency of his office . A man who, it appears to . feel that the opinion of a student should always be taken with a grain of salt .
 I wonder what the men in these educational circles would think of Bates if they found out that this is a place where the student must fight the administration for an education . The goal of the education of the student is secondary to the goal of an efficient and solvent fiscal policy .
 Richard Nurnberg '63 is a former president of the Monroe, North Carolina NAACP, who sought asylum there . He sought asylum in the U.S. and sought asylum .
 Along with this increase in space has come the addition of new equipment and new building facilities . New equipment and building facilities have been added to the campus .
 Physics Department now has six booths in which sound and light can be controlled to a great extent . Sound and light are controlled by sound and lights in the Physics Department .
 It is now possible to cut out all outside noise and limit sound to that produced by the experiment . The experiment is now being carried out in a controlled environment .
 Light can now be regulated according to the conditions desired . Likewise, light can be regulated by the conditions needed .
 Research rooms are now available for seniors working on their theses . Research rooms, which are particularly useful to seniors, are also available for senior citizens .
 The new physics lecture room has facilities for the reproduction of stereophonic sound which is regulated from a projection booth at the back of the room . Stereo sound can be heard in the lecture lecture room .
 Here it is possible to produce various sound effects under controlled conditions . Sound effects can be produced using controlled sound effects or sound effects .
 A number of new oscilloscopes have been purchased for the Physics Department along with other various pieces of small equipment . The Physics Department has purchased several new equipment .
 Professor Bailey stated that these newly acquired items have permitted the department to step-up their program by a full year . Professor Bailey said that the acquisition has allowed the department's program to step up by a year .
 The physics department has two elaborate pieces of equipment which were built last year by seniors . Senior students built the equipment last year .
 Mass spectrographs built by Ed Bailey, Al Wulff and Ed Bailey . They are a mass spectrophraph and analog computor . They were constructed by both Bailey and Bailey, with an analog computer .
 Mass spectrograph is used to measure the mass of atoms and analyze given materials by breaking them down into simpler quantities . Mass spectroscraphs are used to analyze material by breaking it down into simple quantities .
 The analog computer is used by the Physics Department under the direction of Professor G Ernest Lexen .
 Professor Lexen stated that anything in the form of a differential equation can be solved by this device . Lexen said that anything can be found to solve any differential equation in any way .
 The machine . is applicative largely in the fields of physics and engineering, and in dealing with practical problems . achievements of the Cuban government, notably in the area of race relations .
 U.S. officials obstructed the flow of food and medical supplies from the United States to Cuban hospitals, he said . He reported that our government suppressed the action of certain United States officials . He said the government suppressed some of the action .
 On October 10, 1961, he flew from Havana to Miami to Miami where he was detained by authorities for six hours . He was detained in Miami, Cuba, during a flight from Havana, Cuba .
 Customs officials found no grounds on which to arrest him, however, and passed him through customs after finding his vaccination and birth certificates to be in order .
 Six months later he became the first person to ever be indcited under the McCarron Act . He was sentenced to twelve months in the custody of the Attorney General, three in a ""jail-type, institution"" and nine on probation .
 The United States has been lenient in allowing admittance of innumerable Batista thugs and crooks into the country . The U.S. has allowed admittance to countless thugs, crooks, including the Batista .
 It has no room for a distinguished and dedicated reporter who has exercised his constitutional rights to return to his native land . Yet it has no . room for the reporter to return home .
 It certainly appears that he has the absolute right to travel in any area of the world for the purpose of reporting events which he and his employer consider to be newsworthy .
 The government's recent imprisonment of Worthy violates the principles of human freedom and dignity, says Amnesty International . Worthy's imprisonment is a violation of human rights and dignity .
 Bates varsity basketball squad promises to provide plenty of excitement this year for the student spectators . Five Garnet Quintet quets open against St A's Bobcats Initiate Season Monday; Boast New Offense, Fine Shooters . Bates vaunted new offense, fine shooters will be
 Head coach Verne Ullom has selected sixteen varsity ballplayers and has brought to Bates an exciting new offensive, featuring an attack relying on the fast break . Head coach has selected 16 varsity players so far this season .
 Ullom believes that this style of offensive play will best suit the Bobcats . The Bobcats are lacking height but gifted with an abundance of speed . Ullum: "I think this is the best way to play the game"
 Intramural Manager Monty Woolson recently announced the final point standings for the fall intramural program . For well over a month the* 'The Garnet Line* ' — The Garnet line By AL MARDEN .
 Teams receive points in accordance with their final standings in their respective leagues, and in addition receive points for members of their dorm who compete in the interschool program .
 It is in this scoring system that the greatest fault with the present intramural program may be found . The scoring system is in the scoring system, the author says .
 A look at the standings at the close of the fall program reflects the inadequaces of the present program . The standings reflect the inadequacies of the program .
 Touch football scoring, as all intramural scoring, is based on the following system . Touch football scores are based on a touch football scoring system . The system is used in touch football .
 The A league winner receives 50 points, the B league winner, 40, and the C league winner gets 30 . The A and B league winners receive 50 points each .
 This division is the last place finisher's total . This total is divided by the number of teams in the league . The result of this division is this division's total of the teams who finish last .
 JB finished first and received 50 points, East Parker, Smith South, and Smith Middle . JB was the first team to finish first and receive 50 points .
 Middle received 12 1/, points on the basis of the division of JB's 50 points by the number of teams in the league . JB were awarded 12 1 / .
 The figure received by the last place finisher is then doubled, tripled and quadtripled to get the totals for the remaining teams in the league . The figures are then doubled and tripled to make up the total for the rest of the teams .
 On the basis of this system utilized in each league the touch football totals were derived . The touch football total was derived from this system .
 Three points are given to each of the dorm for each of its fall sports lettermen, two points for each sport varsity performers, and one point for each JV performer . The dorm would receive three points for its fall sport lettermen .
 Middle Middle's total of 47 fall awards points was contributed by 19 members of its dorm, or almost 50 per cent of the dorm . Middle Middle received 47 awards points from 19 dorm members . The Middle Middle dorm received the most of the awards points .
 JB's total of 57 fall awards points was contributed by 24 members of its dorm, or a little more than 25 per cent of the dorm . JB received 57 awards points from 24 dorm members, or more than a quarter of the total .
 There has been a movement in the past to reorganize the present intramural system and institute a club system . This would solve this problem of unequal resources for intramurals .
 At a Men's Assembly two years ago this plan was defeated by a wide margin . Two years ago it was defeated in a vote by a narrow margin . At least one of the men's Assembly's plans was defeated .
 There are many arguments against this plan and I, myself, do not favor it . There are also many other arguments against it .
 Practice sessions consist of the necessary drills, a great deal of running, and usually end with a scrimmage . The length of the scrimmage is determined by Coach Ullom, who determines the length .
 Ullom plans to rely on a platooning system rather than individual substitution . The team plans to use platooning systems to replace players .
 Fifteen squad members will be divided into three teams . Substitution will usually be made with an entire unit instead of replacing one of the guards or forwards .
 If this system proves to be successful in the pre-season scrimmage it should especially favor the r,unning game the Bobcats intend to employ .
 There is no first, second, or third teams as such, for the players are being shuffled around in an attempt to give each squad a strong combination with a balanced attack . There are no first or second teams in the Premier League as such .
 Coach Ullom commented on the prospects of the platoon style for the upcoming season . Coach said, "Right now it is hard to tell how this thing will take shape"
 The varsity is presently carrying sixteen squad members . The final division of junior varsity and varsity will not be definite until the final scrimmage with Gorham .
 Co-captain Thorn Freeman and Pete Glanz, both seniors, and sophomore Carl ""Ingo"" Johannesen will be appearing as centers . The senior trio will be returning to the team .
 Seniors John Lawler, Paul Castolene, and Dick Love, junior Will Gardiner, and sophomores Doug Macko and Fred Stevens have been designated as forwards .
 Senior co-captain Mike True, junior Ted Beal, and sophomores Seth ""The Turtle"" Cummings, Don Beaudry, Bob Lanz, Ted Kryznowek, and Ted Kryknowek will be seeing action as guards . Seth Cummings, Ted Be
 This squad consists of a combination of a little experience and a lot of desire . It is a mixture of a bit of experience and desire . This squad will be the first of its kind in the Premier League history .
 Whatever the ""Bobcats"" or ""Greyhounds "" or ""Bloodhounds"" may be lacking in size, they make up for in speed and hustle . Whatever the "Bobcats" or "Grey"sounds" lack of size makes up for their speed .
 Coach Ullom has also been devoting much time to the teaching of multiple defenses . Coach is also devoting time to teaching multiple defenses, including the fast break .
 Bates feels a mixture of various zone defenses and manto-man should prove to be successful in upsetting future opponents of Bates . He feels the mixture of zone defenses along with the conventional manto man should be successful .
 Coach Ullom: "They have their entire squad returning from a very successful season last year. They have . their entire team returning from last year."
 The task of a defensive lineman is not blocking and tackling any opponent, it's not blocking . The task is not just tackling any opponents, but blocking is the job of lineman .
 The lineman must consider numerous variables, such as the playing conditions, score, yardline the player is on, time remaining, the down and many others . The lineman has to consider numerous factors such as playing conditions and score .
 It is raining steadily; the score is tied; the ball is on the 50 yd. line; there are 6 minutes remaining in the first half and it is 3rd down with 7 to go for a first down . The game is played at the 50-yard line; the
 First, I receive the signal from the defensive quarterback and I assume my position . First, he receives the signal . He then assumes his position . He says he is ready to take the field .
 "I can feel where I was stepped on and hit in the last play. During this short waiting period I can feel the impact of the play," says Toni Kroos . Kroos: "During this short . waiting period you can't feel where you were stepped on or hit
 I alert myself to three possibilities of play, trap, draw and pass, which have been drilled into my thick skull during hours of strenuous practice . It is the only thing I can think of is a pass, trap or pass, and I'm always alerting myself to these possibilities
 Pass — this is the perfect situation for a screen pass and I relay my idea to my teammates, both beside me and on the opposite side of the line . Pass . Pass — This is the best way to get around the field. Pass .
 As they approach the line of scrimmage, I immediately look for the man against whom I have been playing . As they approached the line-of- scrimmage, he immediately looks for the player against whom he has been playing.
 The offensive quarterback yells ""Ready"""" I think again — trap, draw, pass. I think . Trap, draw and pass . Trap and pass. Trap and draw.
 I am hit hard, but I slip by his block and look to the inside for a trap . I'm hit hard but slip by a block, but look to inside for trap. I'm not afraid of a trap.
 "He drops back and I recall my earlier thoughts concerning a screen pass," he says . He drops back .
 Because they are my teammates, I do not feel the same pain that the opposing halfback feels as indicated by his grunt . I do feel the pain that I do the opposing . halfback's grunt is indicated by the grunting grunt .
 Girls' volleyball season got off to a roaring start last Monday with the traditional Stu G vs. WAA'ers in Fierce Volleyball Tilt; Playday Planned . DeWITT HOTEL Nearest the College .
 The contest goes on every year; Stu-G has beaten W.A.A., and this year was no exception . The contest went head-to-head for the first time in recent years .
 StuG succeeded in overwhelming them in 2 out of 3 games . W.A.A.'s girls looked more competent athletically than the girls from St.G. girls . The girls were more athletic than the other girls .
 Inter-dorm volleyball games started last week, with Whittier beating Page II and Wilson beating Mitchell in overtime .
 Teams consist of from 6 to 8 girls, depending on how many from a dorm play . The teams consist of between 6 and 8 girls .
 These games are good practice for girls who want to play on the Bates team going to the Playday with Maine, Colby, and Westbrook . These games will be good practice .
 Hinman has been training a few girls for officiating the volleyball games . Hinman says he's been training some girls to officiate .
 In the past, some students have tried for local ratings for officiating professionally . Students have tried to get local ratings .
 Getting such a rating entails taking both a written test and a test during an actual game . Getting a rating involves taking both written and actual officiating tests .
 W.A. will sponsor skiing lessons for any interested freshman girls . Miss Nell will be an instructor for the girls .
 At this time the possibility of organized overnight trips looks doubtful, but nothing has been definitely decided . The possibility of organizing overnight trips is doubtful .
 Northeastern, 6:00 Jan. at K of C. at BAA's Feb. at Milrose AA . Northeastern will host a series of AA events in the next month .
 In the first week of action, several teams emerge as prospective contenders for their respective division leads . Feb. Feb. at Maine Th<B Itatbramwal Some by some .
 It is still too early to choose a team as ""the" team to beat, but the results have turned up some interesting facts .
 Smith South has jumped off to an early league lead by being the only team currently undefeated with two wins . Smith South is the only undefeated team in the A league .
 Their second contest was decided against Off-Campus in three games also, 15-8, 8-15, 1512 . Their second game was decided in three matches, 15, 8, 15 and 1512, 15 .
 J.B. and Roger Bill, both sporting records of one win and no losses . Following in a tie for second, both men have no record of losing one game .
 John O'Neill became an Accounting Manager in New England Telephone's Providence office after only 20 months with the company . The J.B.A. decision was THE BELL TELEPHONE COMPANY SALUTE JOHN O'NEILL .
 The job called for him to manage 66 people, including 6 supervisors, including six supervisors . No easy task, this job was not easy task: managing 66 people .
 John handled this assignment with his customary thoroughness, and was promoted to a similar but more demanding position in the Accounts, Reports and Results Section . John handled his customary task with the utmost respect .
 Two method changes he introduced there were adopted throughout the company and led to his promotion to Senior Staff Accountant in the Chief Statistician's Department .
 Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America . John O'Neill and other young men like him helped bring the world's best communications service to America .
 Off-Campus forfeits by forfeit, Roger Bill downs East Parker . Roger Bill defeats East Parker by a forfeit .
 J.B. does have one loss, but not to its credit, as they lost to a strong non-league team comprised of faculty members . The loss was the result of a strong performance by faculty members at the school .
 Roger Bill and West Parker have records of two wins and no losses . The majority of the activity lies in the lively B-league . Roger Bill has won two matches and lost one .
 Roger Bill downed J.B. and South by coming back with two straight wins after losing the opener in both contests . Roger Bill came back to win the opener after losing both games in the first round .
 Middle also holds a 1-1 record, both matches being decided by forfeit . Middle Middle also has a record of 1-0 .
 The C league shows a minimum of activity, with only two games being played out of a scheduled four . Only two games are being played in the league out of four .
 West Parker defeated Smith North by the odd scores of 15-7, 7-15,15-7 . Smith North defeated West Parker 15-15 15-13 15-14 .
 This annual Christmas Concert will be given in the chapel both at 3:30 and 7:30 under the direction of Professor D Robert Smith . Professor Smith will direct the concert .
 Featured in the performance will be guest soloist Freda Gray Mass6 who will sing the contralto arias . The performance will take place on November 4 at 8.30pm .
 A resident of Maine, Maine, she has sung with the Boston Symphony Orchestra .
 This fall she has also made appearances at Toronto, Ontario and Providence, Rhode Island .
 Taken entirely from the Biblical text, it begins with the prophecy of the birth, the birth itself, the cricifixion, the resurrection, and the resurrection of Christ .
 Handel lived most of his life in London writing Italian opera . Though a German, Handel wrote Italian opera for the first time . Handel died in 18th Century London .
 Due to a change in public taste, he turned to writing oratorios in English .
 Handel's special charity, Foundling Hospital, was given annually for nine benefit concerts . Handel gave it to charity for nine concerts in 1750 to raise money for Foundling .
 For over two centuries the ""Messiah"" continues to be one of the most popular oratorios . Now, for more than two centuries, it is still a popular opera .
 The oratorio differs from the Italian opera in its use of the English language, the importance given to the chorus, and the concert performance as opposed to the staging and acting .
 The solos of the ""Messiah"" are in Italian style and make great demands on the singers . The 'Messiah' solos are in an Italian style .
 Many rapid notes, long phrases, and great dramatic power are typical requirements . "Great dramatic power is typical requirements"
 The solos come in pairs, the first part being the recitative which resembles spoken song and advances the plot . The second part is the aria in which is exhibited the virtuosity of the soloist . The sol solos are played in pairs .
 In preparation for this production, the sixty-one members of Choral Society have been rehearsing twice weekly since the beginning of the semester . Choral society has rehearsed twice weekly .
 The program, lasting approximately one and a half hours, is open to all, free of charge . The program is available for free, with no charge .
 This ""future storage area"" could serve as a fallout shelter and a temple to the folly of man . Strongly bound by many tons of steel, covered by three feet of earth, could be used as fallout shelter .
 It has two lavatories and a shower, provision for a large water storage tank, and pipe lines . It is possibly to be connected to an artesian well sunk between Hathorn and Hedge . The site has two toilets, a shower and a storage tank .
 One door appears to lead out onto Andrews Road three feet overhead . More than one entrance exists, however, according to reports .
 Blueprints describe a ""fallout shelter ventilating duct"" system designed to provide the ""area"" with large quantities of filtered air . The blueprints describe the system as a shelter ventilation system .
 The thick walls, right-angled entrances, storage tanks, showers and lavatories, and air ducts suggest a ''storage area"" unlike any other at Bates .
 The arrow poinis io the site of the ""future storage area."" three feet underground . Three feet underground, the arrow points to a storage area .
 A sense of civic duty has prompted these professors to discuss publicly the many factors and implications behind the two great conflicting systems . The professors say they feel civic duty to discuss the issues .
 Dr. D'Alfonso has offered lectures on the philosophy of each structure . He has also taught lectures on each structure's philosophy .
 Dr. Thumm is handling dents and dents from the respective political theories . Thumm: "Dents are welcome"
 A fee of three dollars is charged for each class held in Room 110, Hathorn, on Tuesday evenings between 7:30 and 9:30 .
 Twelve people, some coming from such distances as Augusta and Livermore Falls, are currently enrolled in the school . Bates debators participated in the Tufts Invitational Debate Tourney last weekend .
 Two Bates teams competed against teams representing 29 colleges . The two Bates teams, Robert Ahem '64 and Howard Blum '63, John Strassburger '64, Howard Blums '63 and Tom Hall '64 competed against 29 college teams .
 Tufts Tourney is characterized by teams that switch sides, debating both the negative and the affirma*tive . The Tufts team debate both sides of the debate .
 At the end of their debates, the two Bates teams had won six and lost six . The Bates teams won six of the debates, losing six of them .
 The af are Peter d'Errico '65 and David Harrison '64, while the negative members are Norman Gillespie '64 and Robert Bovd '64 . The negative members of the af include Norman Gillespie "64 and Norman Gillespie"
 J Weston Walsh, noted debate authority and editor of debate authority in Portland, will accompany the team . He will be joined by Portland-based debate expert and debate debate authority J. Weston Walsh .
 Four members of the novice debate squad will participate in a tourney at St. Louis University . Four of the squad members will compete in the tournament .
 Linda Lash '66 and Max Steinhemer '66 comprise the affirmative, and George Strait '66 is the negative . Brooks Quimby will accompany this team . George Strait and Richmond Rosenblatt '66 are the negative.
 Carl Johnson '66 and Priscilla Clark '66 constituted the affirmative; . Norman Davis '65 and Ronald Snell '65 constituted the negative . The negative were Norman Davis "65 and Norman Snell "65"
 Bates College Republican Club elected a new slate of officers for the coming year . Republican Club elects officers at Bates College College .
 Bradford F Anderson '66 replaces former president James Kiernaji; Kenneth Petke '66 is vice-president; Granville Bowie '66 treasurer; Pat Donaghy '65, secretary; and Allen Kerr '66, director of public relations . The new president of the Bradford F
 The club's main efforts will be directed towards mass communication and a full slate of distinctive speakers . Anticipating a more dynamic existence through increased membership and accelerated activities .
 The object of WUS is to initiate improvements at the Universities through co-operative systems . Co-operation systems would raise standards and provide part-time employment for students .
 The $1000, which is the goal for Bates, would be used for a co-op cafeteria at Nagpur . The success of the project would aid in influencing other Asian institutions to adopt similar co-ops .
 The majority of the Indian students, reflecting the educational revolution in which education is being extended to the lower classes, are from the country .
 Their naive acceptance of the city conditions allows independent concerns to take advantage of them in matters such as food, lodging, and school supplies . Their understandably naive acceptance allows them to be taken advantage of the conditions .
 A hundred students may be found ""eking out nutrition"" in a building comparable to a typical American home . 100 students can be found 'eking out' out of a building in the building .
 Disease is common, forcing many students to leave their studies . Health is a major problem among the students, making health the major problem .
 The organization is working to dispel the causes of disease and sickness, in order not to spend money on students who later may be forced to abandon their careers . The organization hopes to dispel diseases and sickness .
 Since 1948 the number of college students in India has almost quadrupled to the present one million . One million college students are currently enrolled in India .
 The ratio of students per person remains at a nadir extreme, however, of about 1:400 . The United States' ratio of 1:32 is higher than that of 1.400 .
 These Indian students, it must be understood, represent India's future leaders . The success of their education is of the greatest importance for India's education .
 India is in a crucial stage, and its survival depends upon the current student bodies, which in turn depend upon monetary support from others . The survival of India's student bodies depends on the students' support .
 Mr Denise stressed the importance of the cafeteria at Nagpur, concluding with an appeal for donations . He concluded with a plea for donations to help the hospital .
 The Christian Association, which is sponsoring the drive, will accept pledges on Friday, December 7 . All contributions will be appreciated .
 $1,000 Amy Loveman National Award is being offered to a college senior who has collected an outstanding, personal library . For the second year, the award is offered to seniors who collect an outstanding library .
 Campus Library Award Committees are asked to submit nominations of senior students for the national award . Chairmen of Campus Library Awards Committees have to select a local winner, after selecting local winners .
 For the purposes of the Amy Loveman Award, a collection of not less than 35 books will be considered . For the purpose of the award, the books will have to be selected from a collection .
 Collections of any type (excluding textbooks) are eligible whether centered in a subject or avocation, a single author or group of authors, or a general collection . Collection of any kind (including textbooks) eligible .
 Although the Standard Oil Company will not be sending any recruiting officers to Bates this year, they are extremely interested in anyone who wishes to apply . The Standard Oil company is extremely interested .
 Interested students are urged to pick up brochures and application blanks in the Guidance and Placement Office .
 The Professional Placement Offices in both states are ready to interview and refer applicants to the hundreds of job openings now on file . Professional Placements Offices are ready for applicants to apply for the jobs .
 Additional information and necessary addresses are available in the Guidance and Placement Office for those interested in counselling .
 A directory listing summer jobs throughout the United States for college students is now available . Bank Street College in New Grad Schools Offer Scholarship Grants . Students begin summer plans for the summer .
 Students can begin their summer plans during the Christmas holiday vacation . Students can start planning for the summer after the holiday break .
 The 63.63 ""Summer Employment Directory"" gives the names and addresses of 1,485 organizations which want to employ college students . The.63 "Summer Employment" directory gives the . names and . addresses of the organizations that want to . employ college . students .
 It also gives positions open, salaries, and suggestions on how to apply . It also lists positions open and salaries .
 The many types of jobs in the directory are found at summer camps, resorts, government, business and industry . Summer camps, businesses, government departments and industry all feature in the list .
 National parks, ranches, and summer theaters listed, also need college students . College students are needed for summer activities in national parks and ranches .
 Students wishing summer work apply directly to employers . Employers are included in the directory at their own request .
 Copies of the new ""Summer Employment Directory"" may be obtained by sending $3 to National Directory Service, Dept. of Dept. Of State . Copies can be obtained from the new "Summer Employment directory"
 Traineeships are to be awarded for two years to students interested in vocational rehabilitation careers . Traineeship will be awarded to students who are interested in careers in rehabilitation .
 The grants are ordinarily for 21 months and include travel to and from Hawaii and Asia . They include tuition, tuition, books, food and lodging .
 New York City offers a Master's degree in education, based on the four-year liberal arts degree . Asian field study grants are also available for students .
 John J Navin, Jr., Jr. will interview men and women interested in officer training programs . Navin Jr. is a Navy veteran who has served in the Navy in the past .
 The last date for filing applications for the Massachusetts Civil Service Examinations is Monday, December 17 . The last deadline for filing for the civil service exam applications is Monday .
 Daily 11:09 AJVL to l:L:M AJL the particular culture and language in which he is specializing . AJL is a specialist in culture and languages .
 The awards are for persons preparing for careers in editorial journalism, mass communications research, advertising and media research, and broadcasting and film . The awards will be given to those preparing to enter journalism careers .
 In addition to these grants, the department also appoints some research assistants .
 The fields of study are production, educational broadcasting, journalism, and library science . The fields are production and educational broadcasting .
 White crisp paper protected by two soft clean sheets of pink, clutched in one sweaty hand . The paper is flattened, straightened and straightened on the top of a desk .
 After rearranging the many objects of his pockets, placing the excess of writing implements upon the floor as missiles ready to be launched and rolled up the sleeves of his twice worn shirt, he folds back the first pink sheet, poises his pen and waits .
 He waits and then accepts the rough white sheet and listens to the sudden hush and the last nervous cries and exclamations .
 He looks at it, reads it; reads each question and as he bites his nails, reads them again . He bites nails and bites nails as he reads the questions .
 For fifty minutes, and always a little more, what should pour, dribbles . Things vaguely remembered, things described at length that could easily have been assumed, things half-said come to the white pages wounding them with lines of unrhythmic scratches in blue .
 Sudents, Faculty, and Administration are encouraged to submit poetry for STUDENT publication in a poetry column .
 Friends and scholars of Bates College treated to a chef d'oeuvre in the realm of what is sometimes designated general, political thought .
 The particu larists, among whom I include myself, were in something of a froth . It was not the first time I'd heard from such a group .
 Lerner saw or looked forward to a world of possibilities for America, ""a world through the gates of possibilities"" was his expression . Lerner was born in New York City, New York, New Jersey . Lerner died in 1994 at the age of 92 .
 We were advised to make available an ""access to the possibilities"" that made this nation great . But for the time being, we were told to make . available an . access to the . possibilities that made . this country great .
 Today, we are without a genuine ""ethos"" and this is, in large part, what we must uncover or discover in order to fulfill the dreams of the Founding Fathers . The Founding Fathers of our country are missing a genuine "ethos"
 We need the vision of another America in which ""access to the possibilities"" are made manifestly real . We need to see a vision of a new America where access to possibilities are made real .
 Gives Critique of M. Lerner's talk . "Time-space problem confronts us and I would like to go on to my own critique here and now"
 America behind an America behind the hill . American Gem Society members of the Gem Society .
 This when played to some sentimental tune should give us pause to rest, rest of our accesses . This should be given a pause, but it should be a reminder of the dangers of the internet .
 Next, second I think it is, we should have some over-view in this age of over-kill . We should also have a view of the art of art, not just art, in the art world .
 Aristotle stood as the inheritor of the age of fear and the archetype of knowledge . If that is true, it becomes apparent that . Aristotle, as a quite characteristic Greek, although . of transcending intellectual ability, stood as . the transcending . intellectual ability .
 His function was to explain and rationalize the whole known world and man's relation to it . He was a rationalist who rationalized and rationalized the world and its relation .
 "His achievement was to sum up the ethos of a whole civilization more completely than anyone since him has been able to do," he said . His achievement was "to sum up [a] whole civilization," he added .
 Aristotle's God was for Aristotle not the supreme mystery, but the ""Unmoved Mover,"" the center of an orderly universe rotating about him . God was not for Aristotle to be a supreme mystery but a center of a dramatic universe .
 Only a people fearful of the irrational in them would thus make a fetish of order . He was thus, like the other Greeks, still operating in the shadow of fear, says historian .
 Aristotle was moving away from fear toward knowledge, which is a way of conquering fear, he says . Y e t t Aristotle moved toward knowledge as a way to conquer fear .
 His knowledge was chiefly of the external world, the beginnings of science without which the human being is fear-dominated, he says . He says .
 The Faustian impulse was not yet in him . But while he ransacked all the storehouses of knowledge open to him at the time, the Faustian impulses were not yet .
 Knowledge was for him a way of accommodating oneself to the world, rather than conquering it, as it was within the scientists of the seventeenth century . Knowledge is for him to accommodate himself and not conquer the world .
 The Greeks were caught between the assertion of will and the submission to law . Aristotle expresses it in his Metaphysics, between matter and form .
 Aristotle's method is wholly dialectical, characteristic of any age, like our own, it finds itself caught in so basic a dilemma . The method that is characteristic of an age, such as our own .
 Aristotle's rigorous analysis by the method of division and differentiation is increasingly suited to the temper of such an age, which seeks to find amidst the welter of change some firm ground on which it can stand . Aristotle's methods of division, differentiation are increasingly suited for this age of change .
 Third, and possibly last, we can develop an elan which will sustain an access to such wonderful possibilities . We can develop elan that will sustain the possibility of such possibilities. We can't wait for the future to see if we have the elan .
 The 61an itself will, of course, have to be possible, but this should not be particularly difficult if we maintain a general view .
 This view merely entails a commitment to the purely formal character of intelligence and thereby opens up for us a possible world . This view, however, does not mean that intelligence is not intelligence .
 This, mes amis, is the program — at least in its general outlines — so do not despair . Do not despair, you may yet find such a world possible .
 I seek not a possible world, but a real one and I see not an age of over-kill but one of under-live . "I seek not to be over-killed but to be under-lived," he says .
 In a refreshingly original and creative manner, he sets himself to the problem of coming to grips with the crisis that is confronting modern man, and does so in an informal way of Spanish wit . The book is published by Simon Cowell, a self-described Spanish journalist .
 The perspective of history must, he says, be viewed within a structure, a unified structure, in which sections of the historical process merge and blend with one another, yet remain distinct . History must be viewed in a structure where sections of history blend and blend, but remain distinct.
 He uses the idea of the generation, that there is an essential change of life in history about every fifteen years. He says that there are essential changes in life every 15 years .
 The most crucial understanding must be that of the middle ages, where all our problems started . In order to understand the present, we must understand the past, we need to understand past .
 We haven't yet completely rejected the ideas of those who fought with Galileo, he says . But we haven't completely rejected those ideas, and it is this mixture of foundations that is causing all the confusion .
 "A historical crisis is when the world, the system of convictions belonging to a previous generation, gives way to a vital state in which man remains without these convictions," he writes .
 We are as our friend Jean-Baptiste insistedat the bridge, and the water is indeed cold, very, very cold . We are indeed as well as the bridge .
 FOUR BATES STUDENT, DECEMBER 5, 1962 Editorials . The art of fallout shelter building is secrecy . The ""sine qua non"" of fallout shelters is secrecy.
 Who knows but that those snobs at Bowdoin or Colby might wish to emulate Bates . Who knows that snobs might want to emulate him?
 Only the perverted mind might reason that it's sensible to construct a shelter in a maintenance building since it is maintenance equipment that will be first needed when and if anyone survives an attack .
 A maintenance building ideally serves as a fallout shelter provided that the term ""shelter"" is deleted from all of the blueprints save one . A maintenance building shouldn't be used to be used as a shelter .
 One has only to label the shelter area ""future storage area"" to silence inquiring minds . The shelter area has been labeled "future storage"
 A fallout shelter is just that, although Sarcophagus might be more appropriate . For, after all, a fallout shelter was just that .
 Disguising the shelter requires work, but may be accomplished with a certain amount of ingenuity . The shelter is located in the middle of a busy street in New Jersey .
 The walls must be reenforced after trucks parking in the building might strike the walls . The walls will be re-enforced, says the author .
 The walls will allow trucks to get nowhere near certain of the walls . Don't mention that trucks can't get into certain places .
 Shelter entrances must be so constructed to prevent radiation from entering, but still enable the shelterees to get in . Shelter entrances are so constructed that they can still be used to get into the shelter . The shelter entrances must also be designed to stop radiation entering .
 All entrances to the ""future storage area"" must be thickly walled and at right angles . Thus, all entrances to this storage area are thickly . walled .
 For the Bates ""future storage area"" has, not only thick walls and strange entrances, but a generator and a shower . The Bates ""Future storage area" has, as well as thick walls, has a generator, a shower and a bathroom .
 It undoubtedly is not significant to mention that the ""future storage area"" could not hold a thousand beings. It undoubtedly . It undoubtedly was not significant . The future storage area could not be held by a thousand .
 Perhaps it is not meant for much storage, only the administration, the faculty, and the high qpr's .
 Construct an artesian well between Hathorn and Hedge, large storage tanks, and the water problem is solved . Construct a well and a large storage tank for large water storage tanks .
 Convince the world that your fallout shelter is a maintenance building, and the battle is won . Convince yourself that you have a fallout shelter that's a maintenance facility, and you'll be safe .
 Entered as second -clasf,' matter at the Lewiston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879 . Entered as . 1913, it was entered into the . act of . Mar. 1879. Entered as a . second . matter at . the
 I am writing this letter in reference to the one of Richard Nurnburg which appeared in the Student last week . I am a member of the University of Cambridge . The letter was written in response to a letter written by Richard Nurnburg .
 I do not intend to defend or contradict in any way Mr Ross, the Administration and/or faculty on the incident reported. Mr Ross is a member of the faculty at the University of Cambridge .
 I would like to present what have been some of my contacts with them. Rather, I would rather rather than present what I have done with them,’s the author says .
 Last winter I went to see Mr Ross about the skating show to be presented Opening Night of Carnival . The skating show will be presented at the opening night of the festival .
 He arranged for practice rooms, suggested ways to keep the ice on the pond at its best, and helped in other ways to make it a success .
 Since April I have been one of the student representatives to the Faculty-Student Extracurricular Activities Committee . Mr Ross is also a member of the Committee of which Mr Ross also serves on .
 "I have found the members of this committee, including Mr Ross, who have many good ideas and offer needed constructive criticism," says chairman of the committee .
 These are examples of the contacts I have had with Mr Ross and the others of the Administration and Faculty. Mr Ross is a member of the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Cambridge .
 I believe that the Administration and Faculty are sincerely and mainly concerned with the student . I think that they are sincerely concerned about the student's safety .
 I present these examples of my experiences in the hope that more students may get to really know some of these people and see how much they have to offer to us .
 It is unfortunate for the College that the Bates Rules-Makers don't appreciate the psychology of rule-making . The Bates rules-makers don't understand the psychology behind the rule making process, the author says .
 No one thing creates more friction between the administration and the students than the students being held to a conglomeration of regulations and petty legislation . The students are held to an array of rules and regulations .
 The article in The Student of November 28, concerning neatness in women's dorms prompted this letter .
 If their virgin eyes and ears received no damage in the dens of iniquity that the men inhabit, there is no women's dormitory in the world that could cause them - the slightest agitation .
 More important than the question of any one rule is the attitude of the student body as a whole toward all the rules of the school . The student body is more important than one rule, it is attitude toward the school's rules .
 Freshwomen in their dorms by ten, compulsory chapel, closed science building, separate dining — I won't even mention Thanksgiving vacation . When students are faced with a hodge-podge of pointless rules, the rules which purport to be of real significance Prof. David Frum
 During the past week, the organization of WRJR has undergone a streamlining process . Edwin Baumgartner was the first person to be named as a member of the team .
 Program Director Lorn Harvey has appointed three new people to serve as Assistant Program Directors . Each person is responsible for the programming on two nights of the week .
 Bobbi Reid '63, Ron Green '64, and Dick Dow '64 will be helping tremendously to improve the already fine quality of Bates College Radio . The three new hires will help tremendously to boost the quality of the radio .
 Sieve Adams '65, in his new capacity as News Director, will be placing increased emphasis upon campus news, rather than on world issues . Adams will focus on campus news rather than world issues, not on campus issues .
 Marty Ryan '65 and Carol Stone '65 pool their talents to publicize WRJR programming . Further aid is forthcoming in the Public Relations Department .
 WRJR will air twice nightly until the particular event publicized occurs . Information will be aired by the WRJR news department twice nightly . WRJR is proud to be able to provide the most accurate information on Facebook .
 WRJR's annual presentation of Handel's Messiah will be broadcast on November 14 . WRJR will present Handel and Messiah at 8 p.m. EST .
 The Christmas season will be in full swing this year as in the past . WRJR this year will be helping to bring the true spirit of Christmas closer to the campus .
 When a good rule (assuming one exists) is accompanied by a squad of useless ones, the automatic catagorizer of the student mind places the whole bunch in its mental circular file . A good rule is followed by a bad rule .
 The administration might well find that it would be taken more seriously and placed in a position of greater respect if for once it took the initiative to kill some of the sacred cows of the college .
 Edwin Baumgartner of the mathmematics department, is waiting to be solved by some sharp Bates student .
 "They're just for fun, but still involve the basic principles of math."" explained Prof. John Defterios .
 Baumgartner and Sampson attempt to integrate their realistic approach with math as a whole . The seminar will be held in the U.S.
 Students are given suggested reading lists in their weekly mathematics meetings . Students and professors discuss various aspects of mathematics .
 After about a year, however, he changed his major to mathematics, finding it more interesting . After a year of college, he decided to focus on mathematics .
 He earned his master's degree from Syracuse and served as a graduate assistant there until June of 1962 . He also served as the graduate assistant at Syracuse University .
 At Syracuse, some of the engineering students were taking nineteen and twenty credit hours of courses, he said . The engineering students are taking 19 and 20 credit hours a course .
 Baumgartner feels that even with a lighter work load, students at Bates are willing to put their extra time to good use . From what he has seen thus far at Bates, he has been impressed by the students .
 Baumgartner is interested in both his work and the students he meets . He is also interested in the students and the people he meets in Batesville, Mississippi .
 He's already made it from one corner of the board to Bates, he doesn't try to figure out the solution for returning to the same space . Let's hope that since he has already .
 In lieu of Chapel next Wednesday, all students will report to their advisors to register for Spring Semester .
 On Saturday, December 8, the Men's Commons will be closed in the evening .
 Students will eat at Rand Hall for the evening meal . Announcement of the schedule will be made in both Rand and the Commons prior to that date .
 Chase Hall will be closed for the evening beginning at 5:30 and the Bobcat Den will be open and available from the Chase Hall entrance nearest Roger WilBATES STUDENT, 1962 .
 Anselm's Bates game Monday night was one of the most exciting basketball contests of the past three seasons . It was the finest performance by any Garnet five over the past 3 seasons . Monday night's game was the best of the season for the Garnet Five .
 Garnet take on Colby Mules in opening state series play . Garnet hoopsters will be opening series play as they take on the Mules tonight .
 The Mules are rated as the team to beat for the series title, but pre-season prognasticators knew little about Coach Ullom's Bobcats, Greyhounds, and Bloodhounds .
 Ullom has installed a new free lance type of offense which in addition to being made to order for this year's varsity squad, is certainly a crowd-pleasing offense .
 In addition, Ullom has instilled a spirit in his underlings which resulted in such a fine performance .
 Let's all turn out for the opening game tonight and yell like — H-E-double hockey sticks . The opening game begins at 7 p.m.
 Rumor is that ""Whip"" Kiernan has imported a new device for leading cheers . Rumor has been circulating that Kiernan is bringing in a new gadget .
 C I Am A Bobcat Back . The goal of a back on any one play varies according to the situation . C I am a Bobcat back .
 It is to pick up yardage on a long gainer, or pick up a first down, to set the ball in position for the next play, or to stop the clock by running out of bounds . It is also to set up a next play or set up the ball for
 From the many practice sessions the back has learned where to run and upon whom he can depend for a block . The back has also learned where he can run and how to block .
 If he isn't carrying the ball, he may block, fake, or run a pass pattern . He may also run a fake, fake or run pass patterns during the game .
 The men on the opposing team have their assignments which are designed to break up the play . The men from the opposing side have assignments which they use to break-up play .
 As the back approaches his position, he checks the defense to see how the hole will open up . The back checks out the defense before the play begins . The play-by-play video was posted on ESPN.com .
 In football as in all sports, things don't always take place as planned . But in football as well as all football, things often take things as planned. The World Cup is on the brink of disaster in Brazil .
 On the snap of the ball, the defensive lineman may knife in so the tackle must block other than planned . The tackle must be able to block the offensive lineman in order to prevent the tackle being tackled .
 Back blasts through hole with his head low to avoid having a line bucker reach over and take his off . The back blasts through the hole .
 The advantage is with the ball carrier because he can cut, fake and cut, hit head on and dance, or hit and spin . The ball carrier can also hit and dance head on head on or head on, hit and head on .
 At all times the straight arm is useful, and when combined with varying speeds the back can make his own breaks . The back can also make its own breaks when using his straight arm .
 In the last analysis, what is needed is a block, a little finesse, and most important of all — desire . In the final analysis, it is needed to be a block and a lot of desire .
 This Saturday, the Bates Bobcats travel to Medford, Mass., for their opening meet against the Tufts Jumbos . This Saturday's meet will be the first of the season for the Bobcats .
 Tufts pits its power in the weights against the running strength of Bates . It should be a good meet between Tufts and Bates . Tufts is ranked No. 1 in the weight rankings .
 Bates* combine swept through its schedule last year losing only to Northeastern . Last year Bates* combined won only one game in a row .
 Several good weight men and most of last year's great relay team have left via the graduation route . Also several good weight weight men have left the team . Most of the relay team has left via graduation route.
 Bill LaVallee has been a standout performer for four years . He is the squad's captain and has been in charge for the past four years.
 Bill runs the high and low hurdles and is called by many the best hurdler in the state . Bill runs both high and high hurdles and has been called a great hurdler .
 Bates can also be proud of the fact that it also has the second best hurdler in the state in the person of Al Harvie . Bates hurdler is the state's second-best hurdler, with the best at Bates .
 Seniors John Curtiss and Joe Tamburino give Bates more power in the weight department than it has had in recent years . Bates has two seniors on the roster, including Curtiss .
 Bob Kramer is our best in the pole vault and William Davis is good throwing the discus . William Davis looks good throwing a discus and Bob Kramer looks good in pole vault . Bob Kramer also has a good throwing thrower .
 Paul Williams is one of the best men ever to don a Bates uniform but injuries always seem to keep him from realizing this potential . Williams is a junior at the University of Bates College .
 Williams runs the 45 yd. dash and the relay, as well as broad jumping . Williams has broad jumping and broad jumping in addition to running the relay .
 High jumpers Tom Bowditch and Dave Johnson are back again for another season . The pair are back in action for the second time this season . They are hoping to continue their success in the high jump .
 Mike Gregus and Tom McGinee are improving rapidly in the mile and 1,000 yd. run . The sophomore is going to be depended upon in mile while another sophomore is improving rapidly .
 Finn Wilhelmson and Eric Silverberg are sure to do well again this year this year . The two-mile race will be held at the University of Clemson University . The team will compete in the two mile race in the U.S.
 Coach Walt Slovenski is getting used to producing a fine team . This is another of the fine teams that Coach Slovenski has produced .
 Maine Track Coach Walt Slovenski and Captain Bill LaVallee talk over plans for Saturday's opening meet with Tufts . Tufts is Maine's only drug-inpharmacy program .
 The many students making the trip were pleasantly surprised at their truly terrific performance . The students were very enthusiastic about their performance .
 The ""Bobcats" consisted of Co-captains Thorn Freeman and Mike True, Seth Cummings, Fred Stevens, and John Lawlor . The starting team in Coach Ullom's platooning system was known as the "Bobcat"
 Coach Ullom replaced his starters with the ""Greyhounds,"" a team of Paul Castolene, Will Gardiner, Johannesen, and Ted Krzynowek . At this point the team was replaced with the team of "Ingo" Johannesen .
 The rested ""Bobcats"" now came back until intermission at which point the St.C. Bobcats came back to play .
 Cummings continued his incredible shooting and ran his string of six consecutive field goals . Cummings continued to run his string to six straight field goals in the game .
 The fierce rebounding of Freeman and Johannesen, and the great play of Cummings, kept the 'Cats in the game . Cummings continued his amazing shooting and driving, continuing his amazing play .
 Paul Castolene's tight defense on lightning quick Tony Greer held their own . The ""Greyhounds"" held on to a 2-1 victory .
 Cummings finally gained possession with one second left . Hustling defense resulted in three jump balls, Cummings finally gaining possession . Cummings: "I'm not going to let it slide down"
 Shooting the ball immediately he canned it from 25 feet but the ruling was that time had run out before the shot was in the air . The decision was overturned after the ball was ruled out of the basket .
 Girls' volleyball is well underway as .the first week of games has now been completed .
 Rand is in the lead with two wins and no losses . Cheney has played only one game, and won it, and has won it . Rand has two wins, no losses, but Cheney has won one game .
 Milliken and Hacker beat Hacker and Rand and Frye in the first two matches of the week . The week started with two exciting matches between Milliken, Hacker, and Rand, Frye .
 Milliken easily overtook Hacker in the first game, but had a little difficulty winning the second game . Milliken won the first two games .
 Milliken wins, 11-4, 9-7, after time had run out . Milliken won, the scores being 11- 4, 97 . Millikin won .
 Lewiston culty beat Frye in their first game, but the Frye girls and all their spirit gave Rand a tough time in the second game . Frye beat Lewiston in the first game .
 Mitchell defeated Page II 7-10, 13-8, 15-7 in the first game . Page II won the first two games 7-11, 14-15 in the second game . Mitchell beat Page II 15-8 in the other game .
 Page seemed to get better and better as time wore on . Milliken tried hard against an overpowering Page I team on Friday .
 Page II defeated Chase 12-7, 14-7; Cheney defeated Wilson 12-8, 15-3; and Rand defeated Whit 11-8 . In other matches throughout the week, Page II and Cheney defeated Chase . Rand defeated Chase 11-7 and Cheney beat Wilson 11-
 It looks like there will be plenty of exciting games this week as each dorm tries to get out ahead of each other . This week's games will feature some exciting moments of upsets and upsets .
 As the teams now stand, it's anybody's guess as to which teams will succed this year . The teams stand at the top of the standings .
 Rand Cheney Milliken Mitchell and Whittier Wilson Chase Frye Hacker are in action this week . W.A. skiing classes are being held this week in Rand for any interested girls .
 Rand Balcony is offering 25 cents for girls to wax their skiis this week for 25 cents . Upperclass girls who would like to wax skiis may do so in Rand's Rand Balconey .
 The board has organized a committee of the point system that is now being used to determine athletic awards . The point system is being used in determining awards for athletes .
 The group, headed by Ginny Erskine, is planning on handing recommendations over to the new board in the Spring .
 If there are any ideas or suggestions, any board member would be glad to hear them . Board members would be happy to hear any suggestions or suggestions .
 In this second week of intramural volleyball, some games were played, a few weren't . Several games remain a mystery as to whether they were or not contested . The Imtmmuml Seem®
 As regards to the last category mentioned, it seems that those responsible for turning in the results of their contests have neglected to do so . Both the athletic department and myself at a loss as to just what did happen .
 It will be humbly appreciated if someone associated with future playing clubs would kindly perform this simple task, making it easier for all of us concerned .
 Despite this handicap I will nevertheless continue to present some idea of what resulted in the course of the league games this past week . Despite that handicap, I will still present some of the best analysis of the week's events .
 Bob Fisk became an Accounting Manager in New England Telephone's Boston Office after less than three years with the company . Fisk was the Accounting Manager at the company in Boston, Massachusetts .
 He needs a staff this large to handle the immense job of preparing monthly bills for southeast Boston . He needs this large staff, he says .
 Bob earned his latest promotion after outstanding performance on earlier assignments as a Supervisory Assistant and Directory Staff Assistant . Bob was promoted to his latest assignment after outstanding .
 Bell Telephone Companies throughout the U.S. help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America . Bob Fisk and other young men like him helped bring the best communications service to America .
 Smith South isl still in first place with a 2 and 0| record, followed by J.B. and Roger Bill, each possessing records of one and no losses . Smith South leads the league with two wins and one losses .
 J.B. played two contests, dropping the first one to a strong West Parker squad . The first one was a tough loss to West Parker, losing to the first .
 The efforts of J.B.J. were denied by Middle Eastern leaders . The efforts were not to be denied, however, in their subsequent meeting with Middle East leaders .
 Ron Stead's side win by the margin of 2 to 1 in the first half of the game .
 Roger Bill confusingly lost the first and won the last two games 15-3, 15-4 . Roger I Bill and North won the first two games of the match . Roger Bill won the second and third of the games in a row 15-5 .
 The boys from West were again victorious, this time to the dismay of South, 15-8 and 15-9 . The West boys beat the South 15-7,15-9 in the final .
 All signups are due in by Thursday night, at which time there will be a meeting of the intramural league dorm representatives .
 Members urged to attend to discuss important aspects of the league . They are to discuss several important aspects concerning the league, and urged that members attend .
 American Historian Joins Faculty Next Semester . Next semester Miss Barbara will be Miss Barbara . Miss Barbara was Miss Barbara.
 Muller will be on Graymont from Packer Collegiate Institute, a junior college and preparatory school in Brooklyn . Muller joins the Bates faculty as a visiting professor .
 Miss Graymont's major fields of interest are American History, British History, and the British Empire .
 She has done research as well on the American Indian, and has published the book, The American Indian in Today's Society . She has also done research and published a book on American Indians .
 Miss Graymont has completed all her residence requirements for her doctorate . She has only her thesis and oral examinations remaining .
 She is a member of the American Historical Association and the American Association for the Advancement of Science . She is also member of American Association of the Advancements of Science, and American Historical .
 Miss Graymont will fill the vacancy in the History Department made sabbatical next semester . She will fill a History Department vacancy next year .
 Muller will work on several projects concerning nineteenth century American History . Muller will do research on several historical subjects . Muller is currently working on a series of historical projects .
 Muller also has tentative plans for a trip to the Middlewest during the latter part of his leave of absence . Muller says he will not be in residence at any one place for any length of time during the semester .
 Professor Berkelman plans to leave with his wife on February 6 for his twelfth trip abroad . He will also be absent from next semester .
 He intends to spend nearly two months in Greece, studying sculpture, architecture, and visiting places of literary significance .
 The Berkelmans will visit the Holy Land, Egypt, Istanbul, Turkey, Italy, and Southern France . Mrs. Berkelman will also travel to Egypt, Turkey and France . She will be in Southern France, her native France .
 The Berkelmans intend to return to the U.S. by ship in mid-August . After spending the month of July in Switzerland, the couple will return by ship to the United States .
 Professor Wilkins of the Mathematics Department has not made definite plans for his sabbatical at the present time . Wilkins is not sure if he plans to take a break at the moment .
 In so doing, she explained what types of aid are made possible by such college funds . In doing so, she also explained what type of aid is made possible .
 Cooperative bookstores, dorms, and food services are operated in Calcutta, India . Co-operation bookstores and dorms are also operated .
 Student saves part of his meal purchased in the WUS Co-op Cafeteria to take home to share with his under-fed family . WUS students often save part of their meal to share .
 An Asian Seminar sponsored by WUS and the YWCA, took place this past summer under the leadership of Dr. Dr. David Chang . Dr. Chang was the keynote speaker at the event .
 Twenty-nine persons participated in the Seminar . WUS and YWCA personnel and college faculty members and administrators had special interest in sponsoring organizations .
 Congestion and delay are the most pressing problems facing the operation of the judiciary today, says the head of the courts .
 Congress has increased the number of federal judgeships by 20%, yet the problem remains . Congress increased the federal judgeship by 20% but the problem still remains .
 Judge Gignoux commented on some other possible solutions, including decreasing the size of the jury from twelve to five, and turning over more cases to the state courts .
 He added that there was the problem even in these solutions of obtaining qualified judges . He added, however, that there were also problems of getting qualified judges.
 Too often judges are appointed by those in political power, without regard for the qualifications of the appointees . Too often, judges are often appointed by political power without regard to their qualifications .
 Judge Gignoux emphasized that the judges and lawyers alone are not responsible for the task of maintaining justice . Only an informed public can insure true justice, he said .
 On the state level, courts are organized according to a district system . Courts are organized based on district systems in the United States .
 The state superior courts have jurisdiction over cases of criminal and civil litigation involving either violation of state laws or suits between citizens of the same state . State superior courts are responsible for cases of both state and civil cases .
 1 9 6 3 Winter Carnival is sponsored by Bates Outing Club . Carnival plans are quickly taking shape . The Bates Winter Carnival will be sponsored by the Bates Outings Club .
 The festivities open Thursday night with the traditional crowning of the Carnival Queen, followed by an ice show . The Carnival Queen will be crowned at the end of Thursday .
 A square dance in the Alumni Gym and an open house in Chase Hall round out the evening . The Alumni gym and Chase Hall will also feature a square dance .
 Friday begins with an early start to the King Pine Ski Area, East Madison, New Hampshire . The King Pine ski area is a popular ski destination in the state .
 Not only skiing but also skating, tobogganing, and other sports, are available that evening . Skiing and skating are also available for the evening .
 Weary sportsmen can enjoy spontaneous recreation, probably including a songfest . Weary sportmen can also enjoy a game of fun .
 The fun continues on Saturday with a hockey game from 1-2:30, and entertainment from 3-5. The fun will continue on Saturday .
 Singing groups from MIT, Springfield, Maine, and Harvard have already been engaged .
 A buffet dinner in Commons preceeds the dance and an open house at the Women's Union will follow the dance . An open house will be held at the women's Union .
 Tickets may be bought from any member of the O.C. and will be on sale later in both Rand and Commons . Tickets will be available at Rand, Commons and Rand .
 President Phillips will crown the Queen on the opening night of Carnival . From these women, Judith Mosman, Leslan Jones, Lee Nelson, Marcia Rodgers, Virginia Erskine, Eugenia Wise, and Deborah Peterson .
 Judy Mosman, a Speech major from Natick, Massachusetts, is very active in Robinson Players . She has had parts in many of the plays they have produced .
 She is on the Mirror staff, a member of the Hockey team, and a co-captain of the Cheerleading Squad .
 Marcia Rodgers, a Chemistry major from Glastonbury, Conn., is Secretary-Treasurer of the Lawrance Chemical Society . Rodgers is a member of the society . Rodgers: "I am a great student. I am very proud of my work"
 Ginny Erskine is an English Major at Wellesley College . She is a member of the WAA Board and on the Campus Relations Committee . Ginny is on the Mirror staff .
 She is also very active in Field Hockey, and has the distinction of being the only girl ever chosen to be Bobcat of the Week . She is the only female student to have been named Bobcat Bobcat Coach of the week .
 Debbie Peterson, a math major from Newington, Conn., is a leading member of the Merrimanders . Peterson also belongs to the Jordan Ramsdell Scientific Society . Peterson is also a member of a national science society .
 Bring back pictures and scrapbooks from past years (summer and New Year's pictures included) for your yearbook .
 Joyce Mantyla '65 organized the event, aided by Beth Bassett '66, Pam Young '65 and some student volunteers . The event was held in honor of students who were invited to the event .
 At approximately 4 Friday afternoon, the student drivers appeared like Pied Pipers leading groups of children into the Chase Hall Ballroom .
 All thirty youngsters then participated in games and songs, until that gentleman of Christmas cheer, S Claus, appeared .
 It has left its mark on the consciences of those who were involved in it . It has also left a mark on those involved in the crime .
 It has perplexed many students, disturbed and divided the faculty and alienated some faculty members from the university president . It has angered many students and divided some of the faculty .
 On September 21, at the end of the first week of classes, two pieces in The Colorado Daily gave the controversy its genesis and its shape .
 The editor of Boulder, Colorado, wrote an editorial expressing hope that the university's football team would lose all of its games in the coming season and thereby make it easier for bigtime football to be abandoned in Boulder .
 Carl Mitcham wrote a long, confused essay on Barry Goldwater's book, The Conscience of a Conservative . The second, published as part of a weekly supplement, was an angry young man studying philosophy, on Goldwater .
 The football editorial provoked immediate protests from students, sports fans, alumni, newspaper writers and a Republican candidate for the Board of Regents .
 Goldwater is the victim of forces outside himself — as were the men of Homer's Iliad — not because of fate, but because of the nature of violence . Goldwater was a victim of violence, but not fate, as was forces outside of himself .
 Barry Goldwater is a fool, a mountebank, a murder , no better than a common criminal . Read for what he is — not as an abstraction or depersonalized politician — not an abstraction .
 Even with five apologies, Goldwater would not be appeased . Senator Goldwater was not appeased by the apology .
 Senator came to their aid with a letter to the school president . Just when the affair appeared to be dying down, the Senator wrote to the university president .
 There was talk in the state that Senator Goldwater had gone too far and that the university president had carried the field . There was even talk that the Goldwater went too far .
 On the very day that Newton published his reply to Goldwater, Mitcham wrote a fifty-one-inch letter explaining his earlier article .
 Like his first effort, the letter was largely unheeded when it first appeared . "Like his first attempt, it was largely ignored by the public," he says .
 Newton called the editor to his office the morning after the Faculty Senate meeting and fired him . Newton fired the editor on October 17, the day after the meeting .
 Newton and his supporters at the university take the position that it is wrong to use a newspaper for personal abuse and name-calling, especially when the newspaper is supported by compulsory student fees, as is The Colorado Daily .
 By committing this wrong, they say, Althen proved he was irresponsible and deserved to be fired . Althen is accused of being irresponsible and should have been fired from his job .
 He was also hurting the university by making it the target of public wrath, he said . He said he was hurt by making the university a target for public anger .
 A number of students and faculty members view the Althen case in another light . Althen was convicted of sexual assault on a student in 2007 .
 Althen would have been a better editor if he had not allowed name-calling to creep into his columns . Althen's offense was a relatively minor one .
 Newspapers all over the country have indulged in name-calling since the dawn of American journalism . Campus newspapers have been chronic offenders .
 The campus itself testified to the triviality of Althen's offense by ignoring the Goldwater reference for four days and the Eisenhower reference for six days . Althen: "The campus itself is testimony to the . triviality"
 A member of the Board of Publications, who voted to fire Althen, had earlier told a newspaperman that the ""old futzer"" phrase wasn't worth bothering about . Althen was fired from his job in 2007 .
 Newton fired Althen, the president's critics are convinced, not because the campus thought the editor had sinned, but because the papers and politicians outside of campus thought so . Newton fired the editor because he had been accused of sinning, critics say .
 The president left the verdict to an outside jury, instead of resting the case with the university and accepting the outcome of its procedures and rules . The verdict was left to outside jury .
 The Althen firing — in the view of these students and faculty members — made a mockery of campus due process, they say . The firing of Althen, in these students' view, thus made a . mockery of due process .
 The Board of Publications, set up under university rules to handle such cases, ruled on three separate occasions that Althen should not be fired . Althen has been suspended from the university for three years .
 The regents of the university failed to do the firing, and the faculty refused to recommend it . The firing was a result of the regents failing to do it .
 The campus had rendered a verdict, but the outside world demanded a victim, and Newton threw Althen to the lions . Althen was convicted of sexual assault in 2009 .
 Gary Althen was made the symbol of all their suspicions about the university, and all their grievances against it . People outside the campus had made Althen the symbol for their suspicions of the university .
 They saw his behavior as proof that the university fostered radicalism and irresponsibility . They said it was a sign of radicalism .
 Althen fired as much for the football editorial and another editorial advocating Red China's admission to the UN as for the name-calling . Althen was accused of calling for Red China to be allowed to join the UN .
 Newton did not take official cognizance of these two editorials, but he bowed to the will of those who did . Newton bowed to those who said he did, but not those who didn't want him to .
 He set out to halt ""irresponsibility,"" not to silence unpopular views . But the unpopular views have been muted in the process .
 Department of English has been able to offer a number of National Defense Education Act Fellowships . In addition, the department of English offers a National Defense education Act Fellowship .
 Teaching Assistants do part-time work as teachers or laboratory instructors . They also work as lab instructors or teaching assistants .
 Virginia Polytechnic Institute offers graduate assistantships of $200 to $230 per month beginning September 1963 . Graduate assistantships began at $200 per month starting at $230 .
 Virginia Polytechnic Institute Graduate Studies is located in Blackburg, Virginia . For further information address the Director of Graduate Studies, Virginia Polytech Institute, Virginia.
 This is a good opportunity for those preparing for careers in teaching, social work, or related services . It's a good chance for those who want to be involved in teaching or social work .
 The Resort Office of the Connecticut State Employment Service invites college students to register for summer employment in camps and resorts throughout Connecticut . College students are encouraged to sign up for summer jobs in the state .
 Women interested in spending a summer near home as a camp counselor in a Girl Scout camp should call their nearby Girl Scout office or visit the State Employment Service for information on available openings .
 All students interested in the movie selections for next year should speak to John Sirassburger, Judy Outten, or David Hosford .
 Trust Department will work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind . A gift to your college can result in a larger income for your family .
 Maurice Bickford is the head chef for Fiske Dining hall in Augusta, Maine . Maurice has traveled, learned about people .
 He is tall and reminds one of a sailor who has travelled far and seen many things . He was tall and reminded one of one of the sailors who had travelled far .
 He can tell a story with the ease and humor of Will Rogers and make it so convincing that his listeners can't tell whether it is fact or fiction . He can also tell stories with ease of humor and the ease of storytelling .
 Maurice, as everyone at Rand* calls him, was born in Lewiston at the age of 14 . He obtained his first job as chef and has been at it ever since except for three years in the service .
 Maurice has travelled all over the world learning new recipes and cooking some of his own specialties . Combining work with pleasure, he has travelled around the world to learn new recipes .
 He has worked in every state in the U.S., Cuba, Mexico and Canada . He has also worked in Cuba, Canada and Mexico .
 Maurice states that he has learned more about people and places from travelling than he would ever learn from books . Maurice: "I have learned more from travelling more than I would have learned from books"
 He really doesn't work with seafoods, although he likes to work with lobster newburg . He likes to eat lobster, especialy lobster .
 It is the first institutional cooking he's done since previously he always travelled the hotel circuit .
 He worked as head chef at the DeWitt hotel before coming to Bates . During the summers he's at Cas cade Lodge in Scarborough, Maine, Maine .
 "It grows in strength and irresponsibility as we move closer to that wild night before the busses leave," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 There are either two or three hour exams or papers due before the fifteenth, or else there is no work to be done at all . Students are expected to spend up to three hours a day studying .
 We see this spirit in the menial, sometimes abortive, attempts to decorate our lives with Christmas trimmings . We see it in the spirit of the Christmas spirit in our lives .
 The handmade decorations and artificial trees, cut down or stolen at night, fill our corners and lives . They fill us corners and our lives, and fill us with whatever is available .
 Mr Bard studied at Pratt Institute and worked for ten years under Vivian Akers of Norway, Maine . Mr Bard is a native of Lewiston .
 He is an accomplished musician on drums . He is specializing in progressive jazz and rock and roll .
 Bart specializes in pointillism which he combines with a free style of free style working mainly in oils . Bart is known for his pointillistism and free style .
 Bard believes his favorite compositions are landscapes which he feels best represent his love of Maine and New England . Bard's favorite landscapes are landscapes that he believes best represent New England and Maine .
 Included in his collection at the studio are pointillistic landscapes, Jan Vermeer reproduction of an ""Officer and Laughing Girl"" and semi-abstract representative paintings of outer space .
 Headquarters for DIAMONDS are located in Lisbon, Maine, USA .
 Vermeer's architectonic designs of color, form, and light and poised quietness are admirable qualities which he feels are close to his artistic taste . Bard be lieves VerMeer's architects are said to be his favorite architects .
 Bard stresses simplicity and color with the characteristic shimmering effect of pointillism . Pointillism consists of painting in short strokes with different ones of one color . Bard stressed simplicity with color .
 The world of nature can be brought most alive on a flat canvas with pointillism, he says . However, he feels the world can be best brought alive by pointillist .
 In several paintings of buildings found in Lewiston, Bard displays careful use of shading and with subdued tones suggesting desolation and loneliness, he humanizes his buildings . In several of his paintings, Bard uses careful shading to humanize his buildings.
 Frames of his paintings on outer space were designed by him in steel reminding the viewer that steel rocketships have brought man into space . Frames of the paintings were designed in steel to remind the viewer of steel rocketship .
 Bates students and faculty are welcome to make arrangements with him or to visit his studio . Bates students are invited to visit him and make arrangements to make his arrangements .
 Classes are usually semi private, ranging from two to eight pupils, depending on what arrangements have been made .
 Wherever there is one person and a guitar there is a potential folksinger . There is also a possible ""hootenanny"", the jam session of the folk cult .
 1962 is 1962, the year of the purist, the professional, the amateur, you and me . This is 1962 . It is 1962. It's 1962. The purist and the amateur .
 There is no one clear cut definition of folk music, for it is not a homogeneous group . Folk music is not an easy way to define folk music . It's not a straight cut definition for folk music.
 All express the emotions of the originator about some universal truth or some event, through fable or historical fact . Yet all, express the emotion of the originsator about the truth .
 Most of the songs termed ""folk"" were created before the radio and the television brought the ""popular"" music blaring into each home . The songs are called "folk" and "popular" by popular music .
 As they moved across the face of an expanding country, they took their refrains with them as memories of earlier times . As they move across the . face of the expanding . country, the . people took their old habits with them .
 Their children and their children's children listened and learned, adapting the lyrics to the events of their own lives . They listened to the lyrics, adapting them to their own life experiences .
 With each generation, the basic tune received new interpretations and meanings . The tune was written by the first generation of Americans .
 A half remembered sequence of notes developed into a new strain . Snatches of lyric were frantic feeling and their seesaw lives quicken with senseless quibbling .
 The men visit Lou's Place more frequently . The women take long hikes downtown to find the right decorations and to shop .
 The women get their trees and arrange their Christmas parties — and what Christmas parties they are . The women's Christmas parties are held in honor of their friends and family members .
 The Batesy Christmas season is one of the most frenzied aspects of the holiday season .
 When we know what Christmas is for us, we see that it is necessary. And when we know . We see that Christmas is . necessary. We see it as necessary .
 It is a period of Christmas work and catching up for the first time since September . Of being home and finding out who's married or pregnant; of displaying your growth; of conflict; and of deciding if you'll come back .
 The Bates Student refuses to become involved in personality conflicts . The "HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE of ALL TYPES k ■tZ FOUR BATES STUDENT, 1962 .
 We reserve the right to refuse copy which is blatantly personal and derogatory . We also reserve the rights to refuse copies of this article .
 We shall refuse to print or send back for revision letters which merely malign character. Specifically we shall either refuse or send them back for . revision letters that merely . malign . character .
 Each officer and teacher on this campus exposes himself to both praise and condemnation by the very nature of his position . "Each officer and . teacher on campus exposes . himself to . both praise or condemnation"
 The Student will print letters praising and attacking individuals fulfilling a function . The Student has published letters praising individuals fulfilling function .
 Personalities, however, secondary to the individual and his office, are immune . Personalities are secondary to individual and office, but are immune to individual personalities .
 The Student bares its pages to ideas, issues, offices, and individuals expounding and fulfilling them, but not personalities . The Student is dedicated to ideas and issues, not personalities, but to personalities .
 Only a third of Bates students indicated that they would favor a wider selection of books in the space now occupied by the bookstore . The two organizations reached this decision because only one third of the Bates students said they would prefer a wider range of books .
 Without support of the student body it is not only useless, but pointless, for the Committee to ask for changes and improvements . Without support, the Committee will not be able to make changes or improvements .
 The situation involves problems, however, which are far more serious than lack of support . The situation is not the only reason for the government's failure to provide support .
 When an adjective contradicts the definition and essence of a noun, it cannot be used to describe that noun . Adjective can be used only to describe a noun in a word .
 Two such words are ""apathetic students,"" for a student cannot be apathetic, uncaring, uninterested. For example, "apathetic" students cannot be "uninterested" Students cannot be 'apathetic' or 'uninterested' students .
 Students supporting the Committee must face an even more distressing problem . Students must also face the problem of apathy and support for the Committee .
 Students must fight for an education and intellectual facilities . They must also fight for the student body, and the administration. They must fight .
 If the administration seeks to emphasize the preciousness of a college education, they have succeeded . If the purpose of the majority of the student body is to ridicule and annihilate intellectual curiosity they have failed miserably . Instead of being educated, their desire to learn meets repression and resentment .
 Perhaps next year the students will have another opportunity to make themselves heard, perhaps they will by that time have realized the value of such an opportunity . The students will be able to make their voices heard again next year .
 Campus bookstore has added two new bookracks and has increased its stock of books . Campus bookstore added two book racks and has significantly increased its book stock . The Campus bookstore will be closed soon .
 While everyone recognizes that it would be desirable to have a real bookstore, some of the books and academic supplies needed can be obtained at the bookstore now .
 "We urge students to familiarize themselves with the additional facilities," says school officials . "We are happy to provide additional facilities for students," says principal .
 We probably aren't going to be here when the college finally does remedy the bookstore situation . Let's face facts: We probably won't be here for the college bookstore situation until it's over .
 There has been some justifiable concern recently expressed by alumni and friends of the College about the policies of the Echo . Alumni and friends have expressed concern about the Echo's policies .
 The concern seems to involve the question of whether the impressions people off campus may receive by reading the Echo correspond to reality . The concern is that people off-campus may receive the impressions they get by reading it .
 Some people are concerned that those whose only present contact with Colby is through the newspaper are going to get the impression that the school is falling apart . Colby students are concerned about the school's future .
 The Public Relations Department does an excellent job of ""selling"" Colby . Colby College is definitely moving forward, and most people concerned with the College know that it is moving forward .
 It is perhaps unavoidable that progress isn't achieved at a more rapid pace, which is a reason for the impression the Echo often gives of selling the school short .
 We believe that our compaints are indicative of the fact that Colby is getting better, and we would like to take this opportunity to express our confidence in Colby's future . Colby will be back in action at the end of the season .
 I tell you the story of a man I once knew Who, it seems, ate his fill until quite overgrew .
 His appetite failed him after that devouration and he died of starvation . And as a result he died from starvation .
 "If you're fed to excess you will surely digress To a state scarcely worth all your trouble," says author . "I'm not afraid to eat too much. If I'm fed too much, I'm sure you'll digress."
 It is wrong to prolong a once tempting joy In the hopes that its goodness will double. In the hope of doubling its goodness, it's wrong to keep it alive .
 You can take just so much at one given time, And then you will cease to expand. You can't take so much of what you can take .
 Go only so long and then take a rest, Don't cram it all in one session. Don't take too much time to do so long. Go only once you're there, don't cram all of your sessions .
 Recall please the state of that ill-fated man . And assimilate just this one lesson. Recall please, please, that illfated .
 Ninety-one days of steady duration is too long a stretch of hard concentration, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In the tiny village of Sahuri near Barauni Junction, on the north bank of the river Ganges, in the state of Bihar, India . Priscilla Clark '66 Singh Views America As Favored In The World .
 Fifteen acres of land were theirs, on which they cultivated wheat, corn, rice, chilly, potatoes, gram, and tobacco . The family was able to grow their own crops, including wheat and corn .
 When the youngest son went to college there was great excitement; not only was he the first one in the family but the first in his village and district as well . He was also the first student to go to college and was the first to do so .
 Bhagwat Singh first knew that he wanted to come to America when he was in his village . Singh was born in a village on the banks of the Ganges on the side of the river Ganges .
 Our Visiting Professor on campus, Mr Singh comes to us with a long and intriguing history of how he has come to know the United States . Mr Singh is a visiting professor at the University of Washington .
 After two years of teaching, he went into journalism, giving him the opportunity to write . He says he has more chance for self-expression, self-fulfillment .
 He worked for the Hindusthan Standard, an English daily, and contributed articles to many other monthly and weekly publications . He also contributed articles for many other publications .
 These were his political years in which he was concerned mostly with international affairs . These were the years when he was in charge of foreign affairs .
 At the age of 17, when I participated in the national movement I was imprisoned by the British. At the . age of seventeen, when he participated in . the . national movement, he said. "At the age . of seventeen I was arrested by the . British. British.
 "From second grade I wanted to know about George Washington and his land," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says he's been fascinated by George Washington since childhood .
 At the embassy he was involved with ""the whole idea of humanity"", international relations, culture, art, history, and current problems . He was also involved with international relations and culture .
 There he did special study of American Civilization and Culture in preparation for a book .
 Mr Singh has already readied a manuscript being readied for the press — The History oj Carnegie Renovation Gives Geology Dept. the opportunity to learn more about the history of the Carnegie University .
 With the addition to the Carnegie Science Building, the Geology Department has been given adequate facilities for operation . Facilities And Stature .
 Farnsworth estimated that the physical plant has been increased by three times its previous size . Farnsworth estimates that the plant has increased by 3 times its size. Farnsworth said that the size of the plant was three times the size .
 He stressed the importance of this additional work space, saying that it has provided a""tremendous psychological boost to the morale and prestige of all concerned with the department .
 Farnsworth: "but now we have left our shabby surroundings and we are here for business. Farnsworth, ""but now . Now we have ... left shabby . surroundings," Farnsworth said . Farnsworth added: "But now we . have left the shabby. surroundings
 "We no longer have a feeling of being just tolerated, but we are rather a full-fledged department with adequate space in which to operate. We no longer feel like we are just tolerated."
 The new facilities provide an expanded departmental library and a room used specifically for maps . The new facility provides an expanded library and room used for maps.
 Farnsworth explained that convenient mineral display cases are now placed where only scattered samples existed before . Farnsworth explains that convenient display cases were placed where previously only scattered mineral samples existed . The mineral display case is now available in the U.S.
 He emphasized that he has good student assistants in the department, but it will be two or three years before everything is completely straightened out . He emphasized the fact that he had good student assistant assistants .
 Among the new facilities are two individual research rooms for seniors working on their theses, and mineral, chemical, and microscopic testing laboratories .
 Farnsworth expressed a strong feeling that the expanded facilities will draw a great many more students into geology as a major field of study . Farnsworth said he hopes to see more geology students interested in the field .
 The expanded geology department is another example of the desire on the part of Bates College to move forward and offer its students a higher quality of education than ever before . the Indian Press 1857-1961.
 The year 1960 brought a new opportunity to Mr Singh when he was asked to serve as advisor for the Indian delegation to the Committee on International Law at the UN .
 Mr Singh says of this experience, "How fortunate it was both for the world and the United States to meet on the soil of America. Always observing and learning"
 "When I saw thousands of Americans coming every day to see the U.N., it gave me inspiration," she says . "I'm not afraid to be afraid," she adds .
 The very people who rejected the League of Nations have taken the United Nations into their hearts . What a strange thing it is that the very people rejected the . League of . Nations .
 It is very important that the mightiest and noblest country in the Western Hemisphere should take upon itself the mission of which the prophet Isaiah dreamed, says President Obama .
 He shall judge between the nations and shall decide for many peoples; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks . He will judge between nations .
 Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. Nation shall . Neither shall . learn war no more. Neither will they learn . War . No nation shall . lift up . sword against . nation .
 Nobody Knows My Name is a collection of essays written within the span of the last six years . The book is the product of a genuine writer who has seen much, and has endured many slings and arrows .
 Most of the time he writes in an uncluttered and personal manner, almost conversational manner . He writes in a personal manner .
 Desire can be acted out there; over this fence, behind that tree, in the darkness, there; and no one will see, no one . No one will ever know. Desire can't be ignored . Desire can also be acted .
 We seem to be living in an illusion, and the illusion becomes reality, and that becomes a nightmare, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "That's a nightmare," says Sutter. "We seem to have an illusion that becomes reality"
 His concern is not with ""the masses,"" but the people, the individuals in search of identity, he says . He says his concern is with the people in search for identity .
 The second part of the book contains essays on Andre Gide, Ingmar Bergman, Richard Wright, and Norman Mailer . The book also includes essays on Gide and Bergman and Wright .
 They are tributes to real artists, who go beyond ""the pablumclogged cries"" of Jack Kerouac . They go beyond "pablum clogged cries" of Jack, Kerouach, Keruac, they say .
 As the military effort becomes the principle national activity, so the defense department and the Pentagon take a dominant position in the center of the government . The Pentagon is the most powerful military force in the country .
 The defense department employs the most people in the country . It also controls industrial and educational institutions as well as political groups . The department also controls political and industrial groups .
 Congress receives half a million phone calls a year from members of Congress . Most of the calls ask for favors or complain about the lack of them . Congress is the subject of many phone calls to the White House .
 The defense department is in close collaboration with those independent countries which are concerned with the development and production of the modern military monsters . The department is working closely with those .
 Such cooperation can expect from the government each year a billion dollars — half the armament budget of Great Britain . Such cooperation is expected to be worth $1 billion a year .
 Such companies cannot allow themselves to lose contact with the government . As a result, such companies cannot . allow themselves . to lose touch with the . government .
 It's not always clear whether the decision for production, programming and technical development comes front of the government or the companies .
 This ambiguous and complex relationship between the defense department and its industries has led to great internal conflicts and rivalries which waste both time and money . This ambiguous relationship between defense departments and industries is leading to many internal conflicts .
 The belief in a limited military budget of the Eisenhower administration has been dropped . The new trend has been to spend more and more for defense, since the belief in limited military budgets has been removed .
 Brodie of the Bond Corporation stated, ""The more efficient our work in the area of total war is, the greater possibility for conventional warfare" Brodie said . Brodie added that the more efficient work in total war was, the more likely conventional warfare .
 This program has been managed mainly by financing the scientific departments of universities, most of whom are in far too much need of money to give any conditions .
 Most of these universities in the establishment of research programs and the nomination of personnel follow the directions of the defense department . The defense department is responsible for the creation of the universities .
 A great majority of scientists coming out of universities eventually end up by research or teaching in the military circuit . A great many of the scientists end up with research, teaching or research in military .
 Scientists are pleased at this influx of credit which has permitted an increase in the number of people entering scientific fields in universities . Scientists are very pleased at the increase in student credit .
 Scientists are not at all pleased to be brought under the wings of the defense department . However, scientists are critical of the arms race and say it is an arms race .
 Hans Berthe, for example, has been threatened with a congressional investigation for his position on this issue . Berthe says he's threatened with an investigation by Congress .
 U.S. people ask for a continuous increase in military expenditure and security, he says . However, it is the American people in general who ask for an increase in defense spending and security .
 Excessive propaganda and ignorance has led fear to far outgrow the real proportion of the problem . Excessive fear and ignorance have led fear far outgrown into fear, the author says .
 "No scientists' criticism will have any effect until this hysteria can be controlled and curbed," says Colby Echo editor .
 A central concern of this Seminar was to gain a better understanding of these Asian countries and their people . The Seminar is aimed at gaining a greater understanding of the Asian countries .
 In each place visited local WUS and YWCA leaders had arranged sessions with leaders in the Government, education, religion and the arts .
 The group spent four weeks in Bangalore, India, where an outstanding program of lecture-discussions had been arranged .
 In iddition there were visits in private homes and trips to villages, welfare centers, civic and political organizations, religious shrines, etc. Visits in idditions were visits to private homes .
 Seminar participants returned from the summer's experience with a new understanding of and appreciation for the people of Asia as they confront almost insurmountable problems . Participants returned with a renewed consciousness of the underlying unity of mankind everywhere .
 The song a Kentucky Mountaineer sings as ""Barbara Allen"" may be different in melody and words from a song by the same title rendered on the beach of Carmel, California . For this reason BED ARP'S MAINE's only DRIVE-IN PH
 This, then, is what folksongs are, a gift from previous generations to us of the present . This is then the gift of folksongs to us .
 Out of their personal lives ■ and the public events of their time, our ancestors, American and International, drew meaningful stories and lessons in song . Our ancestors, U.S. and . International, draw meaningful stories .
 We now call these ""folk"" songs, and sing them to express our similar emotions and to recall a past we never knew, but which still affects us today . The songs are now called "folk" songs .
 This is a low priority filler type of column and it gets only what space is left over, if any . You see, this is a lot of space left over . It's a low-priority filler column and gets only the space left .
 Carol Sue Stutzman '66, Pasadena, Calif. will be heading for home at Xmas . Carol Sue '66 will be returning to Pasadena, California, for the first time .
 After the Second World War, the U.S. was the only country in the position to help the countries devastated by the war . After the war, the United States was only country to help devastated countries .
 The U.S. was destined to take over the burden of the unfortunate ones. That is why I say that the United States was destined for the burden . The United States will take over responsibility for the unfortunate, he says .
 One comes away from a talk with Mr Singh strangely in awe of the spirit of the man, says Mr Singh . Mr Singh's spirit is said to be that of a man who has been in awe .
 Pictured above is an example of some of the spirit, long a stranger to this campus, which is beginning to creep into the academic-stifled minds of the studentry . Bowdoin Here Tomorrow Night The Garnet Line will be on campus tomorrow .
 A little water and sunlight provided by spontaniety and imagination will develop this seedling into a giant . Don't let it die — a little water .
 The incarnations of such spirit must be well thought-out, however, and must be constructive . The reincarnations must be thought-through and constructive .
 Tomorrow night the Blue-Bloods, long a doormat of the basketball portion of the state series wars, invade Alumni Gymnasium . The Blue-bloods will be the first time they've played in a state series .
 A new coach has molded a winning unit from what every one picked to be an utter lack of material . The team has scheduled games so they don't conflict with the popular hockey games in Brunswick, thereby developing a spectator interest on the campus .
 With most of the exams out of the way and only two days until vacation, tomorrow night would seemingly be a good time to really come out and support a team truly deserving of it .
 The Bobcats have done well as a result of hustle, hustle and an intense desire to win . Not overbounding with talent, the Bobcats are not overbounded with talent .
 Slovenskimen open up their home campaign in the cage tonight . Slovenian team will be looking to win their first home match of the season .
 Crowd response is^as much important in track as it is in basketball, perhaps even more so . Crowd response in track events is ^ as much important as it was in basketball .
 It's easy for an individual to ease up a little when behind but when he knows there are people up in the balcony rooting for him it's easy to put out that extra effort that is often the margin of victory . When an individual is behind in the game, it's easier to
 Although losing the Civil War they have since become the forerunners in many things, especially athletics . The Civil War ended in defeat .
 Bates cousins have taken their cue and have become the campus leader in the institution of coed athletics . The Bates cousins are the school's first co-ed athletics program .
 Men from South will make history when they don their hopefully clean gymnasium uniforms tomorrow . They will participate in a volleyball mach with the WOMEN of Milliken House .
 Southern relations of our campus Rebels are staunch segregationists . Their northern counterparts have spent four years on this Coeducational campus and have finally made a move .
 The Bobcats bounced back from their heartbreaking loss to St. Louis . Bobcats bounce back from the heartbreaking loss against St. Francis .
 The two game streak firmly established Coach Ullom's charges as a club to be reckoned with during this campaign . The team must be ranked a top contender for the State Series Championship . The two-game winning streak has established the club as a strong contender .
 Ullom started the ""Bobcats"" against pre-season* favorite Colby before a full house, anxious to see the squad that fared so well against the powerful St. St. Louis .
 Fred Stevens hit on a twelve-foot jumper to put the 'Cats ahead only to see John Stevens of Colby drop in two from the foul line to knot the score . Beaudry Hits Forward Fred Stevens .
 Ken Stone pumped in four long jump shots in a row as the visitors took a 10-7 lead . Colby's forward Ken Stone got hot and pumped in a long jump shot in the first half .
 The 'Cats fought back led by Don Beaudry, who hit three of four field goal attempts . Thorn Freeman, controlling both backboards with his outstanding rebounding, rebounded .
 John Lawlor put Bates ahead 5149 with 3:50 remaining . Bates had a basket for basket until Lawlor scored a basket in the final minutes .
 Stone, fouled with 2:15 left, dropped in two from the line to knot the score once again . The five-minute overtime period lasted five minutes . Stone's two free-scoring free-falls set up overtime .
 Cummings took over in the overtime, putting the 'Cats ahead by four on a clutch jump shot and a brilliant drive . Cummings led the Cats to a four-point lead .
 The 'Cats went into a freeze in an attempt to keep possession but Lawlor was fouled with :26 left . Lawlor fouled in the dying moments of the game .
 John missed the first one but got the second to give the 'Cats their margin of victory . John missed one of the chances but missed the other one .
 Colby got off one last shot but big Thorn Freeman came down with the rebound as time ran out . Colby had one final shot but it was not enough time to score .
 Glanz scored the lone basket for the 'Cats . The visitors found the range and jumped to a quick 6-2 lead .
 Jim Sands, Mike Shea and George Sakellis led the visitors to a nine-point lead at the start of the second half . The visitors unleashed a fast-breaking attack in the first half .
 Two jump shots by Stevens and one each from Freeman and Cummings pulled Bates back into an eight-point lead with 3:15 left . Two foul shots by Cummings, plus two foul shots from Stevens and Freeman pull Bates back to an eight point lead .
 Most of the student body at Bates does not know that the College Club Trophy Gallery exists or have a vague idea that it is located somewhere in the athletic building . Tufts Fine Collection Housed In LittleVisited Gym Gallery .
 College Club Project The College Club is a club to which outstanding seniors are elected each year . Outstanding seniors are chosen each year to represent the club .
 Dean Harry Rowe, former Dean of Faculty, and now Professor Emeritus has spent many long hours collecting souvenirs and momentos from alumni . Professor Rowe has collected souvenirs from alumni and spent many hours collecting them .
 In one section of the trophy room is a collection of footballs that are symbolic of every win or tie that Bates has gained in the state series . Bates has won or lost every game or tie in the series .
 In the years that Bates wins the championship or ties for it, the footballs are lettered in gold . The footballs will be lettered with gold if Bates wins or ties .
 At the inception of football at Bates every game won was represented by a football but this soon became impractical from the standpoint of room . At the start of the football season at Bates, the school used to play with a football . The school's first football team won a football in the 1960
 There are pictures of each athletic team dating from antiquity to the present day . Pictures of each team from antiquity date back to ancient times .
 Lux's arrival in 1949 it has been the policy to take pictures of all team members . Lux has been a member of the team since 1949 .
 There are many famous individuals and teams represented in the collection . The collection is a collection of photographs of famous people .
 There are pictures of the game, pre-game ceremonies, and the bowl itself . There are also pictures from the game .
 In one corner of the football gallery is the retired jersey of Bob Martin, captain of the 1956 state series team . Bob Martin's jersey is retired from the state series .
 The first letter sweater given to a Bates varsity athlete is enshrined in the Trophy room . It is also included in an inscription to the captain of the 1890 football team with an appropriate inscription .
 One of the more outstanding displays is the Buccer Olympic panel . Former Olympian Represented represented on the panel .
 Buccer, an outstanding miler and two miler in the 1920's, went from Bates to the Olympics to gain world fame . Buccer was an outstanding runner and two-miler .
 The display is also impressive because of the official Olympic banner which a Bates alumni contributed to the trophy room . The display also includes an official Olympics banner .
 The most recent addition to the collection is the trophy gained for a second place finish in last year's NCAA small college baseball tournament .
 The Downeast Consolation championship in 1960-61 was the Downeast championship . The trophy was symbolic of the DownEast Consolation Championship . The championship was held in New York City in 1964 .
 These trophies will reside each year at the college of the eigning champion in the respecive sports . The trophies will be awarded to the winner of each year's sports .
 There will be four pnlicas of these trophies that will remain in the permanent possession of the different colleges with their championship years engraved on them . The trophies will be kept in the permanently possession of different colleges .
 The lobby of the gym has been suggested but again the problem of space arises . The lobby has also been suggested for the gym in the gym .
 Bowdoin has a very similar arrangement as one enters their athletic building . Bowdoins have a similar arrangement at the entrance of their sports facilities .
 This serves notice to the upcoming opponents that once again there is a track powerhouse up in Batesland . It serves notice that this serves notice .
 An old-fashioned razor presented I the past athletic glory. nessed by the fact that there are only three seniors on this club and that means good things in seasons to come. This is a young team as wit wit an old fashioned razor .
 Tom Bowditch and Dave Johnson jump together in high jumping team-mates' first two places . The high jumping combination was enough to put a smile on any coach's face .
 In the shot put, freshman Bill Davis placed third . Davis is a freshman at the University of Columbia .
 Bob Kramer is said to be having trouble adjusting to his new fiberglass pole . Look for him to be up around 12 feet before this season is over . Bob Kramer, last year's fine performer in this year's event, is struggling to adjust .
 All-State halfback Paul Planchon won in the 50 yd. dash in the good time of 5.2 seconds .
 Larry Smith pulled up lame in one of Tufts' trial heats . Tufts lost its best sprinter when Larry Smith pulls up lame .
 Mike Gregus won the mile in 4:38 as teammate Eric Silverberg was third . Gregus: "I'm not going to be surprised, but I'm not surprised"
 Steady two-miler Finn Wilhelmson won his event in 10:12 and with Silverberg was second . Silverberg finished second in the race .
 Bates hurdler Al Harvie wins in meet record time of 5.2 seconds . Bates' two fine hurdlers split up their chores evenly . Bates hurdlers win in 5.3 seconds .
 In the lows, it was Harvie who followed LaVallee as the co-capt. won in 5.2 seconds .
 The team was made up of Bill LaVallee, Garret Benniwig, Paul Planchon and Jon Ford . The team won't be able to compete at the highest level of competition .
 Some of the outstanding performances were turned in by Pete Peterson in the 600, Tom Hiller in the pole vault, Dave Harkness in the high hurdles and the broad jump . Wayne Pangburn in the hammer and shot, Bob Sherman in hammer, Fulenwider in the
 In winning the two mile, Trufant beat all the Tufts varsity performers . In the two-mile race, he also beat Tufts' all varsity runners .
 Beisswanger hit some nice outside shots and accounted for 18 of the Bobcats' total points . The Bobcats scored 18 of their points in the game .
 The game got off to a slow and confused start with both teams having their difficulties in handling the ball and scoring . Both teams struggled to control the ball in the first half of the game .
 Center Joe Matzkin looked good on the rebounds and put in some pretty hooks to score 12 for the Bobcats . The Bobcats scored 12 in the first half .
 Guards Bob Mischler, 8 point,s and Bob Johnson, 4 points, and forward Paul Savello, 11 points also started for the 'Cats .
 The entire 13-man squad, 11 of which are freshmen, saw action against Stephens . The entire squad, including 11 freshmen, took part in the game .
 Secondstringer Russ Reilly played hard and added 9 points to the tally . Secondstringers Russ Reilly also played hard .
 Ernie Metinier, playing forward, was high scorer for the losers with 13 points . Ernie Metinier scored 13 points for the team .
 Mischler and Beisswanger led the team with 16 and 13 points respectively . Beissweanger and Miswweer scored 13 points for the team .
 Coach Leasey said that neither of the past two games was a real test of the team's ability . The coach said that the two games were not real tests for the team .
 ""Chick"" feels he has two good platoons which could be as good as last year's 11 and 4 squad . The team as a whole could be better than last season's 11-4 squad .
 Take full advantage of WRJR programming to publicize the events of your group . Use this weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of events in the news .
 Cheney and Rand Rand can boast of winning three games and losing none . As expected though, both were present at their games in full force .
 Mitchell, Whit, and Wilson can distinguish themselves thus far, with winning seasons . Among the other dorms, Mitchell and Whit are Mitchell and Wilson .
 Frye won their first game 14-5 in their first match of the season . Frye also won their second match 14-6 in the first game . Fryes won the first 14-4 in the second game .
 Chase quickly took the lead in the second game as freshman Janet McEachern was able to win eight points from Frye on her serve . Frye won eight points in the first game .
 Rand found that their victory against Page II wasn't as easy as their previous victories . On Tuesday, the Rand team beat Page II 2-1 .
 Sally Switzer won eleven points with her quite effective serve . The second one seemed somewhat monopolized by Switzer, as she won eleven .
 Cheney girls in Cheney had no trouble at all in achieving two wins this week . Girls in Cheney achieved two wins in two weeks .
 Cheney's game against Hacker was won mostly on serves . Hacker's team consisted of quite a few girls who had had very little volleyball experience . Cheney's team won the game mostly on serve .
 Judy Warren, Jean Dawson, and Bobbi Reid are getting the bulk of Cheney's serving points . Judy Warren and Jean Dawson are among those getting the most of the points .
 Page I and Chase had to forfeit to Wilson and Whit, respectively, as they could not find six girls to represent each of their dorms . Page I, Chase and Wilson couldn't come up with six girls for each dorm .
 Thorn's two-game total of twenty-four points was not, in a whole, a true indicator of his total value to the Garnet five . Thorn scored 24 points in two games for the Nets .
 His rebounding and defensive play marked his maturity as a complete basketball player . He was a strong rebounder and defensive player in the NBA .
 The Ibftrarawmrafl Sceirne volleyball league has produced three apparent champions of the respective leagues . Wilson Frye Milliken, Chase Hacker and Chase Hacker have all won the title .
 J.B. has clinched the number one position by virtue of its victory over Roger Bill . Teams from Roger Bill and West lead respectively in the B and C leagues .
 Two teams will meet in B-C playoff game, with the winner playing J.B. for the intramural championship today . The winner of the playoff game will play J.C. in today's championship .
 It must be pointed out that these teams are in first place on the basis of games to date, so that conceivably, either position held by Roger Bill or West could be lost .
 J.B and Roger Bill meet to decide the A league championship . Roger Bill won the title in the final game of the season .
 Roger Bill downed South in two games, and beat Off Campus by the same margin . In other A league games, Roger Bill defeated South and Off Campus .
 For J.B., Bob Segersten did a fine job of lung exercise, while Ron Taylor's defensive work was widely applauded . Ron Taylor was widely praised for his defensive work in the match .
 Roger Bill is confident of maintaining the undefeated lead in the B league . The team from Roger Bill are confident they will maintain the lead .
 These boys downed their main opponent for the lead, West, in two out of three games . The boys beat their main opponents for the title in two of the three games against West .
 J.B. team, while waiting for North to show, was joined by Hank Stred of the faculty to even the sides, and beat the faculty for the faculty's first loss in two out of three games . The faculty lost for the first time in two games .
 In the C league, J.B. lost its first game and first place lead to West in two out of three games . In the first game of the three games, the team lost two of three .
 West followed up with a 2-1 win over their rivals from East . West beat their rivals East 2-0 in the Premier League on Saturday .
 A team from South will gamely accept the challenge of Milliken House and meet them on the Rand Hall gym floor at 4:15 on Thursday . The South A team will meet the A team at Rand Hall on Thursday afternoon .
 Reports indicate that the girls are demanding a mixed game and that the boys aren't allowed to spike, making for a more even game . Reports say the girls want to play a mixed-match, and the boys are not allowed to .
 Friday, January 4, Hickories will present the Warren Miller movie, ""Lei's Go Skiing,"" which is in color . The Warren Miller film will be shown in color at Hickories .
 Scholar dollars travel farther with SHERATON HOTELS STUDENTFACULTY DISCOUNTS . Save on the going prices of going places at Sheraton Hotels .
 Professor of Music D Robert Smith will present an organ recital on the Chapel organ on Tuesday evening, January 29 at 8 at 8 . Program selection contains classical and contemporary works designed to display the many attributes and aspects of the chapel organ .
 The works of Sebastian Bach, Buxtehude, and other masters of the 18th century provide a marked contrast to the vivid contemporary compositions of Marcel Dupre and Jean Langlais .
 Henry Purcell's Sonata For Trumpet was recently discovered in the Library of England's York Minister . It reflects the great heights reached in the art of trumpet playing in the Baroque period .
 The trumpet soloist, James Hureau '66 is also a rather recent discovery on the campus . Hureau is a recent addition to the University of Cambridge .
 Hureau has participated in a variety of musical endeavors . Hureau is a native of Stoneham, Mass., and a member of the band .
 He continues his musical life in the Bates Choral Society, and in the Concert and Marching Bands, as well as frequent appearances with Bob Cassaday .
 During the Second World War, Professor Smith gave weekly recitals on the outdoor organ in Balboa Park, San Diego for patients of the naval hospital .
 The Pacific Island of Espiritu Santo was his next assignment, and there, the organ by contrast was a portable harmonium . The organ is a portable instrument .
 Following the war, he returned to Puget Sound, coming to Bates as Assistant Professor of Music in 1950 . He returned to Bates in 1950 and was assistant professor at Bates .
 His musical studies have continued at the Peabody Conservatory, and at the famous Organ Institute at Methuen, Mass., as well as two European periods of study .
 The composer of the concluding selection on Mr Smith's recital . The second period was a Sabbatical for the academic year 19601961 where he studied under Dutch recitalist Piet Kee in Amsterdam, the Netherlands .
 Time will be announced Chapel Service 1:455:00 Snow Games on Mt. Rink 1:005:00 Entertainment in Gym 6:006:45 Carnival Banquet in Commons 8:00-11:45 Dance in Gym — Semi-formal 11:30-12:
 An attractive twenty-one-year-old senior was crowned Queen of the 1963 Bates College Winter Carnival last night . The event was held at Bates College in 1963 .
 Miss Virginia Hastings Erskine, attended by six members of her royal court, will reign over the four-day activities . Miss Virginia will be joined by members of the royal court and her royal family .
 The coronation, opening the 43rd Bates Winter Carnival, was held on the shores of Lake Andrews on the campus of the Bates campus .
 The Queen and her court were seated on a snow dias to watch an ice show put on by student members of the Bates Outing Club . Charles F Phillips, Bates President, crowned Queen Virginia .
 Winter Carnival traditionally marks the completion of midyear examinations and represents a brief holiday before the beginning of the second semester . Winter Carnival is the culmination of mid-year examinations .
 Young men and women with farm or rural backgrounds are urgency needed by the Peace Corps to replace the unit in East Pakistan whose tour of duty expires in August .
 Experiment, which trained the unit currently in Pakistan, will also train the replacement group . The Experiment is currently training the unit in Pakistan .
 Volunteers will live with Pakistani co-workers, and provide day-to-day supervision of village projects . Volunteers will stay in Pakistan, supervise and supervise the projects .
 The projects will be planned cooperatively by Pakistani officials, United Nations technical personnel, and the Peace Corps Volunteers . The Peace Corps volunteers will work on the projects .
 This year's Winter's at Bowdoin College will take place on the weekend of February 15, 16 and 17 . The Winter's will be held at the college on February 15-16 .
 The evening features the dual appearance of Bo Diddley and Ted Herbert . The evening is set to be broadcast at 8 p.m. ET .
 Ted will start out the semi-formal dance with his enduring popular music . Ted will be joined by the likes of Bob Dylan and Elle Corsie .
 The evening will then continue to continue with more relaxing music from Ted Herbert . Ted Herbert will play a relaxing version of the classic classic music .
 Norman Woolworth will start out Saturday for students and their guests . Woolworth is a favorite of students and family members . Norman will be available to students and guests .
 The exhibition will be held in the Walker Art Museum from 11:00m. to 1:00 m.m. The exhibition is being held at the museum in Walker, London .
 Advocates Steps To Increase Economic Growth . Coffee will be provided by the StuPhillips Coffee .
 Charles F Phillips, president of Bates College, speaks to the Washington, D C, Life Underwriters Association . Phillips addresses the Washington D.C. Life Underwriter Association in Washington .
 President Phillips pointed to the sluggishness of our economy in recent years as the fact which has made it clear to the leaders of both political parties that high taxes do slow up our progress toward higher standards of living for all .
 The Carnival Court of 1963 The Queen and members of her court are Judy Mosman, Lee Nelson, Les Jones, Debbie Petersen, Ginny Erskine . The Queen's court is shown in a photo of the Queen in 1963 .
 Religious leaders will visit campus February 6 and 7 for climax of Religious Emphasis Week . Representatives of Christian, Jewish, Mormon, Buddhist, and Hindu faiths will be on campus . The week culminates February 6-7 .
 CA Committee is planning speeches, discussions, coffee hours, and informal talks for the first Religious Emphasis Week in five years . Sandy Prohl and her CA Committee are planning speeches and discussions .
 Meredith Handspicker, a Bates graduate and Instructor at Andover Newton, will be the first speaker when he addresses the Chapel Assembly on February 6th at 9:20 .
 Mr Handspicker will be on the campus from Wednesday the 6th until Saturday morning the 9th . He will be available to students at hours to be announced for those four days .
 His address will be followed at 8:00m. by an informal coffee hour in Chase Hall .
 The oriental religions are to be featured Thursday evening, February 7th . The events will take place at 7pm .
 From 9:00 until 10:30 those interested will divide into three discussion groups in the Women's Union to talk over the three religions presented up to that point . Those interested will split into three groups to discuss the religions presented .
 Friday morning at nine the C A. members will present a Chapel program, the content of which has not yet been decided upon . The content of the program is yet to be announced .
 Meredith Handspicker will give the keynote address in the Chapel at 7:00 p.m. Meredith handspicker gives the keynote speech in Chapel .
 You will have an opportunity to expand your own view of religion and the various ways it is practiced . This February 6, 7, and 8 will provide a chance for you to expound your views .
 All are welcome to join in any or all of the events of Religious Emphasis Week . This is an opportunity to learn and to enjoy beyond the confines of Hathorn or Hedge, and all .
 Peace Corps minority and underprivileged groups will be most useful in the Peace Corps . Peace Corps minorities and those willing to live in relatively primitive surroundings will be useful .
 Volunteers selected for this project will be expected to do everything possible to ""work themselves out of a job" by training Pakistanis to do the work themselves . Volunteers selected will be trained to help Pakistanis learn how to do their jobs .
 They will return to the U.S. about March 15 for a ten-week training program . The Experiment will provide the program at its training center in Vermont .
 Volunteers who successfully complete the U.S. training program will fly to Dacca, East Pakistan, for ten weeks of on-the-job training . After ten days home leave in early June, the Volunteers will receive their replacement assignments . Volunteers will then be sent back to the U
 In addition to village development workers, there is a need for s i x vocational agriculturists, three civil engineers, three mechanical engineers and three public health nurses .
 Application forms for all positions in the replacement unit to Pakistan may be obtained from Dr. Dr. Ghaffar Hussain .
 To reflect productivity gains in lower prices, rather than in higher dollar wages, will improve our competitive position in world markets, says the government .
 To eliminate price support programs for farm products, we would reduce the cost of living for our citizens . We would also cut the costs of raw materials for industry . We need to eliminate the support programs to reduce our costs of living .
 To work for lower manufacturing and transportation costs through the elimination of featherbedding practices, the company hopes to reduce manufacturing costs .
 To give greater freedom to such regulated industries as railroads and airlines so that they can make adjustments to today's technological and market requirements . To give . greater freedom . to give greater . freedom to . such regulated . industries such . regulated industries such as . railroads, airlines . can
 To keep total expenditures of the Federal government within income, by minimizing new programs and curtailing some of those upon which we have already embarked . The goal is to keep total spending within income .
 Many of our allies are now in a position to carry a larger share of the cost of the Free World's military budget and of aid to underdeveloped nations .
 The weekend comes to a close with a series of fraternity house parties for the rest of the evening . The weekend will officially come to an end .
 His plays, particularly The Visit, tend to engender aromas of Brecht and Ionesco, with generous influencings of Shaw, Wilder, and Shaw, among others .
 Durren-* maintains that he has described people, not marionettes, as an action and not an allegory . The Visit is set to be released in April 2015 .
 The play is readily understandable, for there are no obscure symbols or allusions so subtle that it would take an expert to figure them out . Despite the several levels of insight (and by this I mean ideas and situations with various intentions)
 "Perhaps even now you can see the frightening possibilities of what might happen," says the author .
 The result of this powerful and jarring mixture of grisly humor and real horror is tragedy bordering on classical sublimity . The result is a powerful mixture of humor and horror .
 It is not quite sublime in the sense of the Medea, simply beand it's absurd . It's absurd. It is simply simply absurd .
 It would only have been entirely meaningful in the mythological kingdom of some ancient polis . It would have only been a mythological state in some ancient kingdom .
 To talk of the unhappiest man n the Bates Student seems trangely out of place . It follows hat the . unhappest man will lave to be sought among the unlappy individuals of memory .
 My tiny olumn is surrounded by all sorts )f Carnival Queens and other ich-like social joyousnesses .
 Iere I stand, the ambassador or the kingdom of sighs, garanded in some roses fallen from he Carnival Queen's festooned hawl . Iere, the queen of the kingdom sighs. Iere .
 My beat will be evrywhere in the kingdom of emories — memories which lave been and have yet to be . My beat (to e purposely trite) will be . evry where I will beat, but my beat will never be .
 Perhaps I shall perform an idean chican'ery or two with our minds — if you will allot e your time once a week. Perhaps I will perform a . idean . chicanery of our minds . Perhaps I . shall perform a idean 'chicanery or
 Or erhaps I shall make Malcolmanc pontifications in most scholarand stuffy manner. I shall be making Malcolmansc pontions in a most scholarian manner. Perhaps I will be making such pontions as a scholar .
 Or I may be presumptuous nd interview a professor and, my most reportorial splendierousness, report my findings . I may interview a university professor and report his findings .
 I am searching for a ommunication with another huan being; and this column will ' be a vehicle for this search. But I shall be honest (foi nee, yet half again) and adit that I am looking for a . ommundication with
 I hall consciously probe my emoions and intellect so you nay observe my limitations and ualifications . I hall conscious probe my . emoionions and . intellect so that you . observe my . limitations .
 Like any other olumnist, I shall merely state iy ideas, but I ask readers o keep an eye out . I seek more Han just assent or dissent — I t'ok understanding. Like any others, I will merely state Iy ideas .
 "Of pettiness nd triviality sing the words, ut the melody is a great symhony of beauty" "The melody is great symphony of beauty," says author .
 To measure a ife in coffee spoons and uneaten peaches with less fuzz than a woman's arm is to be damned . To measure ife is to measure a coffee spoon and peaches are to be be damned.
 It is not our job to discuss the merits of this derivation, nor to dream, but rather to look to the present . We are not here to discuss merits of the derivation but to look at the present, and the future .
 Mr Walsh and Dr. Dr. Walsh say it's easy, amidst the dances and dances and varials, to find a reason to celebrate .
 We just happened to be over in the Alumni gymnasium today, where seniors were taking their Cultch exam . The seniors were in the gym at the time .
 We went up to the balcony and took a few pictures of the long rows of heads, then we went down to the lobby . We went to the hotel and took photos of the heads .
 A few people were coming out, and some of them looked pale, others frightened, and many had definite expressions written across their faces . Some of the people looked pale and frightened, but others looked frightened .
 One typical senior, making sure he was within ear shot of d.g., said "typical" and huffed off . Another senior said he didn't want to get in touch with d.e.g. and huff off .
 Mr Walsh hid very inconveniently under the table . Niehaus tried to get Mr Walsh, who hid under a table, too . Mr Walsh then hid under table .
 We have a picture of a lovely elbow. ious activities to forget the work which has gone into such a large weekend production .
 The Directors of this year's Carnival are Karen ""Bambi"" Brown '65, a French major from Worcester, Mass., and Paul Ketchum '64 from Woods Hole, Mass. The Directors are Karen "Bambie"" Brown "65," a French Major from Worcester
 Together, they set up the various committees, and set up deadlines for all decisions . Together, the committees, they determine deadlines for decisions .
 Each of them goes to one half of the committee meetings and then meet with Dean Boyce and Mr Ross, who represent the administration .
 Paul said Winter Carnivals have grown considerably at Bates over the past years . Paul said that Carnival has grown considerably in recent years .
 The budget for carnival in 1950 was approximately $400 . Last year's budget for last year was $1,890 .
 Karen and Paul agreed that a greater degree of cooperation would increase planning efficiency . Karen said she and Paul would like to see the carnivals in the future .
 Planning for next year's Carnival will begin immediately after the conclusion of this Carnival . Next year's carnival will be held in New York City .
 In regard to entertainment for this weekend, Karen and Paul explained that such groups as Ian and Sylvia, a folk group, and the Dukes of Dixieland were initially considered . The Dukes were also considered .
 It was felt that Dixieland would probably not offer the general appeal desired, and that it would be wise to stay away from folk music . However, it was thought that it was probably not popular with general appeal .
 Karen will perform in the ice show, directed by Karen, in which she will perform . The ice show will be part of the program this year . Karen will also perform at the event .
 A column of farewell often times slips into the realm of sentamentality, but this is often necessarily so . This is the last column of the column, but it's not necessarily so. It's a good time to say goodbye to the greats and greats .
 I have tried my best to present to my readers interesting and informative sports pages . I've tried to present an interesting and entertaining sports page . I'm sorry for the mistakes made in this article .
 I pride myself in having introduced more WAA news than any of my predecessors . I've introduced more news than anyone else, including myself .
 I want to thank all those who helped me through the past two years . Russ Henderson, Web Harrison, Dick Love and Nick Basbanes fell the brunt of the news and feature writing . Phil Tamis, Don Delmore, Keith Bowden, Ted Smith and Ted Smith, Ted
 I would like to thank all the photographers at the Sun-Journal and the Auburn Free Press for their cooperation . The Bates College Athletic Department also did a fine job as Student photographers . I would also like to give a shout out to the Bates College athletes .
 Perhaps the most controversial act I will perform as Sports Editor is to name my successors . I will name my successor in the coming weeks .
 For the first time in the history of the paper there will be co-sports editors, a move which I feel will improve the quality of the newspaper . The move will be the first in the paper's history, with co-sport editors taking over from Sportsmail .
 The sports editorship is a time-consuming and thankless job . Having the duties of the editor spread between two men should make for a better paper, says the editor .
 Russ Henderson and Nick Basbanes have been named as his successors . Russ Henderson has been selected as his successor by the BBC . He has been in charge of the BBC since 2007 .
 Two sophomores have demonstrated a great interest and knowledge of sports . On these criteria I have selected them to follow me. These two sophomoreys have demonstrated they are interested in sports .
 I wish these juniors-to-be will do an excellent job in the year to come . I wish them luck and am sure they will do the best job .
 The old record of three hours and 15 minutes for the 30-odd mile run from Augusta to Lewiston with the torch for the opening of Winter Carnival was shattered Thursday afternoon .
 A team composed of Skip Butler, Basil Richardson, Doug White, Jeff Starr, Pete Heyl, John Meyn, Dave Williams, Ed Belden, Bill Dunham and Bill Dunham, and Lloyd Bunten jogged the course in three hours and 8 minutes to break the old mark
 Staff Photographer Steve Wardwell of the Sun-Journal took first place in the annual M.I.A. football photo contest for his picture of Bill Davis and a Colby player going for a loose ball while sliding through the mud at Garcelon Field .
 The Baldwin, N. Y., resident is another example of the depth of this year's Garnet squad as a fine effort placed him ahead of the favorite in the race .
 It is customary at the time of year when the change in the editorship of the Sports Department of the Bates Student has arrived to devote several columns of well-deserved space to the retiring editor .
 For the past four years the sporting events of Garnet teams that have not been observed by Al ""Kibe"" Marden have been few and far between . Marden has been in charge of the Garnet team for four years .
 The Student profited greatly from the informed and interesting observations of Editor Marden's observations . Editor Mardard's observations of the Editor's observations made The Student .
 Al Marden will certainly be missed when the fall of 1963 ushers in the renewal of Bates athletic action . Marden was the harbinger of school support for Bobcat athletic teams, and will be missed .
 Kibe spent two years at WMassachusetts Regional High School . Basketball and track were added to a repertoire of sports that includes bike racing to billiards .
 Al left W.Massachusetts after his sophomore year and entered the prep school, Lawrence Academy, located in Groton, Massachusetts . Al left the W. Massachusetts school after his junior year .
 St. Lawrence Academy's lacrosse team Al Marden won their prep school league title . The team was selected to the All -New England team . Al Mardan was selected for the All-New England lacrosse championship .
 Al's teammate and now a Bates junior, Jerry Scott, was also selected to this All-New England prep school All-Star team . Al's teammates Al and Jerry Scott were both selected to the New England Prep School All-Stars .
 Al Marden's older brother Parker Marden matriculated to our Lewiston, Maine, campus . Parker's brother Al was a member of the Marden family at Lewiston University .
 A Bates home was found by Al in the southern end of Smith Hall and also two equally sportsminded roommates in footballers Ed Rucci and Howie ""Red"" Vandersea .
 Al became a member of the sports staff of the Student in his freshman year . Al also found time to participate in the track program of the Bates College Athletic Department in his first two years at Bates .
 In the spring of 1961 Al succeeded his brother Parker Marden as the Sports Editor of the Bates Student . Al succeeded Parker in 1961 as the sports editor of the school .
 In doing so he established a Marden Dynasty that was to lead Bates sports reporting and coverage from 1959-1963 . He established the Marden dynasty that led Bates reporting from 1959 to 1963 .
 Al has been on 'he Yearbook staff, the Intramural Men's Sports Council, the Senior Rally Committee, and in the cast of the Winter Carnival Ice Show, 1962 . In addition to his previously mentioned activities, he has also been on the Intamural Men’
 Garnet Garnet has nominated two of the greatest team efforts by its athletic squads . The Garnet men's basketball team has been nominated for two of their greatest efforts .
 This past fall I was fortunate enough to witness a football game that saw a gallant, fired up Bobcat eleven run roughshod over a tough, favored Northeastern squad . The Bobcat team won the game over Northeastern .
 For the past two summers Al has been employed in the career field of his choice, that of journalism . Al has worked in journalism for two summers in his chosen career .
 In the newspaper business on the job experience is a valuable asset to a professional approach to journalism . In the paper's world, experience is an important part of the profession .
 Al received this award on the basis of his work on the Bates Student and his interest in a career in the field of journalism . Al was awarded the award for the work he has done on Bates Student .
 During the summer months of 1962 Al was employed closer to home by the newspaper serving Worcester and its surrounding suburbs . Al worked for the newspaper in the summer of 1962 .
 Al hopes to be able to concentrate his profession in the sports field of journalism on his graduation from Bates College .
 Al would also like to try his hand in the realm of freelance writing as the opportunity presents itself .
 Members of Al's own sports department nominate Al Marden as Bobcat of the Week . Marden was Student Sports Editor 1961-1963 . Kibe is a Bates sports supporter number one .
 Jim, who holds sway in the confines of the Alumni Gymnasium, is the bossman on the men's side of the physical education plant . Jim is also the boss man on the gymnasium .
 The Alumni Gym, scene of many social activities, is Jim's special project . Jim's Gym is a special project for the University of Wisconsin .
 This year Jim has celebrated his 83rd birthday, but his work day still longer than many, sometimes night work and always a busy Saturday . This year he celebrated his birthday with a full day of work, including night work .
 Jim's work life has been varied and interesting to him . For 13 years he was a member of the Lewiston Fire Department . He was a firefighter for 13 years .
 Jim, as he is commonly called by frequenters to his domain in the Athletic Department, first began working here at Bates in 1929 . He is known for his work in the athletic department .
 He was employed as college gardener, in charge of all the flowers and shrubbery, on our Lewiston campus . He was responsible for all of the flowers, shrubs and shrubs .
 The outdoor work certainly agreed with Jim for he is still on the job, but in another capacity . Jim is still working at the helm of his own company, which is based in New Jersey .
 Jim's age forced his retirement from the gardening job two years ago . He moved to the familiar confines of Alumni Gymnasium to continue his faithful service . Jim's retirement was forced by the age of two years .
 I'm sure as anyone knows who has tried, that even the fabled Gatecrasher would have his problems getting by Mr Lawton . I'm not sure if anyone has tried to get by him, but he did .
 During alumni and commencement weekends Jim is just like an old grad . During the alumni and graduation weekends he is like a new grad .
 We of the Student would also like to add ours, Mr James Lawton, for your many years of service to the Bates campus . Mr Lawton will be remembered for his service to Bates .
 Rob Players Present French Film Friday . "A Nous, la Libert*" is a bizarre but joyfully lunatic study of two ex-convicts .
 Director Ren* Clair has utilized the camera for emotional expression, keeping dialogue to a lean minimum . The film is set in New York City, New York .
 Music and song replace words in this satiric tale . Scarcely a speech is more than two sentences, as music replaces words .
 The film is a combination of fantasy and realism — somewhat like a weird dream — farcial, ironic, ironic and sometimes mystifying . The film was released in December .
 The central figures, Louis and Emile, make careful plans to escape from prison, but only Louis gets away . Louis is the only person to get away .
 Louis, a shrewd individual, becomes, under an assumed name, managing director of a phonograph factory . The success of the factory is based on ideas Louis got from the prison factory . Louis becomes a manager of the phonograph .
 Emile is released and finds a job in the phonograph factory, unaware that his prison pal is managing the plant . Louis soon hears of Emile, but he doesn't want to recognize him . Louis is a whimsical, dreamy sort of fellow .
 The two old friends have a ""high"" old time. Finally, however, he takes Emile into confidence and he takes him into confidence . Emile and Emile have a 'high' old time .
 Many sequences follow about their activities and the abortive romanee between Emile and a pretty co-worker . The film is set in Paris, France, at the end of the year .
 "The tale is lucid, but the manipulation of incidents is sometimes another matter," the author says . "The story is lucid but it's not always clear when it comes to manipulation," he says .
 M Clair's enthusiasm for the action of the picture causes an occasional lack of clarity . Characters brought on with more concern for the effect of the episode than for continuity .
 St. Clair never misses an opportunity for a satirical stab or a touch of irony . The book is set to be released in September .
 The skillfully developed comparison of the prison and the factory presents the numbing regimentation of the workshop in which theoretically free men perform the monotonous and unvarying function which binds them as inevitably as their convict fellows to the mechanical world .
 The prison is changed into an industrial enterprise; and the monotonous effects continue, with the former prisoners now laborers .
 As the film ends, Louis, having been threatened with blackmail, abandons the business . Louis is threatened by blackmail, having to abandon his business . The film ends with Louis having to be forced to leave the film .
 Boston Museum Treasures From For the first time, selections from the richest royal tomb of antiquity can be seen in the Western Hemisphere . Boston Museum treasures from the rich royal tomb will be shown in the region .
 From February 1 to March 3 the Boston Museum of Fine Arts will present more than thirty pieces from the tomb of the boy King Tutankhamun . More than 30 pieces will be displayed at the museum in Boston .
 Tutankhamun reigned for nine years, from about 1351 to 1343 B C, and died before reaching the age of 20 . He reigned from around 1351 B C to about 1343 A C .
 His tomb, with its more than 2,000 treasures, was discovered virtually intact in 1922 . His tomb was discovered in 1922, with his tomb virtually intact . The tomb is believed to contain 2,200 treasures .
 The opening of the royal mausoleum, which had been undisturbed for more than thirty centuries, gave the modern world its first glimpse of ancient Egyptian art and crafsmanship .
 It has been possible to see these treasures only in the Egyptian Museum of Cairo . It is now only possible to visit these treasures in Egypt .
 A selection of Tutankhamun's treasures have been allowed to leave Egypt and tour North and South America . Nubian monuments are threatened with inundation by the Aswan Dam . The government of the United Arab Republic has permitted a selection of the treasures to go on tour .
 The exhibit included rings, amulets, pectorals, and collars of sheet gold and feyance taken from the king's body . Royal King Tut's Tomb orite hunting dagger, fashioned of gold and found enclosed in the mummy's linen wrappings .
 Also on display at the Museum are collections of Egyptian art, considered the finest outside of Cairo . The Museum has been in Egypt for over 40 years .
 Questions should be directed to Kenneth Woodbury '63, Howard Blum '63 or Professor Quimby '18 . Any questions should be answered to Kenneth . Woodbury .
 Olegna Fuschi will appear tonight in the Lewiston High School Auditorium at 8:15 . This concert is this year's third performance in the Concert-Lecture Series .
 Students will be admitted at the righthand door on presentation of their I D. cards . Students will also be allowed into the school at the end of the day .
 Mr Lapointe will give a short* T~ talk on some of the problems that are planned during which any tutors may encounter, with a problems encountered in tutor-answer session .
 Students who wish to tutor will be asked to submit schedules of the time they will have free to tutor . At this meeting, those students will need to submit a schedule of free time .
 Students who did not sign up during the first semester will be asked to give some additional information . Students who didn't sign up will also be required to provide additional information about the program .
 Tutoring will take place in Lewiston High School anytime from 2:00 until 5:00 weekday afternoons . Tutoring is available at 2-to-5 hours a day, anytime between 2 and 5pm .
 Each student will tutor twice a week for a period of one to one and one-half hours, depending upon the need of the student being tutored . The tutoring sessions will take place between 1 and 1 and one and 1/1 hours .
 A tutor will handle from one to three students in a session, according to the difficulty of the subject matter and the problems of the students who are being tutored . A tutor can handle between one and three students per session .
 The subject matter to be tutored will include most high school subjects . Students will be able to learn from the tutoring program .
 A student may tutor any subject in which he feels competent, although it is preferable that one tutor in his major . A student can tutor a subject in any subject he feels competence .
 After the onset of the program one or two discussion sessions with Mr Lapointe at the high school will be held at the school .
 Lewiston High students who are being tutored will have periodical interviews with him . Lewiston high students will also have periodicals interviews with the teacher .
 The students who will be tutored will be those who have shown a definite interest in the program and desire to be . tutored . The students will be shown how much of the program will cost .
 If tutor finds that he cannot be at school on a day when he is scheduled to tutor, he should make arrangements for substitution or cancellation . A student whose name will be announced at the meeting should be substituted .
 The project should go into effect immediately . After a meeting Friday and the setting up of a tutoring schedule, the project will begin .
 Miss Libbey reports that first semester grades should be available next Tuesday . She has international performances to her credit .
 Two seasons ago she went to Poland for a short stay, but attracted so much attention that she was offered a recital at the famed Warsaw Philharmonia . She was offered an engagement by the state music agency for a tour of Polish cities .
 Her mother was a concert pianist and her father was an operatic coach . Her father held 80 U.S. patents on inventions . Olegna was an opera singer and composer .
 Miss Fuschi became adept in both of her parents' fields . She still treasures a tape recording made when she was four years old on which she sings ""Vissi d'arte,"" the bravura aria from ""Tosca" and accompanied herself on the piano
 The direction of Miss Fuschi's career, however, soon became evident and the piano won over singing . The future of her singing career became evident in the early years of her career .
 Until she was twelve years old, Miss Fuschi continued to study exclusively with her mother .
 During her teens, Miss Fuschi studied as a starlet at the 20th Century Fox studios, but successive acting teachers there died shortly after she came under their tutelage .
 She eventually decided that it would be better for her morale if she gave up all thought of a dramatic career .
 Miss Fuschi also won the Juilliard Scholarships, the Josef Lhevinne Memorial Award and the Concert Artists Guild Town Hall Award . During the years with Madame Lhevne, she won the school's 1958 concerto competition .
 As Durrenmatt is to the modern German theatre, so is Hesse to modern German novel . Hesse is to be to modern theatre, and so is to modern novel, as is to theatre .
 Two of his novels, The Journey to the East and Siddhartha, are the impressions of a European who went to the east and incorporated Eastern culture . Two of these novels are The Journey To the East, Siddharth .
 The style of this book reflects the author's internal dialogue with himself . The style is simple, uncluttered, and honest, reflecting the author .
 Hesse was strongly influenced by The Little Flowers of St. St. Mary's The Journey . The Journey was written by Hesse himself .
 Brother Leo, the Franciscan, is very close to the servant Leo of the League, which is a brotherhood of men who pursue their individual destinies, and are bonded together by a common Truth .
 The trial of Joseph K is alluded to, as the narrator, ""Self-accuser H."" is put on trial as a consequence of his infidelity and lack of perception and understanding . The trial is alluded .
 Hesse deals with the despair of H H. Hesse . The Judge concludes that it is not the actual sins that are bad, but that fact that H is unaware of these sins . Hesse concludes that H H.'s sins are not his faults, but his .
 It is when the mutable and arbitrary are perceived by the self as universal and distinct truth, and, like Joseph K. K., when the individual comes to depend on outside authority and assistance to provide direction and strength, he has committed a sin which is not aware of, but of
 The picture is one of despair, and H H. H. is melted away into unreality, into nonexistence . The picture was one of the despairing moments of H H.'s life .
 He does not have wisdom, even at the end of his trial — like Joseph K. K., he can only see what is happening to him, and that only dimly . Joseph K.'s trial is not over .
 In Siddhartha, Hesse presents his problem again, but with a different man . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray Ray Ray Rayne in October .
 It is the Brahmin's son, the god-like Siddhartha who pursues the journey, and the difference is that he is already in the East . The Brahmin is already there, but he is not seeking the journey .
 In his spiral path towards awakening and sublime consciousness Siddhartha goes through many self-imposed trials because of his selfaccusation . In his path to awakening he goes through several trials because he is self-confessed .
 The dominant theme that Hesse seems to pose again is the transitory world of the senses is illusion and that reality is the immutable unity which is in all things — the Truth of Om .
 It is the understanding that everything has in the germ of the divine, everything is an end. It is an understanding that . everything has . in the germs of the . divine . Everything has in an end, everything must end .
 There is an Eastern paradox of freedom and fate: Siddhartha sees that he has an irrevocable destiny, but also has infinite freedom within that destiny . Siddharththth sees he has irrevocably destiny but also freedom within it, says the author .
 His awareness is a revelation arising out of a continuous process of progression and regression . His awareness comes from a process of progress and regression, he says .
 Out of the realization that he is completely alone, that the subjective understanding and wisdom of the Buddha can not be communicated to another subject such as himself, that ""opinions mean nothing"", that he must see the wisdom within him, — out of these he achieves his own Nirvana
 Al Lussier, Jr. supervises 32 people in Wilmington, Delaware, business office . Unit manager in Wilmington business office of The Diamond State Telephone Company . Lusser, Jr., Jr. supervised 32 people .
 Al's unit collects over a million dollars in monthly bills and is an integral part of a team serving 47,000 customers . The unit collects more than $1 million monthly bills .
 On one of his previous assignments he did an outstanding job of reorganizing two other business offices serving 95,000 customers . On another previous assignment, he reorganized two other businesses offices .
 Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America . Al Lussier and other young men like him helped bring the best communications service to America .
 Fuschi made a concert tour of Brazil in the summer of 1957 . Guiomar Novaes helped her to develop a greater sense of nuance to add to her technique .
 Miss Fuschi has made a reputation as a brilliant orchestral soloist under such coveted auspices as the Boston Pops, Arthur Fiedler conducting, Hollywood Bowl and Grant Park .
 Saturday, February 2 Basketball, Northeastern, here Chase Hall Dance, 8-11:45 Sunday, February 3 Outing Club Ski Trip, Sugarloaf, 7-7m.
 MASS LECTURE SCHEDULE Friday. Friday. February 6 Meredith Handspicker, Instructor at Andover Newton, Keynote address for Religious Emphasis Week .
 This student newspaper, although depending heavily on cigarette advertising for revenue, was convinced of the destruction smoking does to the heart, lungs, and other organs .
 Despite the protestations of the cigarette manufacturers that the evidence against smoking is not conclusive, we differ . We differ. Despite the protests of the manufacturers, the evidence is still not conclusive .
 The British Government's report on the harmfulness of smoking offers substantial evidence .
 It distorts the truth, suggests a flimsy system of causality, and attempts to overwhelm the senses . The film is set to be released on Friday at 8pm on BBC One .
 However bodacious and sultry a wench is Julie London, she, or any reasonable facsimile, cannot be had for a mere pack of cigarettes . Julie London is a sizzling, sulting actress who has a body of her own .
 However much cigarettes stimulate, we seriously question whether they measurably assist and improve one's thinking . We seriously question if they are able to help and improve our thinking, we say .
 Bates Student and other Bates publications rely on cigarette advertising for its financial vigor . The Bates Student relies heavily on cigarette ads to keep afloat .
 A newspaper is effective in a context of freedom; its editorial policy must remain independent . A newspaper must remain free in order to be effective in its context .
 On page four of this issue we are not merely presenting an ad; we abet the cause of the cigarette manufacturers and the concomitant results . On page 4, this issue is not merely . presenting an . ad .
 The Outing Club should now evaluate the purpose and success of Winter Carnival . Winter Carnival should be evaluated as a success .
 Carnival provides an end-of-the-month outlet for pent-up emotions and frustrations . Ostensibly the Carnival provides a end of the month outlet for those emotions .
 Much money and work (primarily by members of the Outing Club) goes into a Carnival weekend . Much of the work goes into the weekend .
 Carnival should provide social entertainment for all the students, last weekend failed to do this . Carnival should be a social event for all students, says the author .
 The Carnival is for the students' benefit, and since the majority of the students do not benefit, why not channel the money and work into another weekend or a number of weekends . Why not channeling the money into more weekends or more weekends?
 Instead of a single ""big"" weekend, a series of smaller ones might be planned . Instead of one ""big" weekend, there might be smaller ones planned instead .
 Either of these two possibilities, or any other practical suggestion, should be considered, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Merely because Carnival is a tradition does not justify its continued existence, says CNN.com editor John Sutter .
 We praise the Outing Club for their work; we cannot condemn those students who did not support it . We cannot condemn students who didn't support it.
 Entered as second-clasH matter at the Lewiaton Post Office Jan., 191S, under the act of Mar., 1819 . Entered as a second-ClasH Matter at the . Lewiatons Post Office .
 Hume removed Hume removed the must but somehow not the inevitability of the whole thing . Hume removed it from the must-be-there-must but somehow .
 "I choose despair arbitrarily — one can only pattern one of one's life arbitrarily," he says . "I chose despair arbitrarily. I choose despair randomly," he writes . "One can only patterns one of his life arbitrarily"
 Homo normalis calls me untouchable and moves away from me on the street . Homo normali calls me 'untouchable' and 'mouche normalis' and "homo normalis"
 You cannot be intimate for you seek only love when you .o bare yourself. You cannot .e bare yourself . You seek . only love for you . to bare yourself, says the author .
 I worked on the Pharoah's tomb — but not with the rest of them, for I was an Egyptian . I beat the Jews and kicked them and forced them to so hate that they chose God as their salvation, he says . He says .
 Katharine Gibbs Memorial Scholarships Full tuition for one year plus $500 cash grant . Open to senior women interested in business careers as assistants .
 In your system are the checks and balances which eliminate what you most want . And in your system, you have to be careful not to get what you want .
 In telling you that I had a system which in reality is non-existent, I imply a much different system wherein lies my insanity . But in telling you you had a . system which . in reality, I implied a much . different system, he writes .
 Old Man: "My real insanity lies in my heavy inability to express the relationship which exists therein" Then is your sickness in your gamehead or in your need to play the game?
 Chrysallis: Adolescens are too comfortable and have no real wants . They shuffle to the banquet and gobble without relish or conscious endeavor . Has this been progres progres?
 In the United States, and indeed the world, few universities rank as educational institutions of outstanding achievement and influence . Make the most of your summer at the University of Wisconsin .
 I am interested in the 1963 summer program at Madison, so d Please send me your 1963 bulletins on summer study, including course catalogs .
 Garnet College Garnet wins College One Mile Relay event of Boston Athletic Association Meet . Bates College relay team shows way to runners of four other northeastern colleges . Garnet soared home first in the race .
 Slovenskimen showed an overall depth which promises improved times under better conditions . Slovenia finished first in a classy five college field in the Slovenian college .
 The one mile relay team consists of four men, each of whom runs a quarter mile before passing the baton to the runner that succeeds him . Each of the men is a member of the relay team .
 The Bobcat in their corresponding running sequence features junior Paul Williams as leadoff man, senior Captain Bill LaVallee, junior Jon Ford, and sophomore anchorman Gerrit Binneweg . The run sequence features senior Paul Williams, senior captain Bill LaVallee, and junior
 Paul made his move going into the last turn and moved out strongly to a three-yard lead . Paul drove down the last straightaway for his pass to Captain Bill LaVallee . Paul made a pass to captain Bill Lavallee in the final straightaway .
 Bates captain opened a five yard lead but there was a mixup on the handoff to Jon Ford and Jon bumped a closing Brandeis runner . Bates captain opens a five-yard lead but was bumped off by a closing runner .
 After one lap he had opened a lead of 8 to 10"" yards for the Bates team . Jon quickly recovered and quickly recovered . He quickly recovered to lead the team .
 Gerrit Binneweg carried the Garnet hopes for the last quarter mile . The flashy sophomore soared home with a three-yard lead over Joe Goldschmidt of Brandeis .
 The winning of three minutes and thirty-one seconds was one that Coach Walt Slovenski felt sure could be bettered by his runner . Coach Slovenski said he felt sure that his runner could bettered his runner's record .
 Carnival Hockey, J B.-Parker 11, g Smith-Roger Williams 3 . Combined forces outplayed and defeated opponents from Smith -Roger .
 This game coupled keen desire with rough, clean play, kept the carnival spectators in a constant state of excitement and appreciation for the skills of the contestants .
 Chelsea defeated Manchester United 2-0 in their Premier League clash . The result was a narrow margin of victory for the Premier League champions . The victory was the result of a wide margin of defeat for Chelsea .
 South's John Curtiss would be broken up by defenders after a breathtaking and skillful move deep into enemy ice . Time and again, for example, a great effort by South would often be broken-up by defenders . South won the tournament in a 2-1 victory over North Carolina
 Smith-Roger Bill goalie Ted Davis was absent for the first two minutes of play . The contest started at 1 with the game starting at 1 .
 J B. goalie Ed Gill capably and graciously alternated at both goals until the belated arrival of Davis .
 George Beebe scored the first goal of the game for J.B.'s J.C. J. B.'s . Beebe was assisted by Paul Bertocci for the first time .
 Pete Graves scored the final two goals of the first period for J.B.-Parker . The rest of the period was tough and rugged, with the skillful Pete Graves scoring the other goals .
 His first goal came on a double assist from Bertocci and Beebe, and the second from Mawhinney . The first goal was scored on a set piece in the first half .
 Charlie Davis hit home first for South-Roger Bill on a fine unassisted shot at the 8:48 mark . John Curtiss, unassisted and shot from just over the blue line, scored a pretty score for the team .
 John Lund, Jim Brown and Pete Graves played well in the second period . The defensive strength of John Lund and Jim Brown came to light in the first period .
 In the 15 minute second period the J.B.-Parker offensive strength soared with their scoring a total of seven goals . The team scored seven goals in the 15-minute period .
 Their defense allowed few shots to reach their goalie Ed Gill, who turned in some nice ones when the situation so occurred . Ed Gill was not called upon to make many saves .
 The goal tending of Ted Davis, though the score would seem to indicate otherwise, was highly admirable .
 Davis made some outstanding saves in the net . Davis was constantly shot at during the game .
 "Tare s de gustibus you never thought you'd get from any filter cigarette," says Russ Wagonfeld .
 Freshman Bertocci, with three assists, scored after a pass from Pete Graves on a face off . Freshman scored the goal in the first half .
 Paul showed fine skating ability, putting away another goal from Olsen, giving him high scorer honors with two goals and three assists . Olsen also scored two goals for the team .
 Jimmy Brown, to here playing a defensive game, scored unassisted on a fine breakaway at 5:50. Jimmy Brown was playing for the Blues in the first half .
 Olsen and Beebe scored the last two goals of the period . Mawhinney, the latter unassisted, made it 3-1 in the second half of the second period .
 The abbreviated five minute final period was marked by no goalie in the J.B.-Parker net . No goalie was in the net for the final period .
 Even with a vacant net, the losers could score only one goal, that being a spectacular unassisted breakaway shot by Curtiss . The depth of their squad can be illustrated by the fact that even with the vacant net there were only one goals scored by the losers .
 The play of Bertocci and Curtiss was considered by all to be nothing less than spectacular, as they displayed dexterity extending to all phases of the game . The play was seen by all as something more than spectacular .
 The boys from J.B.-Parker had just too much depth . It must be pointed out that boh teams displayed ample skill, however .
 Their constant power plays and strong defense were too much for the opposition . The result was a 2-1 victory for the Red Devils .
 Paul Bertocci led the hockey unit of Parker and John Bertram Halls to an 11-3 win over the combine from Smith and Roger Williams Halls in the annual Winter Carnival game Saturday .
 Paul Paul scored two goals and collected three assists in the 2-1 victory . Paul also scored three goals in the victory .
 Wellesley, Mass., native left little doubt in the minds of observers concerning his skating and stickhandling ability . Stu ienf was selected as Bobcat of the Week .
 A Danforth Fellow, he was appointed an instructor in theology at Andover Newton Theological School in 1961 . He was appointed a Danforth fellow in 1961 and is now an instructor at the school .
 Handspicker has participated in a wide variety of church-related projects . He has been teaching and participating in a variety of teaching and other church projects .
 When an Interseminary Triennial Conference was held at Oberlin, for example, he served on the planning committee . Later, he later served as secretary of the New England Inter Seminary Movement . He served on planning committee of the Oberlin conference .
 Handspicker is married to the former Diane West '54 r and they have three children together . He is also married to Diane West, who he dated in '54 .
 Handspicker was active in debating, served as an assistant in Religion and Cultural Heritage, and did honors work in his senior year . He was also active in religion and cultural heritage .
 Four years after his graduation, he led the chapel service at the Back to Bates weekend of 1958 . Four years later, four years later he led a chapel service .
 From now until Sunday, speakers, discussions, and coffee hours will be devoted to an examination of religion in a world perspective . The event will be held on Sunday .
 The acid test, somewhat like the well-known proof of puddings, is in the hearing . On finely printed programs, most recitals look most impressive, yet the acid test is in hearing .
 Professor Smith superbly fulfilled our highest expectations . From the authoritaive interpretation of the opening work of Buxtehude, the Prelude, Fugue, and Chaconne in C, to the florid rhythmic flashes of the concluding Dupre Prelude and Fugue in
 All those interested in volunteer work at Pineland or at Central Maine General Hospital are urged to meet at 6:30.
 Anyone who is interested in the program should contact Pam Young in Page Hall, Page Hall . Anyone who can't attend the meeting should call Pam Young .
 John Stanley's Voluntary VIII in D Minor was not notably well received by the audience . The audience did not particularly enjoy the performance .
 The work was written for 18th century English organs which at that time lacked pedals . It was designed to serve as ""filler music"" before the start of church services . It ended just a trifle too perfunctorily for the tastes of this listener .
 It was a rather lean entry by contrast . Sandwiched in between Buxtehude and Bach .
 Many organists unwittingly perform this selection in Biblical fashion, not letting the right hand know what the left is doing . The results are highly evident of this .
 It is always a pleasure to see the works of Marcel Dupre represented on any recital program, for we will always be assured of exquisite tonal .colouring and prominent melodic lines delightfully mixed with lush chords and lush chords .
 M Dupre did not disappoint us, and Professor Smith presented a masterful interpretation of his former teacher's composition . Dupre was a master of interpretation of the work .
 It may candidly be said that Tuesday's performance was the best yet heard from Mr Smith .
 It was authoritative, not didactic; tasteful, but not exhibition istic; technically clean but not mechanical. It was technically clean, but mechanical, not mechanical . It was tasteful but tasteful and technically clean; technically .
 It displayed a mastery of the instrument which often is neither heard nor appreciated above the ""tumult and the shouting"" of Wednesday chapel . The performance was a masterclass of the instruments .
 Following the tone set for the Week by Handspicker, several other men will represent the great traditional religions of the world .
 A graduate of Yeshiva College, he was awarded the American Jewish Congress Stephen Wise Fellowship in 1952 .
 After receiving his Master's Degree in Hebrew Literature, Zion taught Jewish History and other courses and served various congregations . Zion served as a member of his congregation .
 He became acting-director of the textbook research project of inter-group relations, sponsored by the American Jewish Committee in cooperation with Yale and St. Louis University .
 The civil rights activist is associated with the American Civil Liberties Union . He was associated with St. Louis Universities in 1960 and with the ACLU in 1970s .
 Recent enrollment trends have finally caught up with Bates . Applications for September 1963 admission are below the levels of previous years . The admissions process is scheduled to begin in September .
 This is in accordance with a temporary national trend which other selective institutions have felt for the past three or . four years . This is the result of a national trend that has been felt by some selective institutions .
 Bates might have experienced such a decrease last year had it not been for the publicity which the school received from its General Electric ""College Bowl" appearances . The school received publicity from its appearances .
 The nation-wide decrease in college applicants stems from the low birth rate of 1944-1945, which has made for a smaller number of high school graduates . The decrease in applications, however, presents little problem to Bates .
 It is felt that most of the applications not received would have come from students of either low ability or of a caliber which would win them acceptance to more highly rated institutions .
 Mr Hein will particiof the lectures being held topate in the discussions . Those of lesser ability apply in smaller numbers beevening .
 Women's groups will be held in the Women's Union from 9:00-10:30m. The groups will also be held at Women's 9-00 - 10:30 Union .
 During this time, students will meet with an informal discussion Buddhist monk from Ceylon, with the lecturers and other stuwill speak on Buddhaism and dents .
 Thursday, after a short break The activities on Friday, followed by Mr Hein's talk . Friday's activities included a visit to the University of Cambridge, Cambridge .
 Reku Vinita has been a member of ligious Emphasis Week, will be a Buddhist monastic cf der for gin with the Chapel Assembly .
 Norman Bowie '64 and Jeffrey Rouault '65 were part of the Bates team participating in the Har vard Invitational Tourney . The team is one of the largest and most important tournaments of the year .
 Two men form the equivalent of a four-man team, as each debater has prepared and must be able to debate either side of the topic . In a tournament of this nature, two men form a team of four-men . Each debater must be prepared and can debate either
 A team might debate the negative side of the topic, then debate affirmatively on the same topic in the next round . In one round, for example, a team may debate negative side, then affirmatively, in another round .
 Bates met schools from across the continent in the Harvard tourney . Two schools from California, one each from Illinois, Ohio, and Canada, and two from Virginia .
 In order to qualify for the better college counseling being given in the nation's high schools, high schools must qualify for college counseling .
 Lack of applications from highest caliber students probably stems from the decreasing number of high schools allowing students to fill multiple applications to colleges . Lack of high school applications may be a result of a decrease in applications from students .
 College Board studies indicate nals, it was necessary for a team to have at least a record of 7-1, that is to have lost only one debate in the preliminary rounds . The team needed to have a 7-2 record in order to qualify .
 Bates' record after the preliminaries was 6-2, one debate short of placing in the final rounds . Unfortunately, the Bates record after preliminary rounds of the competition was 6.2 . The Bates team won't make it to the final round .
 Ohio State, last year's national champion, also failed to reach the final rounds of debate debate .
 Norman Bowie '64 and Kenneth Woodbury '63 argued in favor of upholding a non-Communist economic community . Norman Bowie ‘64’ and Kenneth ‘63’ argued for the non-communist community . Kenneth “Woodbury’s’63
 Norman Davis '65 and Richard Rosenblatt '66 argued in favor of the present U.S. policy . Norman Davis ‘65 and ‘66’ argued for the present United States policy .
 NEW CANAAN COUNTRY SCHOOL in Connecticut is offering teaching fellowships at the pre-school and elementary school levels, the junior high school level, and in the field of the creative arts .
 The full-time fellowship carries with it a stipend of $2,000 . It includes practical on-the-job training, plus theoretical study . The fellowship is required for a full time job .
 SPRINGFIELD COLLEGE has broadened its program in the field of applied social science to include working with groups, agencies, councils, and communities . The program is broadened to work with groups and agencies .
 Opportunities are now available for -professional specialization in group work, international service, YMCA certification, intergroup relations, community organization, and institutional and community research .
 MASSACHUSETTS Department of Public Welfare is offering a trainee program for men and women college graduates interested in social work . The program is offered for college graduates who want to be involved in the social work field .
 Trainees selected by the Department may attend any accredited graduate school of social work . Trainees will be assigned to work in the Division of Child Guardianship for three summer months .
 State of Connecticut has recently announced its Management Trainee Program for liberal arts graduates . The program will be available to liberal arts students .
 YELLOWSTONE PARK COMPANY is now accepting applications for employment in the hotels, lodges, camper's cabins, gift shops, and transportation and boat docks throughout Yellowstone National Park . The company is also accepting applications in lodges and camper cabins .
 Rabbi Leonard Zion, Chapel, 78m. Burroughs Wellcome & Company; Insurance Company of North Am.a; Rabbi Leonard . Zion. Zion .
 Sunday, February 10 Coffee Hour Discussion of Religious Emphasis Week in Chase Hall Ballroom, 8:00 . Tuesday, February 12 Club Night, SEA, 8 Libbey Mercantile Stores Company; The United Church Board for World Ministries.
 As unit manager in the Wilmington, Delaware, business office of The Diamond State Telephone Company . As unit . manager in Wilmington . business office .
 AFs unit collects over a million dollars in monthly bills and is an integral part of a team serving 47,000 customers . AFs collects over $1 million monthly bills .
 Dean Emeritus Harry W Rowe gave a talk to the Chapel assembly last Friday . Rowe Addresses Ch apel Group on Hathorn Hall .
 Dean Rowe's theme, the changing face of Bates as exemplified by Hathorn Hall, emphasized the expansion of Bates from a wooded pasture area with one building to the present elm-studded forty-building campus .
 Hathorn served initially as the college; housing the chapel, commons, and theater, as well as classrooms . Hathorn was built in 1854, and is located in Hathorn's original location .
 As Bates has expanded, the various uses made of Hathorn have correspondingly diminished . Hathorn has been used in many of Bates' most famous works .
 Hathorn serves only one of five buildings housing classrooms . Hathorn is now one of only five buildings in Hathorn's former campus .
 Rowe was a former Assistant to the President, Bursar, and the first Dean of the Faculty, Dean Healey . Rowe is now the College Historian at the University of Cambridge .
 Committees Plan For Betty Bates Week Activities . Plans are well underway for the annual Betty Bates program .
 Linda Browning, Marion Day, Nancy Day, Ingrid Kaiser, Carol Kinney, Nancy Nichols and Lois Warfield are among the top 10 women in Washington .
 Betty Bates week runs from February 1822 . There will be a variety of activities to celebrate Betty Bates' birthday .
 There will also be several skits, and entertainment by the Deansmen . In addition to the fruit sale, there will be an annual fruit sale .
 A highlight of the week will be a program presented by Miss Jan Clarke, popular Boston fashion model, who will deal with certain aspects of good grooming . The program will be presented by popular Boston model, Ms Clarke .
 Buildings and properties, Linda Olmstead '65; Invitations and hospitality, Nora Jensen '64; Awards and mimeographing, Arlene Wignall '63; Fashion show, Anne Cawley '66; Fruit sale, Ginny Erskine '64 .
 The following is an interview of David Nelson, Instructor in the English Department, by Herb Mosher '65 . Nelson Comments About Experiences And Interests In Teaching At College .
 R Would you give me a brief* summary of your previous N N R N R education? N R would like to see if you had any idea of how much of your education had been given to you? N N. R would give you a summary of that previous education. R
 I got thoroughly sick of that and returned to Cornell for a Ph.D. at Cornell . I got sick of it and decided to return to Cornell to complete my Ph.M. degree .
 The most frequent comment was the inclusion of sex in your lectures, says the author of the book .
 Many of the approaches to teaching are valid for teaching purposes . But, I also like to use a variety of approaches because I think many of them are valid .
 Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family . Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind .
 A poet has a specific purpose when writing a poem and this purpose provides the rationale for the kind of artistic decision he made in making the poem . A poet's purpose is to make the artistic decision in making a poem .
 Poems are meant to evoke the state of thought or feeling that's evoked by it, says the poet . Poemists are trying to grasp the purpose or impact of the poem, says poet laureate .
 It seems that if you take this approach you'l never learn anything from literature, it seems that you never learn from literature . It seems to be that you don't have to learn anything about literature from it .
 "All you are doing is looking in a mirror and seeing a pretty reflection of yourself. Because all you are looking in the mirror is looking at yourself," she says .
 There's no communication going on between you and the poet . The poet wanted to move you in certain way and reasonable, sensitive men should sit down and come to an agreement .
 There is a tendency among artists appearing on the Lewiston High School stage to feel the . necessity of performing a sensational rather than a penetrating repertoire .
 This is rare to find one in which the selections chosen are both of immediate reference and at the same time performed as if freshly composed is rare .
 Chopin and Olegna Fuschi play each other for the first time in a row . Chopin's rendition of the Fuschchi was a surprise surprise for the audience .
 Only once throughout the en tire performance did the listener feel that the exception rather than the rule was an integrated part of the performance . "En tire" is the first time the band has played in a public performance .
 There was an unshakeable sense of restraint woven throughout the first half of the program . There was also a sense of respect throughout the performance .
 Bach and Mozart were rendered more as warm-up exercises than entities unto themselves . Mozart and Bach are more than just warm-ups exercises than individuals unto themselves.
 The opening bars of the ""Appassionata"" remind one of Beethoven's Fourth Piano Con certo in which the almost crushing power of the orchestra is ar rested by the assured gentleness of the piano .
 Miss Fuschi found it difficult to maintain the duali ty which music of this type de mands. She said it was a difficult task to do .
 The assurance and agility with which she commanded the keyboard proved her a more than able interpretor . She was a 'more than able interpreter'
 The wrathful demands of the Scherzo were met with comparative ease . The vivacity of the Mazurka in C sharp minor with its varied rhythmic patterns was satisfying . The composer's solo solo solo was the first time he had a solo solo .
 The Etude is perhaps Chopin's greatest form of musical expression . Chopin had an elegant grace and beauty all its own . The Etudes are perhaps the most beautiful form of music ever recorded .
 Despite a few highspots, Olegna Fuschi's concert last week was, for the most part, unsuccessful . Vivian Leigh plus 'LOVES OF SALAMMBO'l limilllllll. WIIIIIUIIIIII IIIIII
 Her highly romantic style just does not suit Bach's intricacy and delicate tonal arrangements . Bach's intricate tonal arrangement is not suited to her romantic style . Bach is a highly sensitive classical musician .
 She started playing before the audience had quieted down and consequently the first few notes were lost . The audience had to quiet down before she started playing .
 Miss Fuschi apparently did not have contact with her audience's mood, and hence her playing became mechnical, and failed to produce any real response .
 Only the last variation sounded like Mozart, and she handled this one with a delicacy and taste which was lacking in the earlier sections .
 One cannot capture Beethoven with one's fists, but Miss Fuschi persisted through his Sonata in F Minor to attempt this task . She said: "One cannot capture him with one of his fists"
 Two different schools of music, the Baroque and Romantic . Her trill became uneven in her passion, and there was little note . The studentry was able to witness two different styles of music .
 To judge the Romantic period on the basis of Fuschi's recital, however, would be unfair to the composers involved . It would be a great mistake to judge the romantic period, however .
 At the Olegna Fuschi concert, the pianist seemed to have evaluated her audience . This is something which a politician should do, but never an artist, she said .
 I think that something a little more ""meaty"" would also have been in order for a Bach offering, in place of Jesu, Joy of Man's Desiring . I think something more "meaty" would also be in order .
 It increasingly seemed, however, that the dramatic device which had gotten out of hand had got out of control . It was not the first time the device had been used .
 In her encore, she made hash of the Spanish baroque composer Soler; and would have probably done so to Bach at the beginning of the program were it not for the fact that such a lovely and simple piece as Jesu is hard to kill .
 The Prelude, Fugue and Chaconne in C by Deitrich Buxtehude opened the Tuesday evening organ recital . Professor D Robert Smith was the organist .
 Played with a little more of something I call ""conviction"", it would have been superb . Played with more conviction, it would've been superb for the band .
 Bach's masterful Fugue in E Flat is played with forcefulness and clarity . Bach's 'masterpiece' is played by forcefulness, clarity and forcefulness .
 Henry Purcell's genius for pomp and splendor never fails to show itself in his music for trumpet . James Hureau '61 delivered the Sanata for Trumpet with polish, precision and verve .
 Hureau succumbed to a couple of poor attacks in this demanding piece . Fluffs can always be forgiven, but a sustained inadequacy (as in Fuschi's performance) is much more discouraging .
 The two final selections on the program moved out of the Baroque and into the 20th century . The final selection on the show moved into the 21st century .
 Langlais' intense and thoughtful Nativity was followed by the Prelude and Fugue in g of Marcel Dupre, a complex and stirring treatment of an unusual theme, which closed Smith's recital in a flurry of excitement .
 In the final movement, she lost most of her fervor, and it came out sounding like a well-executed Czerny exercise . The final movement came out of her final movement .
 Miss Fuschi managed to strike a balance between technique and romanticism in her Chopin selections .
 Chopin used modern harmonics to achieve his minor effects in the Mazurka and Etude . It was interesting to note how Chopin achieved his minor harmonics in these works .
 For some reason, Miss Fuschi chose to play Karol Szymanowski's lush and weepy Etude in B Flat Minor . It was reminiscent of a Dmitri Tiomkin score for some Hollywood spectacular .
 She executed this piece rather well, since it fit neatly with her own emotional temperament . It was rather well executed, however, by the actress .
 Miss Fuschi ended the evening with a jaunt through Liszt's Sixth Hungarian Rhapsody . She also performed a rendition of the Sixth Hungarian rhapsody by the composer .
 Liszt's beer garden music, while repulsive in itself, was well performed by the artist . The show was held in a beer garden in Budapest, Hungary .
 Some advanced courses have too many students, particularly those in the History and English Departments . The complaints are partially justified, but they are not all students .
 Too often, however, the grumblers fail to look at the total picture, too often . Too often one suffers from an ego-centric predicament, says the author . The author's book is published in New York, New York .
 Many classes are too large is obvious, but many more are small, says the Registrar's Office . That is equally obvious to anyone checking the class size in Registrar's office .
 A number of advanced courses have as few as five or six students . Many have fewer than twelve students, many have just a few dozen students .
 In criticizing the student-faculty ratio, one must look at all the classes, not just two or three . In criticizing a teacher's ratio, the professor says, "Look at all of the classes," not just a few .
 A committee is evaluating curriculum changes, including a yearround attendance plan, proposes an acceptable alternation . The structure of Bates could radically modify .
 Change does not necessarily assure improvement; but any minor alternation, such as the addition of one or two instructors in the English and History Departments, must be considered in light of the possible revolution .
 This doesn't deny the need for additional instructors; it merely counsels a synoptic understanding . It's not a need for more instructors, but it's a need to be able to learn more quickly .
 While the student-faculty ratio at Bates reigns not at the apex of the academic world, it hovers nearer the top than the bottom . Bates is a top-ranked university in the world, but not the top of academic world .
 "A small, friendly, co-educational college,"" partially offsets the effects of the few large classes . And significantly, the truth in the oft quoted phrase, "" a small . friendly" college, partially offseted by the fact that there are a few large class classes .
 In college of a college of this size, the opportunities for initiating out-of-class relationships with faculty in part vitiates the impersonality of the large class .
 No matter how large the class, most of the students know each other .
 In criticizing, however, one must consider the whole as well as the parts of the parts, CNN.com's John Sutter says .
 The former certainly do not justify the latter; but they do add a needed perspective . The former does not justify either the former or the latter .
 We plan to discontinue cigarette advertising . We are seeking means of replacing the loss of revenue such a step entails .
 We harbor no doubt of the validity of our position, but we must consider, however, the financial situation . Hopefully, we shall solve this problem in the near future, says President Obama .
 James KIERNAN '63 was surprised by a visitor to our campus and a group of our Bates men . He says he was surprised once by a visit to campus .
 In his three and a half years of association with this institution of higher learning, I have heard many times the word animal in reference to some particular men on campus . In the past, I've heard many of those men refer to as animals .
 Last week I was pleasantly surprised that this quality, the loudness and occasional grossness, is only skin deep, and in relation to certain other groups is negligible . The quality of this quality is skin deep and skin deep .
 Never have I heard of tne *R 0 g er Bill foolish, schoolboy trick of beating up someone because he went out with a girl you once went to out with . Bill foolishly beat up someone for going out with his ex-girlfriend, he said .
 A boorish, overgrown child from Norwich beat up a half asleep Bates freshman in his own room . The incident occurred last Wednesday night .
 His return engagement Thursday consisted of tearing up a bulletin board and urinating on the floor of Roger Bill . He loudly offered to ""take a walk"" with any of the dozen or so men who brought him back to Fights are not common on this campus .
 Bates men wanted was that the animalistic wreckage be cleaned up . It is truly a friendly place, but more than this, there is a certain restraint and respect . The Bates men want to see the wreckage cleaned up.
 While it wasn't an ego boosting experience, I do find the restraint and maturity of the other guy that becomes i action of the Bates men corninstilled in each one of us here at Bates .
 The people that live in my part of Brooklyn would never feel restricted because the odds were in their favor and would not deal similarly with such an oaf . The people who live in this part of New York City wouldn't feel restricted .
 Marx and others have said that what a society does for advancement is determined to a very large degree by economic factors . Marx and many others since him have said . Economic factors determine a society's advancement, whether or not .
 Whatever our motives for action are, the ramifications may well be economic in nature . Although there is academic disagreement as to whether the Marxist view point stresses economic motives in toto, the main point is that .
 At the risk of being called a Marxist, this column will attempt to investigate some of the problems that face us as students, and, I hasten to add, as members of a society that has been prophesied to doom .
 This is not to say that the thoughts and considerations will be earthshaking or even called to attention in Washington . Washington is not likely to be as close to the world as it is currently .
 One topic of interest to Bates students is that of military disarmament vs. military preparedness . The topic has been of no small interest for Bates students in the past few years .
 We have all read the ethical, moral, and expedient reasons for complete disarmament . The reasons for continued military preparedness are the same as the reasons for disarmament, author says .
 Our economic model will contain a public and a private sector, i.e. We have an active ly spending government as well as private industries, says Labour leader David Cameron . We have to have a 'active ly spending' government, says Cameron .
 With public sector that spends we will necessarily have taxation, most likely debt . With public spending, we will have to deal with the burden of the public sector .
 The withering sickness of perfection-lost-lost is a recurring theme in this new series of films .
 For a while, be it a split second or a considerable length of time, love seems perfect . Love seems perfect and fulfilling in itself, says the author .
 After the zenith there comes the pause where reality sets in for the world's first time . But there comes a pause in time when reality is set to hit .
 Stekel, in his book Auto-Erotism tells us (or at least presents us with a theory) why this is so .
 He calls love a projection of the self onto a loveobject or another person . Love is projection of self onto another person, he says. He calls it a projection .
 When our projection or idealization of the love object breaks down, we feel incomplete — and love dies . We feel incomplete when our projection, idealization, is broken down . When our idealization is broken, love dies, it dies .
 Since another person cannot be exactly like us, he/she must eventually assert his/her conflicting aspects . The reason for this is quite simple, really, really . Since we cannot be like ourselves, we must assert our conflicting aspects, this is the reason .
 The perfection we knew when the self-projection was complete lingers with us . And yet the perfection we know when the perfection is complete lingered with us. And yet, yet, it still lingers .
 It can be in the form of a Haydn symphony which reminds us of long black hair and first love . Or of a walk alone through a familiar neighborhood which we took a year before with our current love .
 I am making things sound ex tremely scientific, and love is not so mechanistic . Love is not about mechanistic, and it's not so scientific, I say .
 Stekel's theory may be true or it may be false, but still it remains that love and its loss produce phantoms which stalk us and seek to turn us to sorrow .
 "Never is one more completely alone than after the loss of love — of unity," writes Hillary Clinton . Clinton: Never is one less alone than when one loses love .
 Then one can only turn inward and die in the disjointed world he sees there, he says . Then one must turn inward, he writes, "and die"
 They see nuzzling, laughfilled talking, and sex as the only components of an ideal relationship . Nuzzling and laughterfilled talking are the only parts of ideal relationships, they say .
 Stekel would call them too much filled with triviality to be capable of completely giving over of the self to divine emotion . Stekel: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to completely give over the self"
 Most of mankind is like Bartleby the Scrivener who does not even recognize his ability to love . Most of humanity does not recognize its love, says the lawyer in Bartlebeby . The lawyer is a lawyer who doesn't even recognize that he loves .
 Wilhelm Reich, in his book, The Sexual Revolution, echoes the cry of Erich Fromm in The Art of Loving when he says that man is becoming disabled and is being forced into a form of emotional stasis by his highly repressive society .
 Those who know the sorrow of ""total love lost"" are becoming more and more alone in this society of loveless people . And those people who know "total loss lost" are becoming alone in society .
 There is no joy that spans eternity No comedy without a tragic tear; When laughter but suggests a deeper grief. When laughter is laughter, it suggests a deep grief. There is . no joy in eternity .
 Military spending has been large, in the neighborhood of 50 billion dollars dollars .
 WRJR-FM. your campus radio station, provides an excellent forum for the dissemination of news news and notes about club activities . The station is located at the University of Akron, Ohio .
 The STUDENT is a weekly feature of our weekly feature on The Student . Please write if you have not been receiving THE STUDENT regularly .
 Ruth Walker is a new instructor in French and German . Her knowledge of languages has enabled her to gain a keen insight into some of the world's most pressing problems .
 Walker returned to Germany, and managed to secure passage through the Iron Curtain into East Germany . Walker managed to return to Germany and secure passage to East Germany, where he worked .
 Her primary interest was to observe the living conditions of the East Germans under Communism . Ostensibly, her mission was to attend the Leipzig Fair, but she was not interested .
 Unemployment will result because of the closing down of government supported defense industries, says President Obama . Government supported defense industry is closing down .
 In many cases the large private industries will be forced to curtail production of defense items and lay off employees . The defense industry will also have to reduce production and layoff employees .
 This creation of unemployment will cause a reduction of incomes in other groups as consumer consumption falls . This will also reduce the incomes of those other groups, says economist .
 Investment will fall, giving further impetus to the lowering of the model's aggregate income . The model will be reduced to a model of economic growth .
 For the economically minded who favor reducion in our military stock-piling, the above problem can be partially alleviated . The economically minded should be relieved of the problem .
 By efficient channelling of the public sector away from military spending into other areas of public concern the reduction of government spending might be held to a minimum .
 Our model might experience public spending in education, welfare, urban renewal, and other areas . Our model is that public spending will be spent on education and welfare .
 If we have been so brash as to assume disarmament politically feasible, then more spending in the above areas emerges as feasible . The UK has been brash about disarmament, but it is not politically feasible to disarm .
 In our model society disarmament is possible as long as alternative actions are immediately available for continued government spending . In this model, disarmament could be possible if government spending is not found to be a problem .
 I would now refer my diligent readers to other sections of this newspaper and other newspapers to determine the non-economic justification for disarmament .
 Next week 1 would like to discuss some of the problems that have confronted economists when they try to apply modern economic theory to defense spending . In the same vein, next week 1 will discuss the problems economists face when applying economic theory .
 An Air Force general views the difference between a super-sonic fighter and a long range bomber just as you and I, as consumers, consider the difference from a red Chevy and a black Cadillac . The Air Force says the difference is between a fighter fighter and bomber bomber .
 Intercollegiate Broadcasting System will provide full membership status for Bates College radio . Bates College Radio will be a member of the IBS system .
 The membership of the network consists entirely of college and university radio stations . The network consists of college radio stations interested in helping each other to provide a variety of programming and management ideas .
 WRJR will focus on programs which have great interest to the national college audience as a Nelson than any other . WRJR is looking to increase feature programming .
 You're confusing the fact that I talk explicitly about sex in class when it's appropriate— when the work is about sex, she says .
 I do this largely because I think that it is the only honest thing to do. I do it largely because of the fact that I am honest, I am very proud of it, I say . I'm proud to be honest and proud of my actions, I'm very proud to
 I feel that it is also effective pedagogically because it makes the student sit up and pay attention . I feel it also makes the students sit up, pay attention, and is effective in pedagogy .
 I don't think that there is any more hypocrisy here than there is anywhere else in a Puritan society which makes very strong moral judgments about sex . N. N. If I understand what you mean, there is no more hypocrisy in the U.S. than anywhere else .
 It was suggested that the trip be planned for a Sunday in the near future . The overnight trip can only be held late in the season, it was suggested .
 All freshmen are urged to see their dormitory representatives if they have another feasible plan .
 The freshmen also considered the desirability of sponsoring trips to attend symphonies in Portland, and the possibility of having instrumentalists attend .
 April 20 and April 27 as tentative dates for the Freshman Dance whole . Freshman dance whole is set to take place April 20 to April 27 .
 We will also have the opportunity to bring topnotch WRJR programs to the audiences at other member colleges . WRJR will also be able to bring WRJ programs to other member college audiences .
 WRJR still has four months to bring to Bates students many fine feature programs . WRJR is proud to celebrate the end of the year with a great new year .
 One away state series basketball game remains, at Maine on February 19th . The game is scheduled to be played at Maine .
 New programs from IBS will soon be on the way, as will the music of the annual Pops Concert . New programs are soon to be released .
 WRJR provides music for everyone from Sunday at 6 till Friday at 12 a.m. EST . WRJR also provides music from around the world from Sunday to Friday at 6 p.m .
 A student in such a society is constantly involved in a situation where his own natural drives must be coordinated and made to cooperate with social norms . A student must be somehow coordinated and make his own social drives cooperate with norms .
 "What I try to do is use an exam not as something which the student regurgitates all the information he has piled up in his notes, but as a situation for creative thinking," she says .
 I give them a basic idea, let's say an individual novel and make them relate this specific novel to general ideas . "I give them an idea: Let's say a novel and relate this novel to a general idea," she says .
 This, I think, is essential to r Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents . PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS: "I'm glad to see you in this way"
 Hundreds of young men belonged to ""flying clubs" so called because Gearmany was forbidden to rearm, but which, in reality, were the beginning of the formidable German Air Force . The clubs were called "Flying Clubs" by Gearmany, so called "Gearmany"
 East German officials boarded the train and collected all the passports . Then the passengers were locked in the train .
 While they waited, they saw troops of ""triggerhappy" armed youths in uniform marching by the train . They waited for the train to arrive in New York .
 There was no Canadian Consulate in East Germany . The situation was especially dangerous because there was no Consulate there .
 She was impressed wherever she looked by the extreme shortage of consumer goods . Once inside the border, she was impressed everywhere she looked .
 They are exhausted from overwork and under-nourishment, and they are helplessly apathetic . They are tired of overwork, undernourished and apathetic, they say . They say they are tired and helpless .
 They all suspect one another of being an informer, she says . This attitude, together with the behavior of the police, reminded her of the bitter days under the Third Reich . The attitude, she said, is reminiscent of the days of the Nazis .
 In class I use a discussion method even w^ien I have a class of 45 students . I use it even though I have 45 students. In class, I use discussion method .
 Post-War that in the next two years there will be a nation-wide increase of over fifty per cent in college applications . Post-war that will be over 50 per cent increase in college application .
 This will be due partly to the high birth rates of 1946-1947, and partly to a greater percentage of high school gradu/ / / 6 (p SIX BATES STUDENT, FEBRUARY 6, 1963 B G Trackmen Topple Cats 69 44
 This praise is especially directed to Al himself and the members of our staff . This praise was especially directed towards Al himself .
 A note of interest has recently come to light concerning next year's State Series basketball competition . The State Series Basketball competition will take place next year .
 A A. A., governing body of college athletics in the state, has voted to decrease the number of games between state teams . Each team will meet the others twice, as opposed to the present three games .
 Repercussions in this case would include increased expenditures for traveling out of state, and present a state series in which the presence of a possible rubber game is eliminated .
 A tip of the hat to sophomore Don Cellar who has recently won himself a berth on the local Holiday Lanes bowling team . Cellar has been a member of the local holiday bowling team since 2010 .
 This team will compete with other Holiday Lane groups from the New England area to determine a champion . The team will be competing against other teams in New England .
 Jay Vee Intramural All Star All Star tilt is set to be a top-tier event . Jay Vees Intramurial All Star event promises top billing . The event is scheduled to be held in New York City, New Jersey .
 The Jay Vee's have shown that they have a fine team, but we feel that a talented Intramural Team will certainly make it an interesting night for the Bobkittens . The team will be looking to win their first game of the season .
 Bates sporting innovation has made its appearance on the sporting scene . The Bates team has been introduced to the sporting world for the first time ever .
 Some twenty hockey enthusiasts joined forces to rent the local arena this past Sunday night . The event was held in honor of local hockey enthusiasts .
 The results of this encounter are anti-climactic in view of the overall implications that their initiative has produced . The results were anti-Climactic, but they are not surprising .
 At last a group of Bates students have found a way to their means . Bates students, though their sport specialty is not readily accessible, have nevertheless found a means to play their sport .
 Interested Batesmen should contact sophomore John Lund of East Parker if they are interested in joining this group of enthusiasts .
 The 1962 football schedule has been announced by the Athletic Department . King Football will return for the first time in the fall .
 The Garnet gridsters open against the Cadets of Norwich at the Vermont military school's Northfield campus on the twenty-eighth of September . The Cadets will be the first team to face the Garnet Gridsters .
 The 'Cats then face Northeastern, Worcester Poly, Middlebury, Maine, Bowdoin, and play their curtain closer at Waterville, Maine .
 No game has been scheduled to replace Tufts on the Tufts lineup . Tufts will not be replaced by Tufts . No games have been scheduled for Tufts this season .
 This was to be the 'Cats' opening contest on the twenty-first of September . The game was scheduled to be played before the upperclassmen are scheduled to return to school .
 Garnet are only playing two games at home, those being Worcester Poly and Maine contests . The Garnet play Worcester Poly at home each of their games .
 It seems in this corner that the Bobcats deserve an eight-game schedule and at least three home games . The Bobcats need to play at least eight games in total, including three home matches .
 In closing, we send our regards to the two most attentive spectators at Saturday night's Northeastern basketball game who succeeded in doing both their homework and cheering .
 DeWitt Hotel offers $1.00 Luncheon and Dinner Specials 7 days a week . Hotel rooms include a bar with a pool pool and a pool .
 Bill LaValle leads the way in the high hurdles to make the most of your summer at the University of Wisconsin .
 I am interested in the 1963 summer program at Madison, so □ Please send me your 1963 bulletins on summer study, including course catalogs .
 Paul Williams jumps 22' 4%"" to grab first place in the broadjump . Junior Paul Williams wins the gold medal in the event .
 After an unwelcome defeat in the mile by a triplet of very strong ""Beantown"" distance men, John Curtiss nailed down second place .
 Tom Bowditch Jumps 6' 3"" to chalk up first place . The high jump is traditionally a winning event for the Garnet .
 Bill also broke the tape in the high hurdles and settled for a time of 6. seconds . Bill also breaks the tape for the high-speed hurdles .
 B C. showed their great depth and strength in a number of events . Takes Weights And Distances .
 Jack Rawson nudged out Bobcat Eric Silverberg in the last two laps of the mile to win the event in the time of 4 min. sec. Confident and strategic, Rawson .
 Finn Wilhelmsen wins twenty-one lap race in 9 min.. sec. Finn follows Finn Rawson around the track until he broke into a sprint in the last two laps of the race for the win . Shortly afterwards Rawson followed Finn Willemensen around the . track
 Gilvey opened up a substantial lead in the first hundred yards and maintained it to flash across the finish line . Gilvey set a new meet record of 1 min, 13. sec. in 1 min. 13 sec.
 Cindermen turned in praiseworthy efforts to post 44 points against a very strong team . Despite the loss, our cindermen posted 44 points in the match .
 JV cindermen deserve the credit due for their fine performances . Harkness Shines for JV in spite of lack of recognition .
 The 'Cats fought back to within two points with 14:24 remaining, only to see the Mules open up a six point lead and coast home for the win . Down by ten points at the close of the first half, the 'Mules fought back from a ten point
 Don Beaudry, John Lawlor and Don Lawlor score early goals in Bates' 3-0 win over Cais Cais . Bates leads Cais 3-1 at the start of the second period .
 The 'Cats cleared out the middle for Cummings who drove hard and drew a foul . Cummings drew the foul in the first quarter .
 The half time intermission failed to cool off the shooting of either team . The half-time break did not cool off either side .
 Stone and Stevens matched baskets three consecuback on a foul shot by John tive times, followed by a short Gibbons and a jumper by Ken Federman to knot the score at 3-3 .
 The 'Cats moved to a 9-7 lead after six minutes of play . Sparked by the crisp passing of Beaudry and the rebounding of Captain Thorn Freeman, the Cats took the lead early on .
 The Mules asked for a time out and changed their strategy, which proved to be the turning point of the game . The game ended in a 1-1 victory for the Mules .
 Both teams had been employing pressing manto-man defense . Colby abandoned these tactics in an attempt to cool off the hot shooting Bobcat five .
 The Mules came zone defense, which proved capable of cooling off the fine shooters of the Bates attack . The team's zone defense proved to be able to keep the offense cool .
 The hustling 'Cats' continued to pressure Colby in an attempt to force them into making mistakes . But time was running out and the Mules were able to protect their lead .
 Stevens High For 'Cats: It was a tough one to lose . Stevens High was beaten by the Raiders in the first round of playoffs .
 Fred Stevens, who at one point canned five in a row, led with fourteen points . The scoring was well balanced as Fred Stevens led with 14 points .
 Seth Cummings and John Lawlor had twelve, and Thorn Freeman had eleven . Thorn Freeman chipped in with eleven, Seth Cummings had twelve . Seth Cummings was the only player to score 12 .
 Freeman was outstanding in the rebounding department as he picked off seventeen rebounds . Freeman picked off 17 rebounds in the first half .
 The junior edition of the Bates basketball team surged to victory twice in the past week's action to give Coach Leahy's charges a seven-win, two-loss record for the season . Kittens stop Colby, Thomas and Colby .
 It seems that there are many classes this year which are extremely large . It seems to be a lot of classes which are very large .
 Katharine Gibbs Memorial Scholarships Full tuition for one year plus $500 cash grant . Open to senior women interested in business careers as assistants to administrators .
 This ratio tends to be misleading because it depends on who you count as faculty members . But in any case, this ratio is misleading because of who is counted as faculty .
 "I've got four or five faculty members who are coming now and we meet once a week. I've got 4 or 5 faculty members coming now," she says .
 "If possible, I'd like to turn it into a student, faculty and townspeople chess club," says mayor . If possible, it would be a chess club .
 "It would be a matter of getting a meeting place which would be satisfactory for all," says Ravi Agnew .
 It is the most purely rational game that you can play in the sense that there is no element of chance in it such as in bridge where the game is partly dependent upon the fall of the cards . One of the most pure rational games in the world is the game of chess .
 There is another way you can look at it which is very interesting. But there is also another way of looking at it: "Look at it very interesting."
 Chess is "purely a matter of free will, or the free play of the intelligence," says chess expert . Chess is a game of "free will" and "free play of intelligence"
 It's a game in which you can truly have chance in a way that you can't have in bridge . It's not just a game, it's a way you can have a chance in the way you do bridge games .
 In chess, since you don' have any mechanical ele ments, it may happen that you can get an example of pure chance . In chess you have no mechanical elements, you have to think about a chance chance .
 The position of this pawn may be the determining factor in the game, even though it's, in a sense, quite accidental that the pawn is in that position . Perhaps at the end of the game the position of the pawn will be the deciding factor .
 Chess players have a chance in chess which you don't have in any other game . So you do have a type of chance which you have in chess, says Stanislav Ivan Ivan Ivanovic .
 "I was serving as a liaison person for some townspeople who are interested in the peace movement," she says . She says she was a liaison to people interested in peace movement .
 R I believe it was you I saw at the last Men's Smoker playing a wild game of ping pong . I believe that was you .
 N. "I feel that my position is literally one of an advisor and nothing else," she said . N.
 "I don't try to influence what goes into the paper in any way other than to insist that the material that goes in is honest, and responsible," he says .
 "I'm very strongly against any kind of censorship other than the kind of self-censorship which is always implicit in any responsible citizen's actions," he says .
 Bates Bobcats kept powerful Northeastern in check for more than a half Saturday evening . How do you pick up the game? Share your thoughts .
 Northeastern, rated the best small college team in New England, won its thirteenth game against only four losses . Northeastern is ranked as one of the nation's best small colleges .
 Bates, dropping its eighth straight, now has won three and lost ten this season . Bates drops eighth straight after losing three and losing ten games this year .
 Bates con trolled the ball most of the time, allowing Northeastern only two shots at the basket . There was no scoring for the first three minutes of the game . Bates had a slow start to the game, with no scoring coming in .
 Tom Martin hit a jump shot with 16:45 left in the half, and the Huskies led the rest of the way . Tom Martin's jump shot gave the UConn Huskies the lead .
 Northeastern moved out to a 10-1 lead before Thorn Freeman scored the Bobcats' first goal from the floor with 13:30 remaining . The Bobcats trailed by 10 points from the first half .
 Husky coach Duke Dukeshire prescribed a zone press, but Bates beat it easily the only time it was used . Bates beat the zone press easily in the first time it has been used .
 Fred Stevens took a pass at midcourt, dribbled into the key, and hit a jump shot . Fred Stevens hit the shot in the first half of the NBA Finals .
 After a Husky free-throw by John Malvey which Don Beaudry of Bates matched, the score stood 2319 . Bob Lanz and Seth Cummings' first hoop of the game was the first hoop by Seth Cummings of Bates .
 Freeman made a fine three-point play and Bates trailed by only three, 25— 22 . Captain Bill Tully scored for Northeastern, but Freeman made the winning basket .
 Bates had shot a dismal 29 per cent from the floor, hitting only seven of twenty-24 attempts . Bates shot only seven out of 24 attempts in the first half of the game .
 Huskies Widen Gap Gap Bates continued its cautious style in the second half . Bates continued to play cautious style and the teams matched points for the first five minutes of the first half . Huskies and Bates continued their cautious style of play .
 For the next four minutes a foul shot by Castolene and two by Beaudry amounted to all the Bates scoring . For the rest of the game, the Bates shooting was limited to two foul shots .
 The Bobcats were forced into an all-court press but could not find the hoop in numerous tries . The game degenerated into a race up and down the floor, as the Bobcats couldn't find the ball .
 They shot for only seventeen per cent, 6 for 35, in the second half . Northeastern was 11 for 22, while the team shot for 17 per cent in the first half .
 Malvey led Northeastern with eighteen points, Martin had fifteen, and Tully eleven . Martin had 15 points, Tully had 15, and Malvey had eleven .
 Cummings hit double figures for the seventh time in a row and the eleventh time in thirteen games of the season . Cummings had eleven points for Bates, hitting double figures .
 Freeman with nine points and Lawler with eight were the only other Bobcats with more than three points . Freeman with 9 points, Lawler also with eight .
 Bates' foul shooting kept the margin from being greater . Northeastern was 14 for 23 for Northeastern . Bates shot 16 for 20 for 20; Northeastern shot 14 for 22 .
 Jacobs has done a fine job, given the physical circumstances in which she is operating . Jacobs has been in charge of the U.S. military since 2009 . She says she's a good leader in the Air Force .
 The bookstore committee is arranging to have a group of students act in an advisory capacity for selecting books for the store . I think that the bookstore committee .
 I think it's unfortunate that students have no greater interest in the supply of books than they seem to have . Students should be encouraged to buy more books, the author says .
 "I much prefer teaching the students here to the students I had at Cornell. Personally, I much prefer . teaching students here . I much preferred teaching students at Cornell to those at Cornell .
 "Not that they're more aware, but they are more serious, more industrious," she said . N Not that they were more aware of it, but "they're more serious," she added . N
 Some fraternities and sororities are not corrupted, says Cornell alumnaudan . "They're not corrupted," he says . "I use the word perfectly aware of what it means"
 I had some very unhappy experiences with freshmen who would come to Cornell very eager and ready to w ork. I was very unhappy with freshmen, I said . I had a very unhappy experience with freshmen at Cornell .
 They join a fraternity in the middle of the semester and bingo, they wouldn't lift a finger from then on . "Bingo" would be easy for them to get into a fraternity, he says .
 N Conformity, yes, the fraternities dictated a type of blaspectity for your studies . N. N. Fraternities dictate a kind of . indifference .
 If they felt that you were really serious, they informed you that this isn't cool, they said . "This is not cool," they said. "If you're serious, you're not serious, it's not cool"
 I wish that they were in some respects a little less of a grind because I feel that this is the reason that they are not interested in more books over at the bookstore . On the other hand, I wish . I wish for them to be in a little more of a less of
 Students have been critical of Bates social life in the past . Students say they are disappointed at the idea of outside interests in the school .
 Student ""games "" are over, the intramural competition has once again appeared on the scene with team standings becoming more stable . Student "" games"" are over and student ""games" are over .
 The winners, led by Mark Silverstein, were in complete control of the entire game . The winners were led by Silverstein .
 J.B.'s undisputed hold on first place in the B-l league becomes a three-way tie .
 I was outstanding for the losers as I swished the nets for 13 beautiful points . In all meekness, I must admit I'm outstanding for the loser as I scored 13 .
 J.B.'s defeat has caused a three-way tie between Smith Middle, East Parker, and John Bertram Hall . The defeat has left Smith Middle in the bottom three of the table .
 Pete Pequignot drove in from Lou's just to make the game, and did a marvelous job by leading his team with 13 points . Pete led his team to victory .
 The ""Golden Boys" were piloted by the sterling play of Pete Bowman who was high scorer in both contests . Pete Bowman was high scoring in both matches .
 For me and the majority of the other girls, it was a rather unique, or more correctly, confusing event . However, for me, the most of the . majority of . the . other girls . It was a very unique event, or rather confusing event, for most of us
 Tom Bowditch, standout Garnet high jumper, has been selected by the sports staff as this week's Bobcat of the Week . The sports staff selects the Bobcat as the women's basketball team's most recent Bobcat . The Garnet women's hoops team has been a
 Tom is a sophomore from Rye, N. H., and his performances as a member of the Garnet cinder team have rated high praise from track mentor Walt Slovenski . Tom is also a junior from Rye . He is a junior at Garnet .
 In this week's B.C. meet, Tom jumped for a new personal high of 6 ft. in. in the high jump for the Bobcat team . Tom won the high-jump competition for the team at the Vancouver University .
 As a high schooler at Portsmouth, N. H., High, Tom was high-point man as a senior and the recipient of the Howard Hunt Trophy symbolizing the most valuable track performer . As a senior, he was high point man .
 Basketball for women has become a very different sport for women . J*W«rf of Jgjtuutan £l£c*r*r&y>~y -S&*~ is cur middlr .
 It is much faster, more competitive, and has increased the team coordination of the sport . It is now much faster and more competitive than ever before .
 One guard and one forward from each team is allowed to ""rove,"" or cover the entire court . That is, one guard and a forward, from each side are allowed to "rove"
 The number of dribbles has been increased, therefore making a much swifter game . The game has been improved since the introduction of the dribble rule .
 No longer does the play return to center (i.e., a pass from the official to the center forward) after each basket . The play no longer returns to center after the basket .
 An opposing guard takes the ball out of bounds at the end line after each field goal . Instead of a field goal kick, the ball is taken out of the field at end line at end of line .
 No longer is the ball ""dead"" after a foul shot, but if the basket is missed, then the ball is instantaneously put into play . The ball no longer is "dead" after foul shot . If a basket misses, the ball can now be put in play .
 If the free throw is made, an opposing guard, without stopping the clock, takes the ball out at the side line . If the ball is taken out, the clock is stopped and the ball goes back to the side . However, if the free throws are made, a guard takes
 To accompany the addition and deletion of rules, officiating has had to be revised, too, too . The rules have been added to the sport's governing body .
 New terms, such as for forfeit, balanced court, rovers, and face guarding, have been added . New terms have been introduced for the first time .
 An official's whistle, signaling ""timein"" and the foul ""boxing-up"" have been omitted from the present rules . The foul ""box-up" has been dropped from the current rules .
 Intramural Season of Women's Basketball starts at 8:30 a.m. ET . Intramurial Season starts at 6:30 p.m., 7:15 a. m. ET. ET, 7:20 p.a. ET and 7:10 p
 Inter-dorm basketball season begins . Some unusual games can be viewed . The games are often shown on the internet .
 The new rules are very confusing for girls adjusted to rules and regulations of the previous game . Girls adjusted to the new rules will have to adjust to the previous rules . Girls adjust to new rules for the first time .
 W.A.A.'s basketball will be more spirited, competitive, amusing, and enjoyable . Trackmen took second place in the 45 yard dash and the low hurdles, in addition to taking second place .
 Ken Child, who hadn't ran the hurdles until last year, took a first in the low hurdles and a third in the 45 yard dash . Another fine runner, Ken Child ran the 45-yard dash in 45 yards .
 All prospective football players are to meet Thursday, February 14 at 5:30 in the projection room of the gym .
 Students Obtain Academic Honor; S even Earn 4.0 GPA . Students even earn 4.3 GPA at Bates College .
 Miss Libbey announces that the following students achieved a quality point ratio of at least 3.5 points for their academic work last semester . The students achieved an average of 3.3 quality points per student for their work .
 Class of 1963 Linda Antoun, Carolyn Berg, Howard Blum, Elizabeth Buker, Joan Curran, William Dunham, *William Holt, *David Hosford, Barbara Hudson, Mary Jasper, Sue Jones, *Nancy Levin, Carol Long, Marjorie Lord, Mar
 Class of 1964 Robert Ahern, Marilyn Becker, Norman Bowie, David Campbell, Marion Day, Nancy Day, Douglas Dobson, Diane Gallo, Norman Gillespie, David Harrison, Nora Jensen, David Johnson, Judith Johnson, Roger Klein, Casimir Kolaski, Nancy Lester,
 Class of 1966 Susan Alward, Paul Baker, Everett Barclay, Elizabeth Bogdanski, Royce Buehler, Linda Carter, Lois Hebert, Karen Heglund, Alice Kaplan, Judith Laming, Rebecca Nally, Robert Parker, """"Kenneth Petke
 A Buddhist monk from Ceylon, at Bates for Religious Emphasis Week, spoke in the Chapel on Thursday, February 7 . Betty Bates Selection Buddhist Leader Explains Faith; Shows Its Role In World Peace; shows its Role in World Peace .
 His speech, entitled ""Buddhism and World Peace"" traced the origins of the religion as well as clarifying its customs and role in world peace .
 It does not require that its followers believe in a Supreme Creator, ritual, prayer, or worship . It doesn't require belief in the Supreme Creator .
 The Buddhist religion had its origin in Northern India during the 6th century B.C. when it revolted against the accepted practices and beliefs of the time and the Indian caste system .
 Buddhism disappeared from India and spread to the countries of Burma, Ceyion, Cambodia, Vietnam, Viet Nam, Laos, China, and Japan . Buddhism also spread to Burma, Vietnam and China .
 Today the Buddhist population includes 15,000 followers in England, 20,000 in Germany, and 170,000 people in the United States .
 From a meager though dedicated beginning of five persons, Buddhism has grown into a religion encompassing one-fifth of the world's people . Buddhism is one of the most important religions in the world, Buddhism .
 The founder of Buddhism was Siddhartha Gautama (563-483 B.C.), an Indian prince whose father was ruler of a small province in Northern India . Siddharthththam is the son of a king who ruled a province in India .
 Siddl hartha was raised in luxury and well-educated, yet at the age of 29 he renounced everything into which he had been born in order to search for a way of life that would bring happiness .
 Siddhartha and his followers spread his philosophy of life so that by the time he died, the Buddhist religion became an important influence in the lives of all it reached . Siddharth's followers spread the philosophy of Buddhism to all who they reached .
 This path consists of right belief, right resolve, right speech, right conduct, right occupation or living, right effort, right contemplation, and right ecstasy . This path includes right belief and right resolve and right conduct .
 Truman Grant Madsen spoke last February 8 about the Church of Jesus Christ of the Latter Day Saints . Madsen: The Buddhist does not blindly accept these Competitors for Betty Bates Title Madsen .
 President Madsen analysed the factors in their religion which are responsible for this community spirit . He presented a picture of the active community spirit of the Latter Day Saints .
 For the Mormon, God is pictured as the Eternal Father — literally the Father of the human family . The Mormon, for example, is seen as God's Eternal Father . God is also pictured as a father of the family .
 God is not an abstract concept but is, instead, a person, glorified and radiant . God is God, not abstract concept, but is a person who is glorified, radiant .
 A second concept basic to their religion is that of Jesus Christ as a man, the son of Man . not identical either in substance or in person with God with God . Jesus Christ is not identical with God, not identical in substance, or with God in person .
 To his people he is Redeemer, Lord, Savior, and, most important, Revealor . He is a man who had powers beyond those of most men .
 The Spirit of God demonstrates its presence through the love, peace, and faith of mankind . The spirit of God is revealed in the form of love and peace .
 This Spirit can manifest itself in the persons of men of the Latter Day Saints . This Spirit is manifested in the person of men in the church .
 Closely related to this idea of the Spirit of God is the Mormon picture of Man . The Mormon image of man is similar to that of the spirit of God .
 Each man, | as an offspring of God, has within him the embryonic traits of diety . Rather, each man, . as a . offspring of . God, he says . Rather than an offspring, each . man, he has within . him, he writes .
 "Every single human being has, within him, a tremendous potential for good," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 No matter how evil a man may appear, these "seeds of divinity" may still make themselves known . President Madsen called them the "seeding of divineinity"
 Both Miss Clarke and Nadine will speak Monday evening in the Little Theater, starting at 7:00m. Both will speak at 7 p.m.
 Nadine will set and comb out hair-dos for some of the girls . Miss Clarke will demonstrate the correct and incorrect ways to dress and to apply make-up .
 The week of nightly entertainment in Rand will be concluded Friday at 8:00m. in the Little Theater . Rand's week of weekly entertainment ends Friday night .
 At this time the candidates will be judged on their qualities of poise, leadership, good grooming, versatility and athletic interest . At the time, candidates are judged on qualities of leadership, poise and good grooming .
 From eight girls of diversified talents and interests, a Betty Bates of 1963 will be chosen . Betty Bates will be selected from eight girls who have diverse talents .
 Linda Browning, an English major from Fairhaven, Mass., is the President of Chase House . Browning is a junior at Chase House and a senior at Harvard University .
 She is a member of the Publishing Association board and the Choral Society . She is also a member .
 Linda is a Junior representative on the WAA board and a member of the Yearbook staff . Linda is also a Junior rep on the board and is a junior representative on WAA .
 Marion and Nancy Day, twins from West Hartford, Conn., are both Biology majors and members of Jordan Ramsdell . Marion Day, Nancy Day and Jordan Ramsell are Biology majors .
 Marion is president of Wilson House, Junior class secretary, and a member of the Yearbook staff . Marion is also president of the Wilson House and a junior class secretary . She is also a junior at Wilson House .
 Nancy, a Biology major, is a majorette and a member of the Intergovernment Committee . Nancy is also a major in the Biology major . She is the daughter of former President Richard Richard Nixon .
 Lois Warfield, an English major from Hampton, New Hampshire, is a proctor in the Women's Union . She is a member of the New Hampshire College's English Union .
 Two strains of Hindu religious thought, termed monism and theism, have been extensively developed . Theism and monism are the two strains of religious thought .
 The monistic school, based on the ancient Upanishad writing, claims the existence of a semi-personal god . Man's primary goal is merger with this being, says the school .
 ConViction is the belief that no individual is ever completely alone, beyond hope . Accompanying it is the hope that no one will be completely alone .
 "Spirit is at peace since it is all-inclusive and therefore is in no need of change" "God, the Father, is always within man. and man may yet redeem himself"""; spirit is at rest since it's all inclusive .
 Hindu theism has modified Hindu monism and the teaching of the Upanishads to a belief in a personal god, Krishna, who is directly concerned with man . Krishna is a Hindu god who is concerned with the human body .
 Salvation does not entail disappearance of the individual in a total merger with God, as in the Upanishad tradition, but consists of communion between God and man . Salvation means communion between man and God, not disappearance .
 The importance of the two existing traditions lies not in the truth of one and the falsity of the other, says Hein Hein . He concludes that the importance of each tradition is not in its falsity .
 He suggested that perhaps no religion can encompass God as He actually is, but each individual concept is an honor paid to the true God .
 He discussed Christianity, emphasizing that fears and prejudices must be broken down . He said Christianity must be accepted by man being subject to God alone .
 Reverend Handspicker began by examining the essence of Christianity . After an introduction by Sandy Prohl '64, he began examining Christianity .
 The Christian God is a God who seeks man without requiring man to endure hardships to gain His favor . He pointed out that the Christian God seeks man .
 He concerned himself with the divisions within the Christian religion, and primarily the tendency of most people to other sects, yet they believe their sect to be the only right one .
 We began recently to take steps toward unity through interdenominational conferences . But each religion must be willing to listen to the beliefs of other denominations, he says .
 Handspicker's address centered around the stand a Christian ought to take regarding the other religions of the world . The third division of the address was a discussion of Christianity's relationship with other religions .
 The only practical alternative to coercing people into Christianity through fear of ""Hell"" is sharing the knowledge of Christianity with others as we would share good news .
 In conclusion he asked that everyone ""Let God be God"" — while we desire Him to meet our requirements, and want freedom to decide for ourselves whether God exists, at the same time we demand a method of proving that He does exist .
 The debate topic is the first public discussion of the program of acceleration formulated by the faculty committee organized last autumn . Bates College should adopt an accelerated academic program, faculty committee says .
 The program is modelled around neither a trimester nor a quarter semester plan . Drafted as a recommendation which may be revised or scrapped, the program may be scrapped .
 At present this plan is being studied by faculty members to determine its effect on their departments . At present, faculty members are looking at the plan .
 Freshman Max Steinheimer, Linda Lash, and George Strait will argue the affirmative position . George Strait and Linda Lash will argue for the White House .
 Each member of the winning team will receive a prize of five dollars, and the best speaker will be awarded ten dollars .
 Stu-G Begins Proctor Selection; Juniors Vote On Classless Dorms. creeds and organizations inter1 Tournament from Thursday to Friday . Stu.G. begins Proctor selection; juniors vote on classless dorms .
 Saturday, February 14 through direct us toward God, but we 16. 16.
 Two teams will represent Bates,, and will alternate their positions in each debate . The debate will take place at Bates College in Washington, D.C.
 Howard Blum '63 and Robert Ahern '64 will form one team; John Strassberger '64 and Thomas Hall will form the other . Bates instructor Richard Warye will accompany the debaters . Janice Bauld '63, chairman of a committee rewriting the Constitution of
 The Bates Committee will send cover letters with the proposals to the eleven member schools . At the annual meeting of the Association to be held in April these recommendations for revision will be discussed .
 A committee will re-evaluate the present Bates Student Government Constitution . A committee composed of Nona Long '63, Gretchen Ziegler '64, Andrea Buck '65, and Ruth Christensen '66, will review the constitution .
 They will bring their suggestions to the en tire board, which will be aired . En tire board will air their recommendations at the end of the year .
 The process of selecting proctors and Stu-G officers for 196364 is in full swing . 196364 will be the first year of the Stu G officers .
 Proctor rating sheets and Student Government nomination papers have been distributed in all of the dormitories . Student government nomination papers are also being distributed .
 A formal vote is to be taken among junior women during, this week to determine whether they would prefer to live in in tegrated dormitories or in follow the same food schedule .
 The junior women must that the y were on durin S last also vote for one set of proctors semester, in the event that the majority of President Bette Ann Little juniors vote to spend their . semester .
 On Thursday, February 14, Mr John B Annett, Assistant to President Phillips, has arranged a ""career orientation"" supper meeting in cooperation with Mr Roger Schmutz '54 .
 Mr Schmutz (Training Director at Standard and Poor's) will discuss job candidating in general, and more particularly opportunities in financial analysis and investments advisory work . He will also discuss opportunities in investment and financial analysis .
 The supper meeting for men is planned for 6:00 in the Lane Room, Chase I Hall . The meeting will be held at Chase Hall in London .
 Also on Thursday, February 14, Mr Chester A Baker and Mr Paul Bernholdt '58 will interview men and women interested in the Young Men's Christian Association .
 Grant Company and Standard and Poor's Corporation. Grant Company provided analysis of the results .
 David Harper '59 will speak of his experiences doing alternative service for the American Friends Service Committee in Mexico . On Monday, February 18, Mr Ervin J Gaines from the Boston Public Library will interview Harper .
 Harper will illustrate his work with slides taken during the two years he worked in Mexican villages . Harper will talk about his experiences in the villages .
 The talk should be of particular interest to students interested in the Peace Corps or other work which involves major adjustments to different cultures .
 Harper was a geology major and was especially active on the Outing Club Council . Harper was also a member of the Geology Club Council at the University of Cambridge .
 Librarianship is a training program in libraries . The training program is open to men and women interested in the program . The program will run from January 13 to February 27 .
 Handy from E I. du Pont de Nemours and Company will interview men and women on Thursday, February 19 . The interview will take place on February 19, 2015 .
 Mr James Drake and Miss Mary Lou Hutchinson from Connecticut General Life Insurance Company will meet with interested men and women .
 Miss Mary Allen from the Girl Scouts will interview women interested in professional Girl Scouting . Also on Thursday, Miss Mary will interview girls interested in becoming professional Girl Scouts .
 UNITED PRESS INTERNATIONAL, a worldwide news service, offers a promising field to men graduates interested in journalism .
 UPI offers more flexibility than most newspapers in the sense that a man who would prefer to work in Washington, London, or Rome can usually get transferred to those cities when qualified . When qualified, UPI employees can be transferred to Washington, Rome, Washington or London .
 The starting salary is $83.75 per week and climbs to a minimum of $164.50 after six weeks . Starting salary starts at $83 per week, climbing to a maximum of $163.50 .
 Members American Gem Society . CASH CHARGE BUDGET JEWELER ' 73 Lisbon St. L.A.
 A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family . A gift to your college can result in a larger income for your family . Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney .
 Basil Rathbone, sulky and sauve, stumbling and finger snapping, grace the stage of the Bates Chapel . Three Crater's Edge by James Iernan .
 The Lewiston Daily SunJournal claimed that it was a great cultural event; that Bates would never forget his performance . Bates was awarded a gold medal for his role in the performance .
 As much as I rake my memory, I cannot think of anything I've seen in our chapel that was as absurd as that presentation, except perhaps perhaps perhaps the concert of the Lewiston High School Marching Band . "I can't think of a more absurd presentation than that of the
 Last week a small group of* about forty gathered in the Little Theater to listen to another man of the Legitimate theater .
 'Those who were attracted by the whispering campaign listened to a warm sincere man who made us rock with laughter and brought an occasional tear to the eye'
 Max Gordon started in the early days of Burlesque and grew through the great golden age of Vaudeville to become one of Broadway's great producers . Max Gordon is one of the Broadway's greatest producers .
 This trouper was every inch a showman and his story is the story of the theater . "This trouper is every inch showman," he said. "This is the theater."
 It was his story, a brief sketch of a sprawling and eventful career, that was the subject of his tale . "It's a story of his life, that's his story," he said .
 He said his first few informal words and his audience was his, cherishing every story as if they were sitting down with him at the stage delicatessen . He said: "He said his . first few . informal words"
 Everything he said was rich with folklore of the theater; stories that seemed so unbelievable and unforgettable that they could only be real . The stories were so unbelievable that they seemed to be so unbelievable, unforgettable .
 Mr Gordon blames the sick state of the on-Broadway theater on the lack of good plays . The lack of plays in turn on a lack of playwrights, Mr Gordon says .
 He also mentioned that there were few good producers and that both actors and writers were being stolen by other media . He also said there were a few good actors and that there are few good writers .
 Gordon is correct in most of the above, but he is not correct in assuming that the main cause is a lack of good plays . Mr Gordon is not right in saying that the problem is not good plays, it is a problem .
 Mr Gordon never said directly that the real trouble of the theater is mainly economic, which I believe it is. Mr Gordon said directly, that Mr Gordon . The real trouble is probably economic, he said, but that's what he said .
 Increased cost and inability to produce except on a large scale has caused a consolidation of the producers and a streamlining of the product . Increased cost has caused the producers to consolidate .
 Only half of the on-Broadway theaters that were operating thirty years ago are functioning today because of production and maintenance costs . Production costs are too high for theater theaters to operate today .
 The performing arts has turned the performing arts into a performing business . The theater benefits and wages that have turned the arts into performing business have increased .
 To move a piano from the stage to the pit two union piano movers are required . Union piano moverers are required to move the piano from a stage to a pit .
 To have a rehearsal, even with just a director and one player, a stagehand must be on stage and be paid union rates . Stagehand must stand there and read the Daily News if only to stand there .
 When you pay $6.50 or $7.20 or even $9.80 to see a play on Broadway you are doling out a pocketful of overhead for featherbedding and padded contracts .
 "Many good things may never be brightened by footlights with this method of judgment," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Many good things never brightened with footlights .
 In the next issue of the Student I will describe a most curious aspect of the theater, the newspaper reviewer, especially the pompous knucklehead, Walter Kerr . Walter Kerr is a pompous, snafu-patrony newspaper reviewer .
 The Wreck by PERRY BRUDER '65 . All males have had some odd dating experiences .
 I personally remember meeting one aged grandmother-of-the-date who asked me if I twisted, and a fond father with whom I had to indian wrestle to prove his ability to ""protect"" the fair daughter .
 Page Hall is home to Page Hall, a girl who lives in Page Hall . Page Hall was visited by a group of schoolgirls from around the world . The girls' home has been visited by members of the school's staff .
 They inspect me, and rapidly discuss my campus status, desirability, and whom I probably have come to see . They inspect him, and then discuss his campus status .
 One of Page's elite ""Crony Express" rushes upstairs to tell the news . Another member of the elite "crony express" rush upstairs to announce the death .
 This is no small problem, as the proper bell must be rung the proper number of times, lest some unnamed (and most certainly unrung for) species descend upon the victim . The proper bell is runged properly, and the victim is not harmed .
 There are two modes of being in the world, the sacred and the profane . The sacred and profane are different modes of life, says Pope Francis .
 The former concerns itself with the divine, the latter with itself . The two sides are at odds over whether or not the divine is divine .
 Eliskie maintains that the religious man, or the man in the sacred universe, has a pervading and omnipresent desire to live or enter into the realm of pure being, pure reality, as it was ""before the fall" or before man had dissipated his inherent divinity
 To a religious man, the profane man is existing in non-being, that he has no real essence, says a religious leader . To religious men, he says, "to a religious . man" The profane . man is a man who is not a man, but
 Within primitive religions, there is much use of myth, ritual, and symbolism . In many of the more sophisticated religions, myth and symbolism is often used in rituals .
 In the final analysis, these are manifestations of a symbolic interpretation of the Creation, or any creation, they are signs of God's creation .
 Since the creation of woman — with the removal of Adam's lower rib — was a surgical operation, the doctor contended that his profession was the oldest . The creation of a woman was also a surgical procedure, he said .
 The architect pointed out that in the creation of the world the techniques utilized by his trade enabled order to develop from chaos . The architect said that the techniques of his trade allowed order to be developed from chaos.
 He emphasized the role of man in his relationship with God and biological organisms .
 "Gone is the primitive, the divine passion, the subjection to the divine creative power," says Pope Francis . "The primitive is gone," he says .
 Music reflects the eruption of the ""superabundance of reality" from a mystical source and into the hearts of men, and remains to be explained, if it is not itself its own explanation .
 In these man God history i relationships there is no place for the cosmos . But in these man . relationships there are no places for the . cosmos .
 He even sees the nonreligious man ""not without his greatness."" importance of the creative thinker . He sees the importance of creative thinkers .
 Man's latent spiritual capacities provide the possibility for self-fulment or self-actualization . Man's potential to be self-realized is to be fulfilled or to be successful .
 Man cannot operate within the confines of any rigid law — there must always be movement . Man cannot be constrained by rigid law, there must be movement, says the author of the book .
 To preserve freedom, equilibrium is needed in our government, labor unions, sexual relations, and in every other area of human relations . equilibrium needed in government, unions and sexual relations .
 To exercise true freedom, man needs a certain ""at-homeness" with the world, says the author . To exercise freedom, he says, man must be at-homesess with world .
 Committee Alters The Ivy Weekend Proposal . Financial plans for Ivy Hop had been vetoed by the Extra-curricular Activities committee .
 The class through Bowie had received subsidies of $300 from the C.A., Stu C and Stu G and, with the difference put up by the class, planned a budget of some $2,000 .
 With this sum they planned to get a ""big name"" band — Jimmy Dorsey — to play for Ivy Hop . The money was intended to buy a band to play at the Ivy Hop event .
 President Bowie said that he met with the chairman of the Extra-curricular Committee, Dean Boyce, and discovered that according to established administrative procedure, dances must operate on a balanced budget .
 Ivy could not be done unless the price was radically prohibitive . Judging from previous attendance figures at Ivy this could not have been done .
 In addition to budget problems, the subsidizing of class dances by all-campus organizations would establish a precedent allowing all classes or other groups to demand allcampus subsidizing .
 "Administrative policy at the present time is not to encourage major transfers of funds from one organization to another," says the government . The administrative policy at present time would not be encouraging major transfers .
 The Dean, according to president Bowie, was most explicit when he said that the College was not opposed to ""big name"" bands . The Dean said that such organizations could be had if advance ticket sales indicated a paying proposition .
 He said we cannot, practically speaking, expect to offer social competition to Bowdoin, Colby, and Maine, because of a lack of available capital, and a small studentry . He said, however, that we can't expect to compete with the likes of Colby and
 The dorms voted to have their president call a class meeting as early as possible to discuss the matter . The dorm reps voted to call the president of their class meeting .
 Cut the $2,000 budget down but sell tickets in advance to try to get smaller grants from campus groups . Cut the budget down and try to sell tickets ahead of the event .
 Bowie stated that he would await the comments and decisions from his class meeting on Friday, and would proceed from that point . Bowie has resisted dogmatic patterns.
 Freedom is not a question of Jewish truth, but a state of openness to examine any truth, Rabbi says . Freedom not to question truth, it's to examine truth, he says .
 It rests with the high capability of man to create the ultimate academic freedom, says author . The ultimate freedom of academic freedom rests with man's capability to create it, he says .
 Judaism has lived in many countries and experienced many rigid patterns of discipline . Judaism has also lived in the Middle East and Latin America .
 "It is always renewing the concept of life in the process of creativity," says the author .
 Rabbi Zion answered questions ranging from the concept of truth in Isaiah to the distinctive qualities of Judaism . Following his lecture, Rabbi Zion also answered questions about the concept in Isaiah .
 In every case the Rabbi adapted his answer to the nature of the enquiry . The Rabbi's answers were adapted to the type of enquiry, Rabbi said .
 The editorial page should serve as a forum for a dialogue of ideas, issues, criticism and campaigns . We are happy to make this feature available to the public .
 Many students articulate verbally their reactions to editorials and articles, yet they fail to write letters . Students should write letters to the editorials, rather than write them, they say .
 Critics fear to expose their ideas; perhaps they are just lazy . Perhaps, however, perhaps, they fear exposing their ideas to the world .
 The average student goes to class, occasionally reads all his assignments, hits the Den, and perhaps dreams of going down to the Holly . With few exceptions, the average student is happy to go to class .
 Rarely does this student think seriously about non-required subjects; rarely does he engage in a dialogue about something as significant as fallout shelters . Rarely this student breaks the shackles of this tight little academic world and consider other horizons .
 We plead for a dialogue, an increased awareness of the controversial and stimulating ideas outside the classroom . We plead . for an increase of awareness of controversial ideas outside of the classroom.
 The efforts of logically organizing one's arguments and ideas apparently create obstacles, the student body is unwilling to face . The student body appears to be reluctant to face the obstacles of logical organizing .
 Paul Ketchem's letter: By its very nature every editorial which takes a stand is biased . By the very nature of every editorial, it is biased, he writes .
 The Outing Club has in the past ""tried to change the date"" indicates that alternatives have been considered . The club has also tried to change its date of the date .
 But simply because they have not borne fruit is no reason for stopping, it's no reason to stop them, he says . It's time for the government to get involved in the fight for the country's future .
 For many reasons the students do not support this event, the urge to go home is understandably great . For many of the reasons, the students are not supportive of this event . The urge to return home from this week's trip was understandably great.
 The Student editorial suggested devoting some of the efforts of the Outing Club to other weekends . The editorial did not suggest completely abandoning all post-semester frivolity .
 The Student looks at ""the total picture,"" a picture of a seething mass of male cock not limited to one weekend .
 We regret that Mr Ketchem finds the editorial ""lacking in insight;"" but even with his insights we shall not alter our position. We will not change our position, even if he finds his insights lacking .
 We do not condemn the Outing Club; we suggest again, however, that alternatives be considered, in spite of their past failure or suppression . We suggest again that alternatives should be considered .
 What many ""emancipated"" people reject is only a legalistic moralism, which is far from being the high point of even the Old Testament . What many people reject are only a legalistic moralism which is not the highest point of the Bible .
 One can have respect for the person who rejects Christianity as beautiful dream . One can also respect the Daffled by the problem of evil .
 You won't delude yourself into believing that you are a serious thinker while you merely toy with ideas that are only half understood or not understood at all . If you do feel this way, you won't be deluded yourself into thinking you're serious thinkers .
 Entered as second-clas­( matter at the I^ewlston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879 . Entered as a second-Clas»( matter) entered as a matter of interest at the post office in I*ewl
 Both Saint Paul and Jesus were saying that love, well served intelligence, is God's will . Love well served by intelligence is the will, says Saint Paul .
 It is His will ""that they may have life and have it more abundantly"", a goal to be best approached by intellinet love .
 This emphasis on intelligence is strikingly brought out by the fact that Jesus changed the last word of his quotation from ""might"" to ""mind" The editor of this paper has the right to make value judgments, but there is no justification for inconsistency in methods used when attacking campus organizations and student
 The editorial evaluating Winter Carnival was biased and was lacking in insight, almost to the point of ignorance, of the situation . The editorial was lacking insight and lacked insight into the Winter Carnival .
 The Outing Club has been faced with the problem of making Carnival benefit the entire student body . For four years the club has faced the same problem for four years .
 Carnival is a convenience to the Administration because it gives the students on campus after exams organized activities which to participate . Carnival is an opportunity for students to participate in after exams . Carnival was a convenience for the Administration as it gives students the opportunity to participate.
 We have tried to change the date so that it would fall during February, but this plan was surpressed by the Administration, he said . The White House has not responded to the request .
 Carnival is now set up for those who wish to participate in the activities . Carnival has been set up in place of those who want to participate . Carnival activities are now open .
 The Outing Club agrees, but with the lack of support shown by the students we cannot finance a Utopia of individualized, tailored, social, activities . The Club agrees .
 Winter Carnival is faced with the problems of a disadvantageous date, lack of student support, and financial limitations . Winter Carnival will be held on January 1, 2015 .
 "The Student's" goals may be to build up what social life is left at Bates instead of tearing it apart by negativism . I suggest that knowledge about the subjects expressed in future editorials should be examined more closely .
 The ideal method of approach was expressed in last week's editorial on Student-Faculty Ratio . The ideal way of approaching is to reduce the number of faculty members per student .
 The word ""Republican"" connotes a basic philosophy of the essence of human existence . I'm Present Republican Aims And Philosophy .
 This article attempts to convey the fundamental aspects of this philosophy . This article is an attempt at conveying the basic aspects of the philosophy of this article .
 The basic concept of the Republican philosophy is that of Freedom for the whole individual . The Republican Party is based on the idea of the individual's individual freedom .
 Republican philosophy sees man as a creature with two sides, a material side and a spiritual side . Republican philosophy: Man has two sides: material and spiritual . Republican philosopher: Man's spiritual side is spiritual side, material side is material .
 It is the purpose of this philosophy to establish and maintain a political atmosphere where both may flourish . The purpose of the philosophy is to maintain and maintain an environment where both parties flourish .
 It is a philosophy which takes into account the differences between men, and in accordance with these attempts to establish a climate conducive to man's development of his unique self as he sees fit .
 Although much is said of the ""common man,"" it has been the ""uncommon man" that has made this nation what it is today . The "uncommon" man has made the country what it has today, says President Obama .
 A philosophy which permits and encourages the existence of the ""uncommon man" is a philosophy that will prevent a society from becoming stagnant, and will allow it to advance in full accordance with the individuals who constitute it . A philosophy that allows a society to advance will be beneficial to society,
 It believes that the individual has the right and the capacity to set his own goals, not those of a paternalistic state, and to pursue them wisely .
 It forms a state of equilibrium in the division of power between the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of government . The state of balance in government forms an equilibrium .
 It is also a strong supporter of m states' rights, and for that matter, community rights . It also supports m states rights, as well as m communities rights .
 Social legislation should be initiated only when individual cannot cope with the problem with his own resources, the government says . It wants to check the present trend toward Socialism, but not Socialism .
 It sees any other action as detrimental to indiv dual responsibility, and thus detrimental to that unique quality which has made our nation great . It is detrimental to the unique quality that has made us great .
 It tests the teachings of Buddha . It is the work of a student at the University of San Francisco .
 The message of Buddha is one of non-violence and peaceful existence . Buddhist believes two factors are responsible for conflict in the world . The Buddha believes that two factors, such as violence, are responsible .
 Vinita stated, ""Change must come from the hearts of the people. One is the greed of the optimist and the other is the hate in the pessimist," Vinita said .
 The goal of Buddhism is to see things as they really are, and this necessitates an escape from greed and hate . Buddhism is the goal of Buddhists to see the world as it really is, says the author . Buddhism's aim is to free people from their hatred of greed and
 He concluded by asking the question many will ask of the Buddhist, and by answering with a question of his own . He concluded with the question: "What do you think of Buddhism?"
 A members are reminded thai the February meeting will be held tonight, February 13, at 7 p.m. at the home of Dr. and Mrs. Mrs. A .
 Lewision Superintendent of Schools, Mr Russell, will speak on teacher recruitment . Mr Russell will speak about teacher recruitment in the classroom .
 The premium on couch space gives way to one on porch area, as a great mob of couples blocks the doorway . Crowds of couples block the doorway of the porch .
 Embarrassed, I leave, trying to elbow everyone aside, while staring straight ahead, for even a chance look to left or right draws a multitude of icy stares . Embarrassing, I try to elbow people aside, but I'm embarrassed .
 "I am thirsty and nothing can quench my thirst like a few bottles of beer," says Charles E. Smith . "The supermarket is crowded but I don't mind the crowds," he says .
 I sampled that brand over there last week but I didn't like it. A decision must be made, well let's see, I said . A decision is made, and I'm not sure if I'm going to make it . I sampled the brand last week, but didn't
 "I think my risk is reduced because I do not have to pay as much as the higher priced brand. Ah, here is a lower price brand (has a pretty good label too)
 The same methodology is carried on by businessmen, on a more sophisticated scale . Although my example might be considered inconsequential, the same methodology might be carried on .
 The businessman must choose between not merely two, but a myriad of alternatives every time he considers production problems, such as the buying of capital goods, or what pricing policy to follow . The businessman has to choose between two or more alternatives when considering production problems .
 A considerable amount of economic theory is centered around the act of choosing between alternatives of action . Economic theory is based on the choice of what is best to do and what is the best?
 As I suggested last week, our government must make production, distribution, and employment of military goods . However, the economist faces a problem in attempting to help our prodigal Generals in choosing the economically correct proce dures of defense spending .
 Gen erals view their available choices differently than you and I . Economists consider our pos sible choices in buying consumer goods in consumer goods . Gen . erals are more likely to buy what they want to buy .
 RAND Corporation economists have spent more time and money on this issue than I have . I tip my hat to the economists of RAND Corporation who have spent considerably more time on this problem .
 A market is used by the consumer to choose that which best agrees with his utility function . A market allows people to choose which best suits their utility function, such as a market .
 We are assuming here that we as consumers have the privilege of choosing the best alternatives from the available methods of national defense. We are assumed here that . We are . assuming that we . as consumers . have the . privilege to choose the . best alternatives .
 This would coincide with the pure economic theory of consumer sovereignty . This would be the first time the government has taken action to take action .
 National defense may be considered a public good, but it might not necessarily be a pure (or Samuelson) public good . National defense is considered a national good by the U.S. government .
 Anti-aircraft missile battalions in northern Maine give more protection to us than the battalions of California . Both have something to say as to whether we win or lose a war .
 Winning or losing the war would involve the essence of a pure public good . Now, winning or losing a war would be a victory for the public good.
 Anti-aircraft missile battalions in northern Maine would be a public good only to those in that area . Anti-missile battalions would be public good to those of that area only .
 We see that an interdependence of public good conceptions exist and because of this an economic military market will fail to reach a social optimum . We see an inter-immediate inter-public good conception exist .
 Consumers are incapable of determing our own state of military preparedness since a suitable market mechanism is lacking . Therefore, we as consumers are unable to deter ourselves from our own military readiness . The market mechanism to deter military readiness is lacking, says the author .
 The interdependence is aggravated because we are not always certain as to the state of consumer intelligence . Also the inter-dependency is aggravated as we do not always know what consumer intelligence is available .
 We might not know everything there is to know about waging a modern war, or defending our shores from attack . We may not be the only ones to know everything about waging modern war . But we are here to tell the truth .
 The economist can not to any great degree help the Generals purchase military goo'ds because the latter refuse to operate in the context of an economic market . The economist cannot help the General buy military equipment because he can't help the military .
 Military decisions are made administratively in a partially decentralized organizational structure (sometimes called a Pentagon) where today's problems hardly resemble those of yesterday . The Pentagon has a partially decentralized organizational structure, sometimes called the Pentagon .
 An inconmensurability of costs and risks for military spending makes it very difficult to devise a valid test of efficiency . Moreover, a lack of cost and risks makes it difficult to assess efficiency, he says .
 Without this measurement, economic efficiency as known in the business world is hard to achieve, says CEO . "Without this measurement it is impossible to achieve," he says. "Economic efficiency is very difficult to achieve"
 Military planners must include in their calculations the possible actions of an intelligent enemy . In addition, the technological revolution in military goods staggers the imagination, military planners must .
 Perhaps next week we can help these military men achieve some order in their spending . We hope to see some order next week in the Pentagon .
 You should be proud, not only of the efforts of the . efforts of a fine and inspired team, but also of yourselves . You should also be proud of your efforts, writes Sportsmail.com .
 The 'Cats' record at game time was 3-10, with 8 losses in a row, and their opponent being rated third in New England small college ranks .
 A fine-sized gathering of spectators filled the cage to see the defeat of the Bowdoin Polar Bears at the hands of our fine track team . This enthusiasm carried over to the next day, as well as the victory over the Polar Bears in the final .
 Cheers and yells again proved to be the rule, and this spirit was evidenced through the fact that the majority of the throng didn't leave until the final event of the meet was over . The spirit was evident throughout the meet, with the majority staying until the last event was over
 It's a great feeling to hear Hathorn ring for something other than the summoning of classes . Hathorn is a great thing to hear from Hathorn .
 This Saturday, the sixteenth of February, three members of the Bates student body will travel to Sugarloaf Mountain to participate in the M.I.A. state series ski meet .
 The three men, Tom Adams, Al Skoksberg, and Pete Koch, are going on their own initiative and as individuals, but through the cooperation of Dr. Dr. Tom Adams . Dr. Koch is going on his own initiative .
 Lux and the athletic department, they have been properly cleared and entered officially in the meet . Lux says the team has been cleared to compete in the event . Lux: "It's a good sign that they are going to be allowed to compete at the meet"
 They will compete in the Alpine events, consisting of the downhill and slalom races . They will be competing in the downhill, alpine skiing events .
 The first event will commence at 10m., the second at 1:30m, with either time subject to possible change due to weather conditions . The first and second event will take place at the beginning of the morning session .
 We will be eager to see what they can do, and we Wish them the best of luck . We are eager to hear what they have to do .
 He feels that though Howie still must actually make the team, his chances are good, in view of the fact that he is a needed linebucker, and was sought for as a free agent .
 Coach Hatch also indicated that the Chicago Bears, unlike many of the N.F. teams, takes on a fewer number of rookies, thereby enhancing further his prospects . Coach Hatch said the Bears take on fewer rookies than many other teams .
 He stated finally that he was ""very pleased with the choice,"" a statement which I feel expresses all of our feelings. He said he was "very pleased" with the decision . The president said he would be happy with his decision .
 Reports from Orono bemoan the loss of four basketball players due to academic difficulties . Reports say four players have been forced to leave school due to difficulties .
 This is that word is out that I have passed another Indian History quiz . Though this last item is unrelated to athletics, it's related to ""sports"", and this is related to sports .
 Down by seven at the close of the half, a fast-breaking and ball-hawking Bobcat five, led by the deadly shooting of Seth Cummings, pecked away at the lead and opened up a comfortable margin .
 The Cardinals came to Bates with a very respectable record showing only one defeat to powerhouse Williams College . Wesleyan Once Beaten Wesleyan once Beaten the Cardinals .
 Looking beyond Bates proved to be their downfall as the 'Cats were more than ready to break back into the win column . However, looking beyond Bates proves to be the downfall of the game for the Cats .
 All-state nominee, Cummings, scored 16 of his twenty-23 points in the first half . Captain Thorn Freeman chipped in with ten points plus nine rebounds .
 Cardinals Open Slight Lead with a 1-0 lead over the Cardinals . Game got off to an exceptionally slow start as both teams struggled to find the range . Cardinals take early lead in the first round .
 Wesleyan forward Paul Brands started hitting and the Cardinals opened up a twelve-point lead . It looked like the frigid 'Cats were in for a rough night . Wesleyan defeated the Cats by 12 points .
 Bates had hit on only eight out of twentyfive attempts from the floor . Bates also hit eight for 14 for 14 from the freethrow line . Bates hit on eight for eight from 25 attempts .
 Cardinals went eleven for twenty-23 from the floor and nine out of 13 from the line . Cardinals went 11 for . twenty-three from . the floor, nine for . thirteen from the . line and 11 for 22 from the field . Cardinals failed to score a single point in the
 Coach Ullom changed the tactics of the 'Cats which proved to be extremely successful . Three Guard Offense is the first time the 'cats have used a three-guard offense .
 Wesleyan defeats Wesleyan to close the Wesleyan lead . The 'Cats play a fast-paced style of play . Wesleyan leads Wesleyan in the first half .
 The key to the fast-breaking attack was the rebounding of Freeman and Carl Johannesen, along with the new three-guard Bates offense . The new three guard Bates offense was the new addition to the team .
 The playing of the sophomore speedsters, Cummings, Don Beaudry, and Ted Krzynowek at the same time proved to be too much for Wesleyan to cope with . Wesleyan was defeated by Wesleyan at the University of Cambridge .
 Time and time again the Bobcat forwards cleared the boards and the three guards were off to the races . The Bobcat forward was off the races in the first half of the game .
 Cardinals could do nothing to stop the determined 'Cats' Cardinals . Cardinals could not stop the 'cats' from winning the game .
 Johannesen hit from inside to close the spread to one point . Cummings Sparks Surge Surge Surge . Johannesen closed the gap with a shot from inside .
 Promising freshman Mike Hine connected on a drive to push the 'Cats into a one-point lead once again . Hine's goal pushed the Bobcat back into the lead .
 At this stage in the game Cummings took over and personally made certain that the nine-game losing streak would be snapped . The win was the first time Cummings had taken over .
 In the last six and a quarter minutes he hung up six field goals and three free throws in scoring fifteen of the last seventeen Bobcat points . The Bobcat scored 15 of the 17 points in the final six minutes .
 Wesleyan knew Cummings would be getting every shooting assignment but still failed to contain him . Wesleyan did not manage to contain Cummings in the Wesleyan game .
 Johannesen Johannesen and Paul Castolene set up beautiful picks as he moved about working for his shots . Johannesen set up a beautiful selection of beautiful shots .
 Cummings was carried off the court on the shoulders of teammates and spectators alike . Cummings was then carried off of the court by teammates and fans alike .
 Bates was fourteen for thirtyfour from the field in the last twenty minutes and eight of ten from the line . Bates was . fourteen for . thirtyfour in the final twenty minutes of the game . Bates made eight of 10 of ten of the line attempts .
 Cardinals connected on only nine of 30 field attempts and five out of six from the free throw line . Cardinals turned cold and connected on nine of thirty field attempts . Cardinals shot only five of six free throws from free throws .
 The game will perhaps go on record as one of history's longest, due to the number of fouls committed . The game was perhaps one of the longest in history, with fouls being committed .
 Coach Leahy's platooning wore down the AllStars, and the JV's pulled away in the second half as the Stars ran out of gas . The AllStars won the game in the first half .
 The balanced scoring of the Bobkitten attack showed Bob Johnson and Bob Mischler with fourteen points apiece, Paul Savello with thirteen, Dave Heckman with twelve, John Wyman with eleven, and Joe Matzkin with ten . The balanced scorers were Bob Johnson, Bob
 The All-Stars were led by Phil Tamis and Bill MacNevin who accounted for fifteen and eleven points respectively . Phil Tami and Bill Tamis accounted for 15 and 11 points .
 Mark Silverstein hit for seven and Walt Lasher for six to round dut the scoring leaders for the Stars . Silverstein and Lasher also hit seven and seven runs for the team .
 Tufts Jumbo's trek north to the Bobcats' den . The 'Cats swing back into action on Friday the fifteenth Friday .
 The Wesleyan game has showed that the 1963 edition of Bates basketball has some surprises in store for its fans . Friday night's Tufts game would be the place to hush their skeptics with another win .
 Five games remain on the schedule for Coach Ullom's hoopsters, three of them important state series clashes . The 'Cats are more than a possibility for a fast finish .
 Finn Wilhelmsen and Eric Silverberg win the one mile . The two-mile winners are known for their one-two punch in the two mile race .
 Finn overtook Chamberland of Bowdoin and left him at the hands of Silverberg . Silverberg passed the fading Bowdie with two laps remaining to take the lead .
 Bruce Frost of Bowdoin dominated the weight events, winning three and setting two meet records . Frost set two records at the meet .
 Senior John Curtis and junior Dave Harrison captured second and third respectively in the 35 lb. weight event . Curtis and Harrison won the 35lb. weight competition . Curtis, Harrison and Harrison finished in the event .
 Two Bates frosh, Bill Davis and Martin Sauer, grabbed third places behind Frost in the discus and shot put respectively .
 Paul go+ perhaps his fastest start of the present campaign in the 45 yd. dash . The race was his all the way. Paul go+.
 Bill LaValle sprints home ahead of the field in both the 45 yd. high hurdles and 45 y. low hurdles . The hurdler repeated last week's fine performance against Boston College .
 Bill event to watch is the pole vault and this proved no exception in Saturday's meet . The pole vault was the highlight of Saturday's event .
 Showing the finesse and competitive spirit that held the crowd to the end, Bob Kramer cleared the bar with picand Finn .
 "Nicking another point to the cause by j the bar at 12' 6"" shows much snatching a third place in the highs. Nicking another .
 Won by everdangerous sophomore G e r r r i t promise for Bob in future .
 One of Bates College's all-time standtout athletes has been given a contract to play professional football with a leading National Football League pro-team . The third meet record of the afternoon came in the one mile distance .
 Howard S Vandersea, of Whitinsville, Mass., co-captain of the 1962 Bates football team and an excellent baseball player, has been sent a contract from the Bears effective next next year .
 Despite a near collision as Bowdoin's Ted Slowik fell attempting to pass Ford on the inside, John managed to sidestep him and win the first heat handily .
 Garnet Sweeps High Jump . Tom Bowditch wins his specialty, the high jump . Garnet wins his 'Cat of the week'
 Paul Williams and Dave Johnson tied for second place behind Bowditch's 6' 6' winning effort .
 Finn Wilhelmsen and Eric Silverberg repeat their earlier victory in the one mile . They hit the wire one-two in the two mile at the end of the race .
 Silverberg proved to be the workhorse on the team as he came right back to compete in the 1000 yd. run in which frosh Marsh Snow won third place . Marsh Snow came third place in the 1,000-yard run .
 Joe Brogna 81 38 .469 Peter Finn 54 25 .463 Al ^oane 58 24 .414 John Gillette 74 30 .405 Harry Silverman 83 32 .386 Bill Flahive 70 27 .386 Ken Stone 99 37 .374 Ken Federman 92 34 .370
 La'die Deem'r 15 14 .933 Al Loane 32 26 .812 Seth Cummings 19 15 .789 Peter Finn 21 16 .762 Ken Stone 41 30 .732 Thorn Freeman 19 13 .684 Dick Whitmore 25 15 .600 . Dave Svends'
 Coach Slovenski was impressed with this effort and realizes that with no seniors on the relay team, he'll have the nucleus of a fine squad next year . The team is ranked No. 1 in the U.S. and has no seniors .
 Lux stated, ""we are recommending that he not sign the contract until he completes his college athletic career next spring" Lux stated that he is not expected to sign the deal .
 Robert Hatch, Bates football coach, expressed his pleasure at Vandersea's selection by one of the outstanding pro-football teams of the country .
 Seth Cummings and Finn Wilhelmsen each turned in spectacular performances during the past week's sports action while leading their respective Garnet teams to victory . Seth Cummings was a junior hoopster and a junior trackman .
 Cummings nailed down a starting berth at guard during pre-season drills . Under Coach Vern Ullom's Bobcat basketball regime, Cummings is expected to start at guard . Cummings is a senior at the University of Maryland .
 He is the leading scorer on the Bates squad . His play has been consistent and he is consistent . He is also a leading scorer for the team .
 All-Maine honors three consecutive years for middle line backer . As a senior he made the Little All-America selections as a senior .
 As a center for Coach Hatch, he was named to the Eastern College Athletic Conference All East Team . Then, he moved to guard, he immediately made All-East the following week . As a senior, he played for the East Coast team .
 He is considered a power hitter and good first baseman on the Bates nine . The Bates nine is considered to be a good power hitter .
 A native of Shrewsbury, Massthe 'Cat harriers to a well-de Massachusetts, Cummings was a served victory Saturday over the starting guard for two years . Finn Wilhelmsen, a junior thin .
 Finn's time of 9:52. in the two mile events won the Central Massachusetts ; mile run established a new meet High School campionships in record, basketball during his junior and senior years . Finn was the sparkplug of mile and two mile .
 While in high school, Cummings also partici1 t j c i pate( j pated in baseball, track, and cross country . Cummings also participated in baseball and track .
 Finn Finn entered Bates from New Hampton School where he parin cross country and skiing . Finn is a senior at Bates . Finn was a junior at New Hampton .
 Finn was the number twelve finisher in the New England Cross Coun; ing . Finn suffered shin splints as a frosh. He has been advised to rest and try Championship .
 Slovenski was awarded the distinction of being the student-athlete of his class at high school .
 Seth entered Bates with the class of 1965 and decided that economics would be his major field and basketball his sport specialty . Seth decided to focus on economics and basketball at the time .
 As a freshman he had the determined Finner back on the tracks, much to the relief of Garnet sports followers . Finn is hoping for a finish in the 9:30 bracket this year and the word is out for opponents to watch out .
 Using the platoon system in the first half, all of the Bobcats were very cold from the outside . The Bobcats used the system to get out of the game .
 The Bobcats, utilizing their zone press, posed a mild threat early in the second half, but never seemed to find the range . Bobcats' zone press was a major factor in the game .
 Jayvees win sixth straight win against two defeats . The lead changed several times in the second half . Bob Mischler and Johnson score goals in the win .
 Johnson led the Bobkittens with 21 points, Savello and Mischler each contributed 17 . Savello added 17 points for Bobkitties . Johnson also scored 21 points .
 John Wyman added 10 points, many of them coming at crucial points in the game . The win was the first time the two teams had played together in the last five years .
 Head Football Coach Robert Hatch has announced that all prospective football players are to meet Thursday, February 14 at 5:30 in the projection room of the Alumni Gym .
 The ""Golden Boys"" won it by a mere two points, which is a testimonial to the valiant effort of Roger Bill . Roger Bill.
 J.B.'s high man Vance scored 13 points for the club . Phil Tamis scored 11 for the O.C. club . Vance was J.C.'s highest scorer with 13 points .
 Mark Silverstein was high man for the ""child prodigies"" with 22 points . Bill Graham and Paul Sadlier scored 11 apiece for the losers . Mark Silverstein and Bill Graham scored 11 each for the loser .
 Dick Butz is manager of Pennsylvania Bell's Lancaster business office . He says Pennsylvania Bell is a good business model for the company .
 Dick supervises the 25 employees who are responsible for sales and the service needs of approximately 41,000 customers and their half-million-dollar monthly billing . The 25 employees are responsible with sales and service needs for approximately .
 His initiative has paid off in terms of satisfaction and increased responsibility, he said . His initiative paid off, he added .
 Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America . Dick Butz and the other young men like him helped bring the best communications service to the U.S. home .
 B-I still remains in a 3-way tie as Smith Middle, John Bertram Hall, and West Parker all won their games . Smith Middle remains in the top 3, with West Parker and Smith Middle all winning .
 Hank Stred finally made the big time, scoring 18 points for the winners . Hank Sted scored 18 points in the victory .
 J.B., led by Grant Farquhar's 21 points, defeated them 53 to 35 . Grant Farqhar scored 21 points for the Faculty . The Faculty defeated the Faculty by 53-35 .
 WP ""team"" scored 32 points, while Smith North scored 31 . Smith North kept the game honest by scoring 31 points .
 Smith South takes two wins in the ""C"" league . Smith South boys take two wins for the first time .
 Smith South beat Smith South in a close one . Dave Parmelee and John Bertram Hall both played well enough to give Smith South victory .
 J.B.'s beloved Stu Solomon led his squad with 14 points . Pierce was high man for R.B. with 9 pointe, while Pierce was a high man with 9 points .
 National Review Publisher Speaks This Sunday Night at 8:00 in the Chase Hall Ballroom . William A Rusher, publisher of the National Review, will discuss the probable 1964 presidential nominees this Sunday evening . Rusher will also discuss the likely 1964 candidates .
 Rusher's visit on campus is sponsored by the Young Republican club . Rusher will also address Monday's Chapel assembly on U.S. domestic policy .
 Rusher has served as publisher* of the National Review, one of the nation's leading conservative publications, since 1957 . Club President Anderson emphasized that not just club members, but all interested students are invited to Sunday night's discussions .
 Both he and the magazine believe that a strong conservative sentiment exists in America . This trend will greatly influence such important facets of politics and government as the next presidential election and future domestic policy .
 He has made four trips to Europe in the past four years, covering almost every country on the continent . He has visited almost every continent in four years .
 Recently he returned from a tour of Africa, which he says increased his understanding of the battle for survival which freedom and communism are fighting in Africa .
 He served as associate counsel to the United States Senate's Internal Security Subcommittee in 1956 . He was associate counsel for the Senate's internal security subcommittee . He served in the Senate from 1956 .
 In this capacity, he participated in hundreds of public and secret hearings concerning the communist menace in America . The hearings included hundreds of hearings concerning communist menace .
 In October 1956, he went to Honolulu to prepare for the hearings there, and in November of that year he was sent to Austria by the senate on a special investigatory mission .
 Rusher, who was born in 1923, received his A.B. at Princeton, William A Rusher majoring in its school of public and international affairs . Rusher is the son of former President George W. Bush .
 After three years in the Air Force he entered Harvard Law School, where he received his law degree in 1948 .
 He served as a member of the Executive Committee of the Young Republican Nationtional Federation . Also during this period he served as member of Executive Committee .
 Russian-born political scientist Nicholas Goncharoff is on campus as a Danforth Visiting Lecturer in the Bates Lecture Series tomorrow and Friday . He is the Secretary for International Education of the National Council of YMCAs .
 He will present the George Colby Chase Lecture on ""The New Soviet Society — Education, Indoctrination, and Search for Democratization of Life" tomorrow evening at 8 .
 Four Bates debaters participated last weekend in the Dartmouth Invitational Tournament . At chapel service on Friday, February 22, he will speak on ""The Wholeness of Man in a Divided World.""
 The tournament was composed of fifty outstanding teams from across the country, who took part in the debates by invitation only . The debates were held by invitation-only .
 The Bates ""A"" team, Howard Blum '63 and Robert Ahern '64, finished with a 5-3 record, one short of the 6-2 record needed to qualify for the final round . The Bates team was eliminated from the last round .
 They defeated teams from Scranton, Saint Peter's, William and Mary, Dartmouth, Dartmouth and Saint Anselm's . They lost to three mid-western teams, Northwestern, Emporia, and Southern Illinois .
 The ""B"" team, consisting of John Strassburger '64 and Thomas Hall '64, compiled a record of 2-6, also short of the qualifying mark . The ""A" team also fell short of qualifying mark for the tournament .
 They defeated teams from Illinois Normal and Fordham; and lost to teams from Dade, Brandeis, George Washington, Ohio State, Wake Forest, and Navy . The team also defeated Illinois Normal, Fordham, Dade and George Washington .
 MIT debate teams will participate in the annual MIT Debate Tournament on Friday and Saturday, February 22 and 23 . These same teams will take part in the MIT debate tournament .
 There will be a ""Bates Day"" at the Augusta Kiwanis Club on Thursday, February 21st .
 Goncharoff: Developed nations of the world must be recognized . The U.S. should be recognized as developed nations, he argues . The world's most developed nations must now be recognized, he says .
 They are ripe for vast political, economic and social changes — now . And they're ripe for social and political changes . Now. Now.
 Goncharoff conducted a series of seminars for the YMCA on the Friday Narks Climax Of Betty Bates Week . The annual Betty Bates night will be presented Friday, at 8:00 , in the Little Theatre .
 The presentation of Betty Bates 1963 will highlight the week's activities for the women on campus . Betty Bates will be presented at the end of the week at the University of Columbia .
 The three rounds of competition will begin after an introduction by Margie Lord, mistress of ceremonies . Margie will be introducing the event at the end of the day .
 In the second, the girls will display their athletic ability in various games . In the first, they will be shown how much they have to do .
 The third round of competition will require each of the candidates to answer both a serious and humorous question . Candidates will be asked to answer a serious question .
 Hinman and Miss Nell were instructors in Physical Education . June Gustafson '63 was Stu-G representative, Virginia Erskine '63, WAA representative. Virginia .
 In addition to the competition, other student entertainers will perform . The competition will be held on June 14 .
 Anne Cawley '66, of the WAA, has arranged a Fashion Show with freshman and sophomore models . Karen Hastie '66 is the narrator of the show .
 In 1958 he toured the world studying the needs of youth in nineteen countries of Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East . In 1961, his tours covered several of the Latin American nations .
 Goncharoff: "We met people from a tremendous variety of fields. We met a lot of people from all over the world" Gonchoff: "We met a variety of people in all fields"
 Some were intellectuals and students, and some belonged to the business world, labor movements, military groups and political parties . Others belonged to labor, business, labor, military and political groups .
 Goncharoff was the son of a career diplomat who turned to the Orthodox priesthood . Born in Kiev, Russia, in 1921, he was educated in communist schools . He is now married to a former Russian Orthodox priest .
 He was also a member of the Orthodox Church despite religious persecution . He died at the age of 92 .
 Later he was captured and interned, first in a prisoner-of-war camp in the Ukraine, and then in a forcedlabor camp in Germany . He was later interned in a German forced labor camp, where he was held until his death .
 After the war Goncharoff joined the staff of the YMCA, and in 1948 became president of Dr. Dr. George Gonchoff . In 1948 he was president of the Dr. John Sutter's Dr. Sutter .
 At the same time he served as secretary in Germany to the Russian Student Christian Movement . At the time, he was secretary to the German Student Christian movement .
 Goncharoff was connected to the National Council YMCA public affairs program . Goncharoffs was a member of the YMCCA's public affairs team .
 Goncharoff will conduct informal sessions with students and faculty members Thursday and Friday mornings . The sessions will be held at universities across the U.S. and Canada .
 A preliminary meeting of candidates for this year's Miss Lewiston-Auburn Pageant will be held this Sunday, February 24, at 2:00'm. in the Saint Joseph school auditorium .
 This meeting is designed to bring together any girls who may be interested in entering the Miss America competition . It is held under the auspices of the Lewiston Jaycees .
 Entrant must be single and never been married, divorced or had a marriage annulled . Entrant is single and must be divorced or divorced from any previous marriage .
 Entrant must be of good character and possess poise, personality, intelligence, charm, and beauty of face and figure . Entrant is required to possess pois, personality and intelligence .
 E Entrant must either be a resident of city, county or territory in which local Pageant is 1 held for six months prior to Pageant . Entrants must be a college or university student in city or university where Pageant held .
 Pageant officials are hoping to have college girls enter the competition . This last requirement points up the desire of officials to include college girls in the pageant .
 Any girl presently attending Bates who feels she may be interested in entering the Miss America Pageant is urged to attend the meeting .
 Dr. Chute Comments On Religious Atheism . Bates students greeted him at the end of the day .
 Chute, the new head of the Biology, Mathematics and Geology Departments with appreciative laughter as he commented on their captivity under the compulsory chapel program .
 The audience listened attentively to a humorous introduction, then settled back in expectation of an entertaining 20-minute show .
 Chute first expressed the opinion that the recent Religious Emphasis Week was incomplete without a representative of atheism . Chute: The week should be complete with a representative from atheism .
 Critics of atheism claim that if no Creator is accepted, all is chaos . Atheist answers that it is possible to view chaos as the interaction of chaos . Harper Lectures To Gould Club On AFSC .
 Atheism does not claim a design or purpose for the world as a whole, but maintains that the individual can find meaning in a chaotic world . Atheism is not a religion, but a belief that individuals can find purpose in chaotic world.
 Art and science must serve to relate the fragmentary pieces of reality offered to human understanding . Art must serve as a tool to relate fragments of reality to humans, says author .
 The decision between right and wrong in a given situation depends on the individual, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Atheist admits no ""pseudo-objective" moral or ethical law; he, himself, is the only one on whom he may depend . Atheists admit no "pseudo"-objective moral or ethical law"; he admits no possible moral law
 Its implications lead to an acptable mythology, a meaningful life for the individual, and a satisfactory ethical code . The implications of the book lead to a satisfying ethical code, author says .
 Russell Speaks To SEA Group About Teaching Requirements . Russell Speak to SEA Group about teaching requirements . Russell addressed the group last Wednesday evening .
 Lewiston school system seeks qualified teachers for available positions in the school system . School principal says he is looking for qualified teachers in the Lewiston area .
 The first consideration is the applicant's appearance and manner . The teacher must create a positive impression, especially since younger students many •times seek to emulate .
 A well-dressed, well-groomed individual with a reliable sense of social responsibility will be preferred to other candidates who lack these qualifications . The job is a job that you can do with your social responsibility .
 Russell stressed the importance of the potential teacher's interest in people, particularly the age group he de sired to teach . Russell continued to stress the importance in teaching people .
 The teacher will not be able to carry out his tasks well unless he has a strong sense of dedication and interest in his work .
 In respect to a major, the speaker stated that he usually required thirty hours of credit . The speaker said he usually needed 30 hours of credit .
 More credit in a major as well as eighteen hours in a minor is a definite asset for the composer . The composer is known for his work in the classical music .
 On the subject of graduate study, Russell felt that he would gain more from his graduate work if he took it while teaching . Russell: "Teacher should take graduate work while teaching"
 Any student who has work he wishes to exhibit may do so in this weekend's exhibit . The exhibit will be open to students from all over the country .
 For this spring's outdoor exhibition, the association will invite students from other Maine colleges to exhibit their efforts . Students from Maine colleges will also be invited .
 He spoke at a meeting of the Gould Political Affairs Club, last Sunday evening in Libby .
 Harper, a conscientious objector, spent two years working in Mexico with the American Friends organization in place of military service . Harper spent the time in Mexico as a volunteer with American Friends .
 In Mexico, he worked with a group of young college graduates, also conscientious objectors doing alternative service, in drilling water wells . He worked with the group to drill water wells in Mexico .
 The A.F.S.C. helped bring potable water to small villages in Mexico . CARE, CARE, the U.N. and the state government helped the men work in villages .
 The committee's groups should be composed of international volunteers, thus promoting international understanding and working toward peace; 2. The committee should be made up of international volunteer groups . The committee will also work toward peace .
 The A.F.S.C. will not get involved in any political issues where it is working; 3. Not getting involved with politics where it's working; 4. Not get involved with political issues in areas of the country where it works; 5. Not going to get
 4. There should be a minimum of set rules about how to approach the work; and 4.4.5 . There should also be set rules on how to deal with the project; and . 4.5.5 on how it should be dealt with .
 Whatever work is being done shall be turned over to the local people when completed . Whatever work will be turned around to local people .
 Also on Monday, men and women interested in TRAVELERS INSURANCE COMPANY will meet with Mr John H Grimes '43 . Mr Grimes is a member of the company .
 Mr Bruce Wald from NAVAL RESEARCH LABORATORY will meet with men and women interested in physics, chemistry, and mathematics on March 1 .
 John A Curtis '33 from NEW ENGLAND MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY will meet with senior men and women . John A. Curtis '32 from New England MUTual Life Insurance Company will meet senior men, women .
 He will interview sophomore and junior men interested in the Summer Seminar Program . He will also interview junior and senior men who want to participate in the program .
 A.F.S.C. students should take courses in preparation for joining the organization . The DeWITT Hotel is located at the DeWitt University campus .
 He had never spoken Spanish until he reached Mexico, and found it difficult to communicate for nine months . He said he had never been able to communicate with anyone in Mexico .
 AETNA LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY is looking . for two men to train investment analysis and portfolio management . The insurance company will be represented at Bates on February 28 at the insurance conference .
 Work in this area offers an above average opportunity for the capable man . Work in the area offers the chance to be a successful businessman .
 A brochure containing a description of this position is available in the Placement Office . The role is described as an 'essential role' in the role of a senior member of the public .
 Stanley E Bradley is looking for a young woman to work with him as a research assistant in the Department of Medicine . The position is described as an assistant research assistant .
 He is engaged in research on liver disease, nephritis, and high blood pressure . A beginning salary of $4400 is offered .
 Students can find a summer job in a country of your choice in Europe . The organization is one of the most extensive travel organizations in the world . The program includes a tour of European cities and a job in your choice .
 This unique experience of living with foreign people is much less expensive and more interesting than going as a tourist . Living with foreigners is less expensive than going on a holiday .
 Miss Mary Allen, regional Scout Executive, will be interviewing career and summer candidates (for camp counseling) on Thursday, February 21 . She will also interview summer camp counselors .
 A Gift To Your College Can Result In A For Your Family Larger Income . Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift .
 These questions are not easily* answered and because of this decision making by the Department of Defense they are again subject to difficulties that few businessmen ever see . These questions will not be easily answered, says David Cameron .
 After World War II our defense system operated under the assumption that the enemy employed contemporary planes and relatively few atomic bombs . After WWII, the U.S. defense system believed the enemy was using contemporary planes with relatively few nuclear bombs .
 The prevention of destruction of our cities is now near to impossible in the event of war . Little need be said about the change that has taken place, says author .
 Military stock-piling by the enemy has increased, as well as the ability to deliver their punch, beyond our wildest dreams . The enemy is now more powerful and more powerful than ever before, according to the U.S. State Department .
 Our main objective now is retaliatory capability in the event of attack and therefore the indirect protection of our cities . The country's main objective is to protect its cities from attack, says MoD .
 "The job of the Defense Department is to not lose sight of these objectives," says President Obama . The job is to "not lose sight" of the objectives, Obama says .
 Efficiency Called For Efficiency should be achieved in spending money allotted to defense . Defense spending should be more efficient and more efficient, says President Obama .
 Defense Department should act to maximize output as private industry acts to maximize profit . Defense Dept. should act as private industries act to maximise profit, says Sen. Tom Coburn .
 Maximization of output will give greater efficiency, and as I said last week, greater efficiency means that decision makers who are better equipped to handle defense problems can be employed . Maximization means that decisions can be made to deal with defense problems .
 It should be noted that a difference exists between optimum and efficient maximization . It is also noted that there are no guarantees of optimum or efficient maximizing .
 Any point along a firm's (or in this case, the Defense Department) production function is by definition a possible efficient scale of production . The U.S. Defense Department says it is working with the U.N. to make the most efficient use possible .
 Now along these possible efficient points an optimum position may be located . The optimum position should be located at an optimal position .
 In this case the optimum point is defined in terms of the higher level criterion of minimum cost, given the factors of prices . The optimum point in this case is defined as the minimum cost of minimum .
 An inefficient alternative can be inferior to an inefficient one . SuZANNE: Substitute can be superior to an efficient alternative . SuzANNE is the name of the author of this article .
 When comparing alternatives the efficient and hopefully the optimum one is always preferred . When comparing an alternative to an alternative, the best is always the best .
 RAND Corporation economists have favored the policy of ""suboptimization" to mitigate efficiency problems in the Defense Department . RAND Corporation has favored the practice of "partial equilibrium analysis" or partial equilibrium analysis .
 They optimize alternatives at an intermediate leve because there is no way of de fining what they call a ""globa optimum" - the highest possi ble objective . There are no ways of fining the highest possible objective .
 The commander of a fighter wing who controls several squadrons has the job of maximizing the tota capabilities of his squadrons . Further up the latter the air de fense sector commander is in charge of several fighter wings, missile battalions, radar units etc.
 He must maximize the tota capabilities within his sector . And so it goes. He must maximise the capabilities within the sector .
 If national objectives change new criterions for decisions are required for the choosing of al ternatives . Economists Useful If National objectives change .
 This replacement of criteria, either because they are not optimal or they are outdated because of changes in technology and objectives, is a very serious matter for the Defense Departmentment .
 RAND publication states there is a range of circumstance in which policy improvements are available through the substitution of a better scheme of suboptimization criteria, but in which it would not pay to make a formal change in the de cision structure .
 The first of these, the work song, usually originated in the prisons or on the plantation, where the music-loving Negro sang to lighten his burden of work .
 Oh when those cotton balls get rotten. Or the old darkie of the South might have rendered Oh . Or the Old darkie . The old darkies of the Southerner .
 In those old cotton fields down south. as he rhythmically shuffled down the rows of snow-white cotton . In an old cotton field down south . as he shuffled .
 A second group might be Republican Club Demands A Firm Position on Cuba . Over a year ago, a cry of anguish went up that we never should have permitted Castro to come to power .
 It was conceded, however, that the opportunity for action had passed, and it was too late to do anything about it . It is conceded that it is too late for action to take action against the club .
 The U.S. failed to win the Bay of Pigs . Cuba, bolstered by the victory, continued to get stronger . The United States continued to fail .
 The recently planned invasion of Cuba for late autumn, 1962, was cancelled . More recently we have heard a similar cry that we should have supported that invasion, but once again it was conceded that it was too late .
 The ""offensive missiles"" have been removed (leaving only ""defensive missiles"" to turn on the United States) and have been replaced by morality songs . An estimated 2 0,000 fully would contain both the purely equipped Soviet troops with religious and mundane .
 Come all you fair and tender maidens. A young girl falls in love, but is jijted by her suitor, and warns her .
 A maid who has married a handsome face unaware of the shiftless heart it hides might say to a companion Go and tell my baby sister. Or a maid . Or a . maid who is married to a handsome man unaware of a . handsome face . might say, 'Go and tell
 The economist employs considerable flexibility in the choice of suboptimization criteria, and this gives a vitality that is generally associated with a ""darn good idea."" mere ""conventional"" weapons such as jet planes and tanks .
 Soviet government seems to be making no new bold moves, but instead has settled down to the peaceful pursuits of distribution of arms to other Latin American nations . The Soviet government has been making no bold moves .
 Castro has also embarked on a program of putting hundreds of acres of Cuban acres of opium-growing land . "There's no sickness, toil or trouble," Castro says .
 An educational segment of folk musio is that termed historical . An educational as well as interesting segment of historical music is that called historical . Folk music is a popular form of folk music .
 Robert Bruce stirring his Scots for the coming engagement with the English, under Edward II, with Wha. for Scotland's king and law Freedom's sword will strongly draw .
 Castro has offered asylum to Communist hijackers of a large, Venezuelan freighter . Soviet arms have shown up just recently in government struggles in Venezuela .
 Whether or not the crisis in Cuba is ""settled, we have lost another cold war battle by failure to take decisive action . The U.S. has lost a cold war with Cuba by failing to act on the crisis .
 As a result, we are faced with an all too large and growing danger from Cuba, says President Obama . "As a result of this, we're faced with a growing danger," says Obama .
 "We proved that Russia would back down in the face of force, but then stopped there," says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: 'We proved we proved we would not back down, but stopped there. We proved we were wrong'
 We fear war more than loss of Freedom, and when faced with a choice between the two, war and surrender, we will choose the latter . We fear the loss of freedom more than that of freedom, writes President Obama .
 The U.S. has waited about eighteen years for the situation to change peacefully, but . no avail. The United States has waited for eighteen years to change .
 Our time grows increasingly short, but if we are to survive, we must turn the tide somewhere . We must turn tide somewhere, but our time grows short,’s time is increasingly short .
 Communist imperialism is difficult to combat, because it proceeds in a slow, patient, peacemeal manner, degenerating economically and politically . Communist imperialism will continue to degenerate economically, politically, politically .
 They aren't as gentle as Caroline, nor are they playing with PT-boats in the bathtub . They are still playing with them in the water .
 That failing, we should turn to possibly less ""rational"", although undoubtedly more effective methods . We need to turn to less "rational" methods, such as less rational methods .
 Dr. Chute Comments On Religious Atheism . Bates I students greeted him at the end of his visit to Bates I .
 Critics of atheism claim that if no Creator is accepted, all is chaos . Atheist answers that it is possible to view chaos as the interaction of systems according to natural law .
 David Harper '59: "The whole idea is helping people to help themselves" Harper Lectures To Gould Ciub On AFSG: "Help people help themselves. Helping people is helping themselves"
 DeWITT HOTEL Nearest the College $1.00 Luncheon and Dinner Specials 7 Days a Week DINING COCKTAIL ROOM ROOM LOUNGE Tel.4-5491 in is a great advantage,"" said Harper .
 Lewiston Dally 11:00 AM. to 2:00 AJL THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE oi All TYPES A Gift To Your College Can Result In A For Your Family Larger Income . A gift to your college can result in a
 Our main objective now is retaliatory capability in the event of attack and therefore the indirect protection of our cities . It is obvious that we cannot operate under the same national objectives that followed World War XL XL .
 AND A fONOFJbY 1 ' \ < flit tASTUAN COLOR PAHAVISION C0 S1ABRING . INTRODUCING s ...turn siokh • Mm murpht mm mm mm um sum KEVIN
 They optimize alternatives at an intermediate level because there is no way of defining what they call a ""global optimum"", ie. the highest possi ble objective .
 The commander of a squadron of fighter planes has control over specific men, airplanes, etc., anc is told to maximize his ability to destroy enemy bombers . The commander is also told to minimize his effectiveness in destroying bombers .
 The commander of a fighter wing who controls several squadrons has the job of maximizing the total capabilities of his squadrons . He is the commander of several fighter wings and has the role of maximizing his capabilities .
 Air de fense sector commander is in charge of several fighter wings, missile battalions, radar units etc. Further up the latter the air de fence sector commander has control of several missile and radar units . The sector commander also has responsibility for several fighter and missile units in the air
 This replacement o criteria, either because they are not optimal or they are outdated because of changes in technology and objectives, is a very serious matter for the Defense Department .
 RAND publication states that there is a range of possible policy improvements available through the substitution of a better scheme of suboptimization criteria, but in which it would not pay to make a formal change in the decision structure of the Department of Defense .
 Hudson Surveys Folk Singing And Comments On Four Categories . We tried to define a folksong, deciding that a song handed down from preceeding generations would fit this classification .
 Down behind the railroad. Oh ya' work all day for the sugar in ya' -tea down behind a railroad .
 You can't pick very much cotton, In those old cotton fields down south. as he rhythmically shuffled down the rows of snow-white cotton. as well .
 A second group might be termed morality songs, and would contain both the purely religious and the more mundane . A third group might contain both religious and mundane .
 Over a year ago, a cry of anguish went up in this country that we never should have permitted Castro to come to power . The Castro-led Cuban government has been in power for a year .
 The ""offensive missiles"" have been removed (leaving only ""defensive missiles"" to turn on the United States . The ""defence missiles" have been replaced by 20,000 fully equipped Soviet troops with mere ""conventional"" weapons such as jet planes and tanks .
 An educational as well as interesting segment of folk musie is that termed historical . An educational segment of historical music is that called historical .
 With increasing frequency the Republican leaders in Congress have bombarded President Kennedy with pleas for armed action against Cuba . President Kennedy and their colleagues have been bombarded with threats of armed action .
 Attack Cuba now. Don't allow communism to spread to other parts of this hemisphere . Attack Cuba. Attack Cuba . Don't let communism spread to others .
 The communist presence in Cuba annoys, but we should not allow it to precipitate an armed clash . We should not let it precipitate a clash with the Communist Party in Cuba, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Republican leaders in Congress and on this campus who advocate armed intervention are nearsighted . The Republican leader in Congress is nearsighted about the dangers of armed intervention in Iraq .
 The effect of communist Cuba's proximity overshadows the more serious problems this country faces in Europe and elsewhere . Cuba's close proximity to the U.S. is a major factor in Europe's problems .
 The Communist countries have lived with American troops juxtaposing their borders for many years . The U.S. troops have been stationed in the Communist countries for decades . They are now stationed in Russia and Ukraine .
 The Chinese Government on Formosa continually sends spies and saboteurs into mainland China, just as Cuba sends them into other Latin American countries . The Chinese government constantly sends spies into Formosa, Taiwan and China .
 Power politics today plays not with the chess pieces of the Second World War . For power politics today, power politics does not play with the war chess pieces, it says .
 Once the Queen is committed the game is either won or lost, there is no chance for a regrouping of forces . The Queen is either committed or lost in the battle for the throne .
 If force be truly needed, use it against your opponent's major pieces, not against a pawn . If force is needed, it should be used only to protect your pawns .
 The best of which is to work through the U N. or other diplomatic channels, the U.N. says . Other possibilities exist .
 Justification of military initiative in Cuba based on the Monroe Doctrine and Teddy Roosevelt's bunglings are invalid . Justification for military initiative based on Monroe Doctrine is invalid . Teddy Roosevelt bunglings were invalid .
 Petke and Foster's concluding statement that we should turn to ""possibly 'less rational' although undoubtedly more effective methods,"" indicates well the nature of their position . Their position is a reflection of Barry Goldwater's irrationality, they say .
 Entered as second -clasti matter at the Lewiston Post Office Jan., 1913. under the act of Mar. ft. T99. entered as second-classi matter .
 Letters To The Editor are directed to the writer of that so-called piece of journalism that frequents the last page of The Student .
 May we also point out to this prejudiced one that it might be advisable that he wipe off his fogged glasses and notice who is in first place in two of the three leagues they are entered .
 Our teams have never forfeited a game because of a lack of interested participants, a fact which was omitted from your lopsided writings . Also our teams have not forfeited games due to lack of interest, which is a fact .
 A journalist has no right to set himself up as a God in whose power the power to judge others lies unless he has the tact to utilize it properly . May we also point out to you, the high school winner of the Alfred E Newman Award .
 May we finally remind us that we play intramurals fpr the intrinsic fun of the games . May we remind us of the fun of playing intramarals .
 "We participate because we enjoy the game, and we feel that we should not be subjected to the abuse that has been directed toward us by your narrow-minded pen," the team says .
 According to the Student, this is done by our newspaper here on campus . The Student is a student at the University of Columbia .
 It seems that an editor should be happy if his editorials simply stimulated discussion . But it seems that he's happy if he just stimulated discussion.
 The Student admitted that the students ""verbalize"" in the den and the commons . Since the student body admitted that students "verbalize" in the common and den, I see no reason to call it apathetic .
 The students are neither apathetic nor afraid to put their arguments in writing . The students say they are not apathetic or afraid of putting their arguments into writing .
 We have Biologists, Psychologists, Chemists, Historians, and Economists, to mention a few, who see no reason to wrote to the newspaper on every controversial article that comes up . We have no idea why we should write to the paper on controversial articles .
 The Student has accomplished its purpose when these students meet in the den and commons and verbalize . The Student's purpose is to verbalize. The Student is to help students understand what they need to do .
 The events of the past half-century have confronted the United States with problems which it can no longer ignore . To write is to prove an ability to do so, and does not prove any more .
 Two major world wars have led to a demand for courageous and creative leadership . Two major wars resulted in an unprecedented depression and a breakdown of the balance of power in Europe, on which our own security so largely depends .
 This is far from being opposed to a basic belief in the worth of the individual, it is not opposed to the idea of individuality, it says .
 The prosperity and security of the individual is the end toward which social security and medicare are directed . Social security programs are directed toward the individual's prosperity, not toward social security programs .
 Any dynamic society, whose needs are constantly changing, cannot expect satisfaction from stagnant, unchanging government policies . Government policies should not be satisfied with unchanging policies, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 The European balance of power was mentioned above above and is worthy of explanation . The EU is the most powerful country in the world, but it is not the only one .
 The Western hemisphere was able to isolate itself, to a large extent, from the political struggles in Europe .
 Public opinion demanded an idealistic crusade to wipe out those evil Germans, ignoring the fact that total destruction of German power would drastically alter European power politics . The United States became involved in World War I .
 Wilson was aware of this danger when he proposed a moderate peace treaty, but many of his suggestions were disregarded . Wilson's peace treaty proposals were often ignored .
 In World War II, public opinion was more public than would be found in a den discussion or a commons conversation . Public opinion is more important than in den discussions or a common conversation .
 We are sick and tired of being called apathetic by people we never even see around at the campus functions. We are pretty sick . We're pretty sick and . tired of calling people apathetic. apathetic . We are not even seeing people at campus functions .
 I have just completed digesting the inspiring article concerning the animals at Norwich Prep School that suddenly appeared on the bulletin board . I'm not sure what happened to the animals .
 At Norwich the well-known Guidon is offered with no charge and in almost unlimited supply of the paper . I assume that Bates, being of nearly equal prominence, offers their paper in the same manner .
 If there is a small fee involved, I will be glad to reimburse you the full price . However, if there is an issue there is no fee involved. However, it is possible to pay the small fee .
 Truman recognized the United States no longer under the protective shadow of Great Britain . Plans for revitalization of Western Europe and an aggressive policy against Communism were developed under the Marshall Plan and the Truman Doctrine .
 The American people became committed to participation in international affairs, President Obama says . The U.S. is committed to participating in the world's most important nations .
 A minimum of concern with foreign affairs and a maximum of domestic interests predominated . During these years, a minimum of . concern with . foreign affairs predominated. A maximum of concern . with domestic interests . predominated in the years .
 In such a system, it is hoped, each party will be receptive to its electorate and yet responsible enough to make wise and far-sighted decisions .
 There is room for both a forwardthinking, progressive party and a party which moves more slowly, serving as a check on possible over-enthusiasm . The party should be able to serve as a party that moves slowly, not too slowly .
 As future voters, we of the Bates College Young Democratic Club choose the former, the party of progress . However, as future voters they choose the latter party .
 Focus On Religion with Bob Livingston '63 as host will feature all the addresses and the chapel service of Religious Emphasis Week . Bob Livingston will be the host of the week's Focus on Religion .
 WRJR hopes that Focus On Religion may fill this gap . WRJR has received many comments by students that they were not able to attend all the lectures in this series . There have been many comments about not being able to watch the lectures .
 Focus On Religion will be heard MONDAYS at 10:10 at 10 a.m. Steve Adams '65 has worked up another interesting feature program .
 The Sophomores shown above are all in some stage of planning to take their Junior Year abroad . They are all planning to spend their Junior Years abroad .
 Right, Evelyn Breck, Brenda Kaulback, Emily Blowen, Janice Kopco, Linda Olmstead and others gathered for the event . The event will be held in New Jersey City, New Jersey, on Friday .
 We asked three questions about present preparations of prospective travelers for next year . We asked them three questions: How to prepare for the holiday season .
 Many have filled out and returned the necessary information, and several have been accepted . Many of the information has been returned to the public .
 Eight sophomores have been admitted to foreign schools to date . Many are waiting for replies from foreign schools .
 Next year's juniors abroad will most likely be situated in either England, Spain, or France . Proposals include Aix-Marseilles, Nice, Nottingham, Manchester, Barcelona, and Dijon .
 Healey expects at least five more definite candidates for the program . Healey says he expects at most of them to be candidates for governor .
 A small number of B.S. students go abroad to study abroad . The reason for the small number is that it's not easy to do so for students in Canada .
 Most B.S. students are not proficient in a foreign language and are necessarily restricted to English-speaking universities . He also mentioned that most students do not have to study in English .
 The science major also has difficulty completing his core course requirements before junior year, but as was emphasized, it is by no means impossible for the science student to study abroad .
 Bill Ford became Acting Manager of New Jersey Bell's South River Business Office before he had been with the company a year . Ford was acting as Acting Manager at the company in South River, New Jersey .
 In South River, Bill was given management responsibilities that would demand the best abilities of even an experienced manager . Bill was appointed as a manager at South River .
 He was promoted to Manager of Woodbridge Business Office before his first anniversary with the company .
 Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications service in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America . Bill Ford and other young men like him helped bring the best communications service to America .
 Arations this year's freshmen have started and will be involved in through next year . Arations arations will take place in the classroom next week .
 Several freshmen have already expressed interest in the Junior Year program . Students have been preparing by completing as many core courses as possible .
 The students have complete freedom of choice as to which school they will attend, as long as it is accredited . The students will be able to attend a school that is accredited by the government .
 The offered program of work must be adequate and acceptable to Bates . Few foreign universities fail to meet this requirement . The student should feel competent in the language of the country to which he wishes to go .
 France, Spain, Germany, and England are the usual student selections, not excluding Commonwealth countries . Germany, France and Spain are among the usual selections .
 Several years ago a Bates ' student went to an English-speaking university in Japan . A Bates student went there to study at a university .
 Dean Healy expressed the hope that any students interested in this program will see him and have the possibility examined . Healy said he hopes students will be able to apply for the program .
 There is ample time for any freshman to register for this opportunity . There is also ample time to sign up for the program .
 Today in our struggle with the problem of nuclear war, new songs are being created which may well join these in years to come as recognized folksongs .
 With the Peace movement, one of these might well be Men and women, stand together . Do not heed the man of war. With the peace movement, a peace movement might well well be .
 The fourth, rather heterogeneous category one might make would be the amusing or whimsical songs . The songwriter says he has no idea how many songs he has written .
 Included would be those especially for children, such as Mister Froggie went a courtin' and he did ride . A sword and a pistol by his side .
 The oldsters enjoy laughter too, and find it in the tale of The most chivalrous fish of the ocean .
 Whether fast or slow, sad or gay, in English or a foreign tongue, they have generally been accepted as folksongs . They are sung today by increasing numbers of folk performers .
 Cats Top Tufts 7860; Clark 8364 SPORT.NG S \ By RUSS HENDERSON . Hoopster Surge .
 A more meaningful display of this last term has yet to be seen in truer form than that shown by the Garnet basketballers in their wins over Tufts and Clark during the past week .
 The Cats have found the key to victory in a self-sacrificing attitude of teamwork and hustle that has carried them above and beyond the exploits of any one individual player . Lacking a great individual star, the 'Cats have found a key to success .
 The Ullommen have been displaying unexpected rebounding strength that has enabled their fast break and harrassing defense an opportunity to pressure the opposition . They have been in impressive form in recent weeks, with the likes of Jurgen's side-to-the-midfielder
 Saturday features the Bobcat in his home den, facing the Colby Mules and highscoring All-East forward Ken Stone . The Bobcat takes on the Mules in their home den .
 State series leader, the Bowdoin Polar Bear, travels to Alumni Gym to face the Bobcat in the season finale . On Wednesday, February 27, the state series leader will face the Polar Bear in the final game .
 This is in reference to the Jay Vee basketball aggregation of Coach Chick Leahy . Coach Leahy is known for his role in coaching the Jay-Vee team .
 The Bobkittens have an eleven and two record that is highlighted by an eightgame win streak which is the longest streak of any kitten club . Bobkettes have an 11-and-2 record that has been highlighted by their eightgame winning streak .
 The junior Bobcats are the preliminaries to the varsity encounters . The early arriving fan is in for a real treat if he catches the junior teams in their tilts .
 Johnson, Mischler, Savello & Co. provide the J.V.'s with a ""thrill a minute"" showcase . Johnson, mischler and Savello are known as the "thrillers"
 Garnet Garnet win basketball but lose in track in Maine Intercollegiate ski championships . Bates group of doubtful status brave the wintery gusts of a Maine winter as they join the ski teams of the other Maine colleges .
 A skeleton crew of three men carried the Garnet colors at Kingfield in the state ski meet . Pete Koch, Tom Adams, and Al Skogsberg carried the colors .
 The Batesmen were able to compile 205 points despite the fact they only had three men competing . The other teams had the full complement of five skiers . Competing in only two of four events, the downhill and the slalom, the Batesmen won 205.
 The Bates skiers did not compete in the Nordic events which include the crosscountry and jumping competition which were held Friday at Farmington's Titcomb Slope . The ski team did not participate in the ski competition .
 Pete Koch was ninth in the downhill followed by Adams and Adams in twelfth spot . Skogsberg finished in thirteenth place in downhill .
 In the slalom Tom Adams was eighth, the ""Owl"" tenth and Al Skogsberg fifteenth . In the slalom Tom Adams was 8th in the world, the "Owl" was tenth and the "Skogsberg" was 15th
 The Batesmen proved they can hold their own among the skiers of the established state powers . They finished behind the other three Maine schools .
 The weightmen of Maine captured four of the six positions in the shot put and weight throw competition . Maine also captured four places in the weight throw and shot put competition .
 Arnie DeLaite smashed all Maine records with a heave of 52 feet, 4^ inches in the shot and a weight throw . Bill Blood set a meet record in the weight throw in Maine .
 Garnet supporters making the trek to Maine will surely witness down to the wire duels in the dash and hurdle events .
 Maine's MacPhee and Hicken are performers in the class of Garnet stars Paul Williams, Bill LaValle and Al Harvie . Maine's duo are in the same class as the stars of the Garnet series .
 Bates will be at full strength and hungry for victory against the favored Bears . Bates will face the Bears at the University of Bates College .
 Journeyman middleweight Randy Sandy and former New England light heavyweight champ Bob Young will be featured on the next show .
 Those who witnessed Friday's encounter didn't have long to wait to see more of the same .
 Saturday night at Alumni Gymnasium the opposition was different, but the script was the same . Saturday night's game was the first time the UVA team has won a game in six straight games .
 Tufts defeated Boston College in a near-upset upset at Boston College . Tufts is one of New England's large school basketball powerhouses .
 John Lawler sank one for the Bobcats early in the game to put the Garnet five in front by a 4-3 margin . The Bobcats went on to win the game 4-4 .
 Castolene, Lawler, Stevens, Glanz, Freeman and Freeman lead 16-8 lead . The starting five of the starting five is Lawler and Stevens . The shooting spree was the first of the season for the team .
 At this point the ""Bobcats"" departed to be replaced by Cummings, Beaudry, Krzynowek, Hine and Johanssen . Cummings, Beaudry and Hine were replaced by Cummars and Krzesnowek
 This unit, appropriately nicknamed the ""mosquitoes," took the game into their hands and put on one of the most exciting exhibitions seen by this viewer in three years of watching basketball .
 The 'Cats took to a fast-breaking attack with a pressing defense sparked by the ""little three"" of Beaudry, Cummings, and Krzynowek . The 'little three' was the "little three"
 Tufts was forced into committing costly errors on offense . Time after time, Tufts committed costly errors . Tufts is forced to commit costly errors throughout the game .
 Tufts made a determined effort to get back into the game early in the half, but the hot hand of Freeman kept the 'Cats in front of Tufts . Tufts scored a goal in the first half .
 The shooting and passing of Cummings picked the Tufts defense apart, and Ted Krzynowek Carl Johanssen picked it apart . As Mike Hine and Don Beaudry scored from the outside, Cummings picked up the points .
 The pattern of this game was quite similar to that of the previous night . The game was played in the same way as the previous game .
 Stevens, Glanz and Freeman were all shooting victims . The first team jumped to a 17-9 lead before being replaced by the ""mosquito"" unit .
 Cummings, Beaudry and Krzynowek sparked with their fast-breaking and pressing type of game . The win was a comfortable victory for the Czech Republic in the first half .
 John Lawler then scored six of the Garnet's final ten points in a run that saw the 'Cats leave the floor at half time with a 4430 lead . The Garnet led the game with 4430 points from the basket .
 This time they really clicked in leading a great team effort which saw them gradually pull away . This was the first time they had a winning streak in the Premier League .
 Bob Lanz took charge, setting up Bill Gardner for a bucket and then contributing two driving layups . Bill Gardner was a big part of the scoring for the team .
 The Black Bears surged to an early lead and were never headed . Dave Svendsen and Ladie Deemer led the Black Bears to the win .
 Lawler Leads Cats to victory . Lawler leads the team to victory in the game .
 The trio of Krzynowek, Cummings and Beaudry again displayed hustle and ball-handling which had the fans going wild .
 Lawler enjoyed his finest game of the season and set up many scores when he was on the court . Lawler set up several goals in the game .
 Paul Castolene played an outstanding defensive game on Clark's Duane Corriveau who owns a 33 points per game average for the season . Paul played out a defensive game against the 33-point scorer for Clark .
 Castolene's effort was evident in his ability to constantly prevent his opponent from getting the ball, proving ultimately to hold him eight points below his average . The result was the result of the match .
 The next home encounter for the Bobcat quintet will be against the Colby Mules on Saturday night . The state series game should be interesting, in view of the recent revitalization of the team .
 A familiar face at football and basketball games this year, in all probability, will be absent from the Bates scene next year . Love 0 0 2 29 20 78 Tufts G F P Solomon 1 0 2 Brennan 5 5 15 Jacobsen 0 1 1 French 0 6 6 i BATES
 Verne Ullom, head coach of basketball and tennis and football line coach, was the Garnet Athletic Department's choice to temporarily replace Coach Peck . Coach Peck is expected to return to the Bates staff at the conclusion of his sabbatical year in Finland .
 A four-year football, basketball, and baseball standout at Hughes High School in Cincinnati, Ohio . L Player L Player .
 Ullom was contracted to play professional football for the Brooklyn Dodgers . The Brooklyn Dodgers were an early N.F.L. team from the 1930s .
 Ullom then returned to Cincinnati where he accepted a position as a teacher and coach in the public school system . He then went back to Cincinnati, Ohio, where he was a teacher .
 His first real coaching opportunity developed at Taylor High School in North Bend, Ohio . He spent eight years in charge of football, basketball, baseball, and track .
 North Benders will never forget the high standard of athletics that Ullom established at Taylor . North Bender was a standout athlete at the time . North will always be proud of the high standards he set at Taylor High .
 Taylor produced three AllLeague football teams, an AllState baseball team, and three All-League basketball teams . His last four years at Taylor were the most impressive, during which time he won 52 out of 58 games played and finished one season undefeated .
 The following year, he became varsity end coach and then defensive line coach . He has been at the University of Alabama since 1984 .
 The year 1956 saw Ullom at Bates coaching Bob Hatch's line, varsity basketball, and J.V. baseball . Bob Hatch was coach at Bates High School .
 Bates won a Maine Series Football Championship and took a second to Colby in Maine basketball competition . During his two-year stay, Bates won two Maine Series football championships . Bates also won a second Maine Series Basketball Championship .
 Ullom's next stop was Principia, in Elsak, Illinois, where he was Athletic Director for two years . He was also Athletic Director at Principialia in Illinois .
 In 1961, he was at Columbia, coaching the line of the eleven that tied Harvard for Ivy League honors . In 1961 he coached the line that led the team that won the Ivy League title .
 Team Effort Impresses Bates football, says Ullom . Bates coach says he is impressed with overall team effort .
 The weather really hurt the Bobcat effort at the end of the season, according to Bates . The worst blow to Bates was an undeserved third down penalty in the Maine game .
 The penalty threw the Bobcats out of scoring position and into a definite passing situation . The penalty was the first time they had been penalized in the game .
 Ullom feels the biggest drawback to the season was the lack of co-operation between coach and team . He feels the unity that only comes of longer association only comes from association .
 The Bobcats had a strenuous schedule following Christmas vacation . The schedule was the reason for the team's success . The team has been in good shape this season .
 Ullom pleased with the enthusiastic spirit of his predominantly underclass squad . The manager is pleased with his side's exciting and outstanding wins .
 Bates weightmen gather ten out of a possible eighteen points . Bates weight men gather their finest showing this year, gathering ten points .
 Dave Harrison, a dean's list student, captured second place behind Curtiss . Curtiss is a Dean's List student at the University of Columbia .
 The record for this event in the M.I.T. cage is 60' l¥z"" by former world record holder Gary Gubner .
 In the high jump, John Thomas holds the record at 6' 8%"", another Bates dean's list student, Dave Johnson jumped 6' IV 2 "" for a first place . The high jump record was set by Olympian John Thomas .
 Paul Williams, fouling all but once, chalked up Bates' only point in the broad jump as he placed third . Paul Williams was fouled all but one of Bates' fouls in the jump .
 The pole vault saw soph Bob Kramer soar over the 12' mark for the fourth consecutive meet . Kramer has now vaulted 12' in the pole vault for four consecutive meets .
 Bates' first victory in the running events came in the 50 yd. dash as junior Paul Williams hit the wire ahead of Flink and Reinhardt .
 Eric again became Finn's ""shadow" as he finished second behind Finn's 10:05 sec. Finn's victory in the two-mile . Eric finished second in 10:00 sec. Eric again finished second .
 Frosh Marsh Snow repeated his effort against Bowdoin by placing third in the 1000 yd. run . Snow finished in third place in the 1,000-yard run .
 Junior John Ford was forced to withdraw from the second time he has been involved in a race . The junior has been hampered by someone who interfered with his running in the past two races .
 Running first at M.I.T.T., a small girl wandered onto the track in front of John . John says he was running first at the start of the race .
 To avoid hitting her, John side-stepped, losing his balance momentarily . John lost balance momentarily and lost his balance as he walked around .
 This allowed Green of M.I.T. to slip by John for a second place, with John finishing third . John finished third, with Green finishing second and third .
 John is to be commended for his fine performance despite the near tragedy . John is also to be praised for his performance despite his near-fatal injury .
 The strong hurdle contingent from M.I.T. swept the hi's and grabbed first and second in the lo's . The strong hurdles contingent from the MTSU swept the high and low hurdles .
 In the one-mile relay it was the Bates team of LaVallee, Peterson, Ford, and Binnewig, finishing on top in the time of 3:41.4.4 . The Bates team finished on top of the time .
 The cage record in this event is 3:37.37. by B.C. C. by the B.I.T. track . This gives evidence to the slowness of the low-banked track . The cage cage record for the cage record was 3:
 MIT defeats the 'Cats 4-3 with two meets remaining . MIT's record now stands at 4-2 with two more meets to go .
 The first two have already been mentioned — the third beingv.00 yd. man, soph ""Dave ""Dave"" Williams . Williams. Williams .
 Dave has shown tremendous improvement in his first season as a trackster . He has shown a lot of improvement since taking up the role as a driver .
 Bates can't be ruled out as a possible contender in the Maine Series . Bates has three games to play in Maine Series with three games remaining .
 There is no assurance that Verne Ullom will be on the Bates campus next fall, but even if he is not here in person, his spirit will prevail .
 No lineman will ever forget running through his iron cage or the imperative trinity of hostility, mobility, and agility . The trinity is the trinity: hostility and mobility . No lineman can remember running through the iron cage .
 Flying time interfered with the ball game and the base was forced to forfeit . The game was called off because of a lack of flying time and the game was delayed .
 Coach Chick Leahey has had success imitating the varsity and using two units . Coach Chick has been successful imitating varsity with the use of the units .
 Bob Johnson, Bob Mischler, Paul Savello, John Wyman, and Russ Reilly have formed a well-balanced scoring attack . The first string led by Bob Johnson is led by Paul Savella .
 The loss of Bill Beisswanger and Mike Hind to the varsity hasn't seemed to hurt Leahey's attack .
 Gorham State junior varsity didn't come close to their varsity counterpart's gaudy 99. points a game average . Gorham's junior team scored 99.9 points in a game . The Gorham varsity was ranked No. 1 at the top of the state's
 Mischler took scoring honors with 28 points . Lewiston | Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 – Phone 2.22 .
 John Wyman scored ten points in the first half of the game . Wyman also added ten more points for the team . He also scored 10 points from the bench .
 Dave Hillman played his best game of the season, collecting seven points for the team . Hillman also collected seven points in the game .
 The game was close in the early stages but the Bobkittens press and running game eventually broke the contest open . The game finished 1-1 with a 1-0 lead .
 The reserves saw plenty of action and everyone made the scoring column . The reserves also made the scoresheet .
 The game Tuesday was closer but the first string had enough scoring punch to win . The first string won the game Tuesday .
 Bob Johnson with his fine outside shooting cut the cords for 22 points . Bob Johnson also scored 22 points in the first half .
 The Leaheymen will hope to continue their winning ways next week as they face Maine at Orono and Colby Mules at home on Saturday .
 The Bobkittens hope to reverse an earlier one point loss to Maine who have been weakened by the scholastic difficulties of several key players . Maine have been reduced to just one point after a one-point loss to the Bobkitten .
 Big Team Effort Sparks Garnet; Bounding Key To Break, Press Hoopster Surge . Cats Tod Tufts 7860; Clark SORTING S \ * By RUSS HENDERSON V* By
 The Bobkittens have an eleven and two record that is highlighted by an eightgame win streak which is the longest streak of any kitten club . The junior Bobcats are the preliminaries to the varsity encounters .
 Garnet Garnet men's basketball and women's track team win in basketball but lose in track . Bates group of doubtful status brave the wintery gusts of a Maine winter to join the Maine Intercollegiate ski championships .
 Pete Koch was ninth in the downhill followed by Adams in twelfth spot and Skogsberg in thirteenth spot . In the slalom Tom Adams was eighth, the ""Owl"" tenth and Al Skogberg fifteenth . Pete Koch and Tom Adams were ninth and tenth
 Those who witnessed Friday's encounter didn't have long to wait to see more of the same . Friday's incident was the latest in a series of high-profile encounters .
 A familiar face at football and basketball games this year, in all probability, will be absent from the Bates scene next year . Tufts coach Ullom Adds Spark To Cats by adding a new coach to the team .
 The record for this event in the M.I.T. cage is 60' IV2"" by former world record holder Gary Gubner . The record was set in the 60' I.T.'s cage by Gary Gubner in the 1960s .
 Dave Johnson jumped 6' IV2"" for a first place in the high jump . Olympian John Thomas holds the record at 6' SW, in which Olympian Thomas holds a record of 6" SW .
 The Leaheymen will hope to continue their winning ways next week . They face Maine at Orono on Tuesday, February 19 and meet the Colby Mules Saturday, February 23 .
 The 'Kittens landed only three first places out of thirteen out of 13 in the event . The team landed second and third places in five events .
 In the hammer throw Wayne Pangburn captured the winner's wreath with a toss of 40 feet . Wayne's hammer throw was the most successful thrower in history .
 Ted Davis managed to stay in the circle and make it a clean sweep with third place . Harry Mossman sewed up second place, while Ted Davis made it to third place with third . Ted Davis was the last man to win the race .
 M.I.T.'s Sivers wins in 50 yd. dash in time equal to varsity's . After taking a reluctant second in the broad jump, he was nudged out in the 50yd. dash by Sivers .
 Dave came back again to take a second in the high hurdles, a first in the low hurdles, and another second in high jump . Dave also took a first place in the low hurdles (with an excellent time of 5. seconds) and a second place in high hurdles .
 It takes a real "gut-runner" to come back after placing second in the mile to casually grab up first place in the two-mile run . Trufani gets 13 points for his performance .
 Ken Trufant wins the two-mile in 10:44.4 and pole vault in 10.4 seconds . Trufants also wins the pole vault at the same time as the two mile .
 It is the all-around ability displayed in these runners that makes the junior thinclads a strong team . All-round ability displayed by these runners is the reason for the team success .
 Dave Fullenwider took second place in the 600 and third in the mile . John Meyn won third place in mile and third place for mile . Dave Meyn also took third in mile .
 Dave Campbell finished second in the 1000 and Mark Biel third in the same event . Dave Campbell chugged around the track to nail up second place in the race . Biel followed Dave across the finish line to finish third .
 It is obvious from these performances that a great deal of this squad's threat lies in its depth . The depth of the JV tracksters was not to be denied when it came around to equaling the singular, but excellent performances turned in by the M.I.T. freshmen
 John Lawlor is selected this week for "Bobcat of the Week" honors . Lawlor was selected as senior forward for the honor . The senior forward is a senior forward at the University of Washington .
 John is a native of nearby Auburn and graduate of Edward Little High School . He emerged as an instrumental cog in the great team effort displayed by the Garnet five against Tufts and Clark .
 John and his teammates fought and van quished Tufts from Medford, Mass. Friday, against Tufts . John's team beat Tufts 4-0 .
 The ""Ghost"" also contribued with a consistent effort on defense, and figured prominently in the assist column . The "Ghost" also played well in defense .
 It looks as if the ""Golden Boys"" are turning a palid green as / it is extremely hard for me to see a win in either the ""A"" or ""B"" leagues . J GER: It looks like it is very hard for the 'Golden Boys' to win
 "They probably think I'll win games for them by calling them nice names. They probably think they're winning games for me by calling me nice names," I said .
 Smith South has just about sewed up the ""A"" league championship . Smith South leads ""A" Smith South .
 OC played the boys from Smith South in a makeup game and were defeated 64 to 43 . OC defeated Smith South 64-43 in the makeup game . OC was defeated by Smith South's Smith South boys .
 Phil Tamis was the backbone once again for OC, scoring 23 points . Wallach and Silverstein were high men for S.S. while Tamis scored 23 points for OC .
 Ron Taylor was more interested in smiling at the fans than playing basketball . Ron Taylor is a former NBA star who has been in the NBA since 1984 .
 '63 Bill Graham scored 16 unbelievable points for the bases . Bill Graham was the star of the day .
 Smith Middle beat JB's B-l squad 40 to 30 . Smith Middle defeated JB 40-30 in the league .
 A highlight of the Smith Middle Smith South game was the play of ""Sweet Willy"" Farrington . Farrington was the star of the game . The game ended in a 1-1 draw .
 He didn't score any points but he did receive a beautiful black eye for his efforts . He was given a black eye by the referee .
 Art Purinton scored 12 points for Smith North in the second J.B. game . John Devendoz dropped in 12 points in Smith North's second game .
 It is interesting to note that Dick ""No-Hit"" Jones has made it once again in the world of sports . Jones has been a big name in the sports world again .
 Roger Bill managed to salvage a win before the week was out by defeating West Parker 3433 . He was high scorer for the Smith North squad in their fatal endeavor . Smith North managed to score 3433 points against West Parker .
 Smith South is the probable victor in the ""C-l"" league with Smith South as the likely victor . Smith South will play for Smith South at the end of the season .
 J.B., led by the ""Milford Flash,"" Stu Solomon, defeated Smith North 40 to 29 . In the other ""C-l"" game, J.S. led by Stu . Solomon, won 40-29 . Smith North led by "Milford
 The climax of the WAA Volleyball season will come Friday night, Betty Bates Night, when Louise McCabe, president of WAA will present a trophy to Judy Warren, captain of Cheney's victorious team .
 The top four teams played off to determine the championship . Cheney Rand Wilson, Whit Frye Milliken Mitchell and Hacker Chase won 5 Cheney wins . Chase 4 4 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 0 .
 Rand, quite surprisingly ended up near the bottom of the league, as they were defeated in their first games by Wilson, 13-5, 8-14, and 11-7 . Rand, however, ended up in the bottom three of the standings .
 Cheney, as expected, won over Whit 12-6, 15-6 and over Wilson 15-5, 4-12, and 10-5 . Cheney also won over Wilson and Whit . Cheney won the other matches .
 Arbeitgeber bevorzugen junge Damen mit einer GIBBS Ausbildung . The last set of games TTTTT TTTTTTTTttTTTT
 Seniors of Cheney proved their superior ability to those in Rand Rand . Rand: "Of course, Cheney really proved his superior ability"
 Watching girls' basketball especially with the new rule changes is very amusing . Girls' basketball is very different from the old days of basketball .
 Confusion appears the rule so far this season with the exception of a few excellent players . Confusion seems to be the rule of the season so far .
 Jan Soltis, Chris Faulk, Pris Clark, Karin Mueller, Gretchie Ziegler, Nancy Nichols, and Nancy Nichols were outstanding players in the opening games of the season .
 Possibly the biggest detefent to good sound play is the size of the floor . The floor is the biggest obstacle to sound play in the world .
 The court is nearly half the size of a regulation court and limits play tremendously . It's nearly half a size, it's half a regulation basketball court . The court will be used to play tennis matches .
 Why the women should be subjected to such conditions, warrants an explanation . The women should not have been forced to live in such conditions .
 The short time needed per week for W.A. games would not disrupt organization in the Alumni Gym . The short-needed time would not be disrupted by the short-time period .
 Louise McCabe, Barb Remick and Pris Clark refereeed the afternoon games . Credit must be given to the three referees for their time in learning the new rules .
 Credit also should be given to Linda Jarrett for her organization of the WAA season .
 Subscription Women Select Kinney As Betty Bates 1963 . Betty Bates of 1963 was* chosen last Friday night in the Little Theater .
 Carolyn Kinney was awarded the silver Betty Bates bracelet after demonstrating her poise, grace and co-ordination in a series of three situations .
 Linda Browning, Lois Warfield, Nancy Nichols, Ingrid Kaiser, Marion Day, Marion and Nancy Day, Carolyn, Kinney, and Linda Jarret w£s the Social Situation . The first ordeal for the eight contestants was a very formal tea party .
 Each candidate managed to bring a spark of life and even humor to a situation difficult enough in real life .
 Seniors are also nominating Alumni officers of President and SecretaryTreasurer . Seniors will also nominate Alumni Officers of the University of Wisconsin .
 Primary elections will be held in the Alumni Gym, Monday, March 4, from 9m. to 4m. Primary elections to be held on March 4 at 9:30am .
 These are only class primaries, as the majority of the campus groups by-pass the primaries with nominations . The majority of these primaries is only class class primaries .
 Final elections are set for March 11, and will also be held in the Alumni Gym . Voters will choose from a slate of two candidates for each class office and nominees for various campus organizations .
 Eight juniors, six sophomores, and four freshmen have petitioned for next year's council . Stu-C is the only exception and will present eight juniors .
 Betty Bates competition was a form of competition . The candidate's being a quick-change artist, the stagefright, and the strong feeling of companionship that the experience generated .
 Carolyn Kinney was particularly outstanding as she dribbled a basketball around and between all the other candidates . Kinney dribbled around a basketball between the other players .
 Carol later demonstrated how to play tennis — or how to learn to . play tennis well enough to impress the captain of a tennis team, and how to do it in thirty hours . Carol also demonstrates how to . learn tennis well .
 After a second fashion show, more formal attire was more formal this time, including a really stunning Oriental outfit . The event was held in New York City, New York, on Wednesday night .
 Norman Gillespie '64 will succeed John R Wilson '63 as Editor-in-Chief of the Station, John Lang '63, President of the Publishing Association, announced Monday . Gillespie will succeed Wilson as Editor in-Chief . Gillespie is the first person to succeed Wilson .
 At an afternoon meeting, the thirteen member board considered applications for the positions of Editor and Business Manager of the three campus publications .
 The audience couldn't help admiring the courage and poise of the candidates which enabled them to relax on stage, to be genuinely natural in spite of a series of situations .
 Robert Ahem '64 and Howard Blum '63 finish third in MIT Invitational Debate Tournament . Ahem Blum and Ahem finished third at NTT Tourney this past weekend .
 Five wins and one defeat qualified them for the semi-final round of the tournament . They lost to Boston College, who went on to win the tournament by defeating Harvard in the finals .
 Blum and Ahem defeated Providence, Brooklyn, Fordham, Trinity and Amherst . The ""A" team representing Bates defeated Providence .
 Their only loss, in the preliminary rounds, was to the same Boston College team that they met in the semifinals . The U.S. women's basketball team beat the same team in the semifinal .
 The Bates ""B"" team of John Strassberger '64 and Tom Hall '64 finished with three wins and three losses . The team won three games and lost three games .
 Hall finished tenth in the individual speaker ratings for the tournament . Hall finished 10th overall in the overall speaker ratings .
 Presently, an Assistant in Philosophy, he was until this semester, a member of the Varsity Debating Squad and de facto Chairman of a Literary Club . Presently he is an assistant in Philosophy . He was until recently, until this . semester, was a member . of the
 Professor Quimby requests that students interested in delivering semi-humorous, after dinner speeches at a speech festival of the four Maine colleges, see him before April 28th .
 ""Open City,"" or ""Citta Ciper ta"" in Italian, is next in the Rob Players film series . The Rob Players series is set to be released in 2015 .
 This award-winning picture will be presented at 7:00 and 9:00m. in the Little Theatre this Saturday .
 The hard simplicity and genuine passion is somewhat shocking to American audiences, who have become used to the slick Hollywood studio productions . The hard-simmering film is a classic classic, but it is not a Hollywood classic .
 This film tells its story in a frank, uncompromising way, very different from what spoon-fed, sheltered audiences are accustomed to . The film tells the story in an unflinching way, unlike many other films .
 The anger is not hysterical, but the clear anger of those who have known the depravity of their foes . Anger not hysterical. Anger of those with knowledge of depravity will not be hysterical, it will be the anger .
 The cruelty of the enemy, the passion of life in the underground, and the intensity of the conflict are depicted in detail and with realism, the film is said to be the most realistic portrayal of the war .
 The producers are obviously anti-Fascist and anti-Nazi, and this determined feeling against the Germans and their collaborationists pulses through the film .
 More than anger, the film expresses an admiration for people who fight for freedom's cause . The film expresses more than anger than anger at people fighting for freedom .
 The film shows a real sense of human fortitude — a quiet exultation and an inconquerable belief in life . The film is based in New York City .
 The story of the film is literal based on actual facts of the occupation of Europe and of the underground resistance . The film is based on the actual facts that happened during the occupation .
 A leader of the resistance is the central character of the film, and is cornered by the Germans in a part of R""ome . The film is based on the story of a German resistance leader .
 H i s girlfriend, a dope addict, informs on him and he is captured and tortured to death in the Nazis' frantic quest for information . He is captured, tortured and killed in the Nazi's frantic quest to get information .
 The drama and emotion in the film — its illumination of human qualities — are not nearly conveyed by this outline of the plot . The film is not nearly conveying the drama, emotion in it, says the reviewer .
 "To understand this film is to experience the total effect of the picture," says the author . "To find a sense of real experience not often attained in a motion picture these positions," he says .
 Gillespie is a member of the Rob Players Movie Selection Committee . Gillespie has been on the Dean's List for the past three semesters . Gillespie currently serves as a member on Rob Players movie selection committee .
 Gillespie has been an active participant in all intra-mural sports . Gillespie has also been an avid and competent participant in various Chase Hall activities . Gillespie is an avid member of the Chase Hall team .
 Previous honors include numerals for TV Tennis and the Almon Cyprus Libbey Award for Freshman Prize Debating . Previous honors have been given to TV tennis players .
 President Phillips spoke to two groups of alumni recently about plans for the college in the near future . Phillips Announces New Administration Building; No Tuition Raise Next Year .
 Ground will be broken for the new administration building before the end of 1963, he announced .
 President Phillips said that Bates expects to maintain its current tuition rate for 1963-64 academic year .
 It seems likely that these costs will continue to advance in the years ahead, it seems likely they will continue .
 It takes a real ""gut-runner"" to come back after placing second in the mile to grab up first place in the two-mile run . Trufant Gels 13 points: "Gut-runners"
 It looks as if the ""Golden Boys"" are turning a palid green as it is extremely hard for me to see a win in either the ""A"" or ""B"" leagues . It looks like it is very hard for the 'Golden Boys' to win .
 John Lawlor is selected this week for the "Bobcat of the Week" honors . Lawlor was selected for this week's honor by the University of Washington .
 The fine come back of John and his teammates will be severely tested in state series play . With three games remaining, the fine come-back will be tested .
 '63 Bill Graham scored 16 unbelievable points for the bases . '63 '63 . Bill Graham was the star of the day for the teams .
 Cheney 5 0 Rand 4 0 Wilson "" 4 1 Whit 3 1 Frye 2 2 Milliken 2 3 Mitchell 2 3 Page II 1 3 Page I 1 4 Hacker 1 4 Chase 0 4 . The top four teams played off to determine the championship .
 The last set of games $4.00 LITTLE, BROWN 'Boston' is $1.00 . Arbeitgeber bevorzugen junge Damen mit einer GIBBS Ausbildung .
 Bates 44—83 Clark 30—64 . Bates 44-83 Clark 34-64 . Clark 30-64.
 Primary elections will be held in the Alumni Gym, March 4, from 9 to 4 . These are only class primaries, as the majority of the campus groups by-pass the primaries with nominations .
 The audience couldn't help admiring the courage and poise of the candidates which enabled them to relax on stage, to be genuinely natural .
 Robert Ahern '64 and Howard Blum '63 finished third in the MIT Invitational Debate Tournament . Ahern Blum and Ahern Ahern finished third at NIT this past weekend .
 Blum and Ahern, the ""A" team representing Bates, defeated Providence, Brooklyn, Fordham, Trinity and Amherst . The ""A"" team defeated Providence and Fordham .
 Presently, an Assistant in Philosophy, he was until this semester, a member of the Varsity Debating Squad and de jacto Chairman of a Literary Club . Presently he is an assistant in Philosophy . He was until recently, until this . semester, was a . member
 A leader of the resistance is the central character of the film, and is cornered by the Germans in a part of rtome . The film is based on the story of a German resistance leader .
 To understand this film is to experience the total effect of the picture . To find a sense of real experience not often attained in a motion picture positions .
 "Every one of us is capable of shaping history with an investment of honesty and earnestness" Dr. Goncharoff Stresses Rifts In Soviet System .
 He fought in the Second World War as a Russian tank commander . He was captured and put in a concentration camp by the Nazis . He fought as a tank commander and was put in concentration camp .
 As a refugee, he came to the United States, in 1952, and became a naturalized citizen in 1957 . He was born in New York City, New Jersey .
 Goncharoff's talk was based upon examples of his life under Communism . The major portion of the talk was about his twenty-four years in the Soviet Union .
 When 13, in 1933, the peasantry were ""resettled"" — scattered far from their homes . The peasantry was scattered far away from their home .
 They rebelled against this treatment, and the government sent troops to put down the rebellions . The government was forced to put the rebels down, and troops were killed .
 When the troops refused to fire on their own friends and relatives, Stalin withdrew all supplies, and people began to starve and die . Stalin withdrew the supplies and ordered the troops to stop shooting .
 Eight to ten million lives were lost, and his mother's was one of them . His mother's life was lost in the World War II .
 When a national purge began on the week before Easter, 1937, security police arrested his brother . Security police arrested him when the purge began in 1937 . His brother was arrested on the same day .
 A note came for Goncharoff from the government, congratulating him from being ""liberated"" from his religious brother . Gonchoff's religious brother was a member of the government .
 They are idealistic, and their desires to receive liberty and to break the bonds of peasantry were what excited them to follow the revolution of November 7, and Marxism . The revolution was the ""essentially spiritual promises"" of the revolution .
 Since Communism demands the faith and belief of the individual in its en* tirity, doubt will weaken the system, says the author . The author says doubt is necessary in Communism .
 He was optimistic as to a Republican victory with a conservative candidate with conservative candidate. He said he was optimistic of a conservative victory .
 During the time of the Civil War until 1932 the Democrats were unable to penetrate Republican dominance . During the 70 years in which the Republicans were a majority party, Democrats were not able to penetrate the Republican Party .
 Democratic success matured in 1932 when the depression, labor organization, immigrant groups, and the South combined to enforce a new, Democratic majority .
 Governor Rockefeller's margin of victory in the past two gubernatorial elections was too slight to guarantee his victory over President Kennedy . However, according to Mr Rusher, Governor Rockefeller won't guarantee President Kennedy's victory .
 As plantation aristocracy yields to industrialization, Southerners exposed to national communications media, more bipartisan politics is developing . As plantation aristocrats yield to industrializing, more bipartisanship is developing in the South .
 Republican state chairmen in the South feel that with the support of the new, active middle class a ""sane conservative"" could easily carry the previously Solid South .
 Lecturer Points To Role Of Individual For World Peace . Addressing last Friday's chapel assembly on ""The Wholeness of Man in a Divided World""", Dr. Dr. Michael Lister says .
 Nicholas Goncharoff: Individual's role in minimizing conflict among differing cultures of the world is to minimize conflict among cultures . He said individual's role was to minimize the conflict between cultures .
 He attributed the fluctuating world situation to misunderstanding among cultural entities — notably those of East and West — to misunderstanding .
 Formerly backward countries, as those in Africa and South America, search for aid to enable them to participate in the benefits of the Industrial Revolution .
 Both Communist ""East"" and United States ""West"" offer aid . The more personal assistance offered by the communist system appeals to the pride of these nations . The economic aid of the U.S. seems to come from a large and impersonal force .
 The U.S.'s economic aid is not accompanied by persons who want to help such countries fulfill themselves in the most beneficial manner possible to their culture . The United States' economic aid has not been accompanied by people who want it to be beneficial to the country's culture, writes CNN
 Often the only impression these people have of the U.S. has been left by inconsiderate, condescending, "Ugly American" tourists .
 The rectification of such misconceptions, as well as underlying ignorance, challenges each of us, challenges us .
 A beginning may be made with the mastery of a foreign language, and study of courses in foreign cultures . A study of foreign cultures in foreign culture is also possible .
 Student organizations such as student and culture congresses may also further understanding among cultures . Student organizations are also possible to further understanding of cultures .
 PhilSilvers will interview men interested in petroleum products marketing, management, and technology . Mr J G Ronayn from HUMBLE OIL & REFINING COMPANY will interview him on March 4 .
 LAWRANCE LEATHER COMPANY, O R T H O PHARMACEUTICAL CORPORATION, and POLAROID CORPORation will meet with interested men on Tuesday, March 5 .
 ALL State INSURANCE COMPANY will be represented by Mr Richard A Peterson on Wednesday, March 6. All State Insurance Company will be representing Mr Peterson on March 6 .
 Men and women interested in communications research, the foreign language program, and the technical program . Also Mr John F Sweeney from the NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (Department of Defense) will interview men and women .
 Mr Richard L Whitehead from HOME OFFICE LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY will meet with sophomore and junior math majors interested in the summer internship program .
 MASSACHUSETTS MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY will be represented on Friday, March 8, by Mr Robert Scott, Jr.
 Mr Wyn Dangelmayer and Mr Lincoln A Divoll from NEW ENGLAND TELEPHONE & TELEGRAPH (and other BELL SYSTEM COMPANIES) will meet with men interested in management, marketing, sales, administration, manufacturing, purchasing, and programming .
 A colleague of mine has been a very fortunate fellow, says Charles E SMITH '63 '63 . He says he has been fortunate to have a good friend in his life .
 Businesses, especially one large corporation, are opening their doors to him . Businesses and especially large corporations, including the U.S. government, are welcoming him back .
 The singer's success is attributed to his success in the U.S. market . He says he is proud to be able to perform at the top level .
 Studentry Seeks Greener Grass On The Other Side . Studentry: "It's not necessarily that specific law which afforded me the key to success" Studentry says it's not "that specific law" which afforded him the key .
 Parkinson's book enables one to see campus interviewers in their proper perspective . The understanding of the whole scheme of the book can be seen in the context of the interview .
 The young friend could well be unable to step into the position at 65, our friend says .
 When this fellow joins the firm, his boss will be in the age of 40 years old, and most likely will be looking forward to 25 more years of service . This fellow will join the firm when his boss is 40 .
 Our Junior Exec, also reaches the age of Achievement somewhere around 40, but he was forced into a different series of stages of growth — Frustration, Jealousy, and Oblivion .
 A Gift To Your College Can Result In A For Your Family Larger Income . Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift .
 Air travel and filling forms will make any elderly man retire early, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Air travel, filling forms and filling in forms are the main reasons to retire early .
 High official should attend frequent conferences in Manila, Ottawa, Mexico City, Hong Kong, etc. and only giving three or four days between each trip, the diplomat says .
 During these short intervals he should be required to come to the office and fill out forms relating to his recent travels . During this short intervals, he should also fill out his recent travel forms .
 My friend reminded me that it was getting late; seems he was flying to Cincinnati early the next morning and he had yet to get all his personal resume forms together . His friend reminded him that he had to get his resume forms in order to keep up with the job .
 The next day I tripped into the book store and paid out $1.15 of my money for a copy of Parkinson's Law and Other Studies in Administration by C. Northcote Parkinson .
 It makes the conservative business world shine in nonsense and at the same time shows the intelligent reader who to beat these industrial giants at their own game .
 Probably at one or more points in a college career a student considers transferring to another academic institution . By JENNIFER WINGATE '64, students may consider transferring to other institutions .
 The reasons are many — dissatisfaction with courses, financial difficulties, and personal problems, to name a few . The reasons for students to take up courses are many .
 As one student expressed it, "I would like an environment which is completely different. I would like to have a completely different environment"
 This desire for new blood is evident in these rather bleak months when we are haunted by the disappointments of last semester and are apprehensive about the evercoming school threats . This desire is particularly evident in this rather bleak month .
 Transferring is a good topic of conversation which not only brings sympathy but is a kind of pat on the back that the problem is outside of ourselves . Transferring brings sympathy and is a sort of a good idea that the problems are outside of us .
 Transferring reaches epidemic proportions during January and February when whole groups of friends decide on a mass exit . Transferring takes place during the winter months when friends decide to leave .
 A student gets ready to transfer only to find that he may not be able to do so as easily as he thought . Thus, a student may not have been able to transfer .
 Schools equal to Bates or with better academic ratings often do not have room . Schools equal or better schools with better ratings often don't have room for room .
 Most colleges do not want problem children who are looking for a Utopia . Most colleges don't want problem kids looking for U.S. U.topia .
 The feeling seems to be that students bring their personal problems with them wherever they go . Students bring personal problems everywhere they go, students say . Students say they bring their problems wherever they are .
 Large numbers of students feel that their individual growth and freedom is being hampered in every direction at Bates . Bates students say they feel that individual growth, freedom and individuality are being hampered at the school .
 Many regulations restrict almost to absurdity the freedom of the individual, or we are discouraged in every way possible . No, they are either shielding us from independent thought by the many regulations, or they are discouraging it all .
 Although all of these students will not transfer, this kind of cry for freedom and responsibility can be heard among them . This kind of universal cry for free and responsibility is heard among these students, says CNN.com .
 Bates is ""small and friendly"" but with a social life close to extinction . Bates is described as a small and friendly animal with a close-knit social life .
 The fact that many students do remain at Bates does indicate something is found to be meaningful here . Bates is a top university in Washington, D.C.
 Perhaps we are all defeatists and do not have the courage to try a new environment or improve the old one . Perhaps we do not want to try to try and improve the existing environment or try to improve it .
 Those students who are transferring and using imaginations to improve Bates are at least doing something . Those students are using their imaginations, they say .
 On Monday, March 4, representatives from Humble Oil & Refining Company will visit Bates College to interview men interested in petroleum marketing careers . Bates College students will be asked to apply for petroleum marketing jobs .
 We invite you to examine these and to visit with our interviewers on March 4 . Visit with them and visit with their interviewers to learn about their interviews .
 There will be a semi-formal dance this Saturday night in Chase Hall beginning at 8:30, featuring the fabulous quartet of Barry Davidson, James Curtis, Don Mawhinny, and Carroll Googins .
 FOUR BATES STUDENT, FEBRUARY 27, 1963, was a four-month-a-week U.S. college student . Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was a pioneer of American culture .
 Robert Chute spoke to a chapel audience recently, his topic was atheism . He spoke to the chapel audience about atheism .
 First new faculty member to address chapel assembly this year . "We commend Dr. Dr. John Lister as the first new member of the chapel assembly"
 Chute thanks Chute for his initiative and willingness to present his views on this subject . Chute: "I'm not afraid to say yes"
 The presence of this editorial demonstrates that we consider his comments significant . We consider it significant .
 Any attempt to outline a religious viewpoint within twenty minutes, must necessarily be general . Any attempt at outlining a religious view must be within 20 minutes .
 Chute failed to provide an adequate basis for ethics and morality, which according to him is basic to any religion, he says . Chute says he is disappointed by the lack of a basis for ethical and moral values .
 Chute would look to the individual as the basis for morality and ethics, he says . Chute: "I'm looking at the individual, not the government, as a model for morality"
 He stated that in a given situation, the decision for right and wrong depends on the individual . He said in the case, the individual is responsible for his actions .
 In allowing each decision to be made in view of the relative circumstances of different situations, Dr. John Sutter says . Dr. Sutter: "In order to make the right decision, each decision must be taken in a very different way"
 In order that decisions about behavior and possible action will not be relative to every situation, men seek ethical assurance . Men seek ethical assurances in order to make sure their behavior is not relative to each situation .
 Ethics is an attempt to formulate and organize principles as a guide for what ought to be done . Ethics is a form of formative principles that should guide what should be done. Ethics is the result of an effort to organize principles that can guide people to the right .
 These principles are not relative, but are applied to specific circumstances for guidance . These principles were not relative but applied for specific circumstances in the U.S.
 The ethical individual does not consider merely the uniqueness of each decision, but instead looks instead to the similarities in different circumstances . "Ethically, the ethical individual is not satisfied with the uniqueness in each decision," he says .
 The ethical-minded concludes that it is not the uniqueness, but the pervasive aspects of human existence that are striking . It is not unique, it is the pervasive aspect of human life that is striking, says the author .
 Chute's belief that atheism is ""more than a denial; it can be an affirmation,"" was not realized in his address . Chute: Atheism is "more than denial" than it is a denial .
 The implications do not ""lead to a satisfactory ethical code,"" but provide the basis for a denial of ethical considerations . The implications don't lead to a "satisfactory ethical code" The implications "do not lead to an ethical code, they say .
 The following letter is in reply to a letter printed in an earlier issue of the STUDENT from the Student Government, Student Council .
 The support, encouragement and kind thoughts expressed by all of you during this period will always be remembered . The support of all the . kind thoughts . expressed by . all of us during this . period will . always be . remembered. The support and encouragement .
 An article on Cuba, written by two members of the Young Republican Club, appeared in last week's Student . Meredith Meredith . Meredith RETRACTION: An article about Cuba appeared in Student.com last week . Meredith
 The article's headline and the Editorial comment on the suggested policy towards Cuba mistakenly stated that these two members were spokesmen for the Republican Club . The article also mistakenly said that two members of the GOP Club were speaking on Cuba .
 The opinions expressed in that article represent only the views of the two authors, and not the position of the Young Republican Club . The opinions of the authors do not reflect the views expressed in this article .
 Allan Williams '64: Leigh Campbell '64, Donald Delemore '64; Keith Bowden '64' William Goodlatte '65, James Fine '65; Steven Edwards '65' Marcia Flynn '65 . Robert Segersten '63: Howard Vandersea '63
 This letter is in response to the position taken in last week's Student by Mr Petke and Mr Foster in regard to the Cuban situation . It is a response to a letter written by Mr Foster and Ms Foster .
 I will not comment on the military status of any weapons there, for I do not have any direct line of communications with that island nor have I ever been there . I shall not comment . I have never been to that island .
 Communist communism was a significant factor before Castro's coup on New Year's Day 1959 . Castro was overthrown by the Castro government in 1959 .
 We have no right to be indignant any more than does the opposing pitcher when the batter hits a home-run . Granted it is to our advantage to keep active communism out of the Americas, but we have no . right to indignant . any more . than does an opposing pitcher
 "The last statement to be criticized here is the absurd request to demand that communism be withdrawn from Cuba," he said .
 Most that could be done conceivably would be to force a withdrawal of a number of prominent Communists, or to destory the structure of the Cuban government . The most that could do is to force the withdrawal of some prominent Communists .
 How one can destroy the idea for which the word communism stands is far from being clear . But how one can destroyed the idea of communism is not clear, he says .
 The primary purpose of this letter is to qualify a headline and hence a general misunderstanding resulting from last week's Republican Club article . This letter is intended to clarify that the headline of the article was incorrect .
 Republican Club member writing his opinion in an article to be published must submit his name to be included therewith . Republican Club members write their opinions in this article .
 Although beliefs of other club members may very well be identical or similar to those published, this is not necessarily so . This article does not necessarily reflect the views of other members of the club .
 The person whose name appear with a particular statement accept total responsibility for that statement . The person who appears with a certain statement accepts total responsibility . For more information, visit CNN.com/Heroes .
 It should be evident that in a Republican Club which must necessarily include in its membership different strata of political outlook that such an opinion as that to which I refer in this paper could not be construed as representative of the entire group .
 If an article which is of less controversial nature, embodying the sentiment of the whole group, is submitted, it will either go unsigned (as a regular news item) or will bear the name of Public Relations Director, Allen Kerr .
 Republican Club Members Demand Firm Stand on Cuba . The headline might have read, "Republican Club Members" followed, by the two names . I hope this explanation has cleared up any misinterpretation .
 An editorial appeared on page 4 of the same issue of the Student. The editorial. appeared, in opposition to our statement, appeared in the Student Student. My second objective is to comment on the editorial .
 I used to believe sincerely in this peace-promoting institution as it was established and described in its charter . But since that time it has so digressed from its original goals that it now supports and actually carries on warfare, he says .
 Last week's article entitled ""Republican Club Demands A Firm Position on Cuba" is not an official stand of the club nor is it a consensus of current opinion .
 It must be taken as only the personal opinion of those whose names appear as authors of the article .
 Robinson Players will present the first of three performances of William Shakespear's Hamlet on April twentyfifth . If at any time in the future the club does take a formal stand concerning a certain issue, it will appear in the form of a resolu .
 Alan Clark '64, Barbara Hudson '63, Elizabeth Davis '65, and Jean LeSure '65 . Barbara Hudson and Elizabeth Davis "63," Elizabeth Davis, "63, "65," "65" Barbara Clark "64," Barbara Hudson "63" "64" "65
 Although the process of casting is not yet completed, most of the longer roles have been filled . Most of the larger roles have already been filled, but the process is still ongoing .
 Starring as Hamlet will be Carl ""Todd"" Lloyd '64; as Claudius, King of Denmark, Robert ""Skip"" Butler '63; as Gertrude, Queen of Denmark,. Abby Palmer '65; as Polonius, John Holt '64, David
 Miss Schaeffer explains why Hamlet was chosen to play Hamlet . She explained why the play was chosen .
 Miss Schaeffer continued to say that every effort had been made to reduce the length of the play to reasonable limits consistent with faithfulness to the text of the text .
 Great care was exercised in arranging the scenes to allow the full impact of the tragedy to be felt by the audience . Great care also was exercised to ensure that the tragedy was felt in the audience's eyes .
 The actors are spending hours in individual thought and study to prepare for their roles . But she quickly commented that the actors themselves were also spending hours .
 Miss Schaeffer admitted that Hamlet provides a tremendous challenge to the Robinson Players . The Robinson Players will play Hamlet for the first time this year .
 In several ways, she continued, the production difficulties of the two plays are quite similar, she said . The production difficulties in both plays are similar .
 An elaborate set is unnecessary and often undesired in Shakespeare . Characters usually tell where they are when they are in the play .
 Lighting will be used as an integral factor in the play to separate scenes and create moods . Hence, lighting will be an integral part of the play, says director .
 Miss Schaeffer seems acutely aware of the challenge before the Robinson Players . She is confident in their ability and potentiality .
 The club as a whole will take full responsibility as the author and supporter of the cause . As she expressed it, ""We approach Hamlet with awe, but with the sense of having a very good theater piece.""
 I would appreciate it if you would print this article as a letter to the editor . It would be the first time we've seen this article in the U.S.
 It is necessary for the protection of the club and its individual members . Besides clearing the air, it is necessary to protect the club's members, he says .
 Of the three genres, poetry, essay, and fiction, the latter merits the most praise . Poems, essays, fiction and fiction are poetry and essays .
 Jim Kiernan's "A Fragment" is more a thumb-nail sketch than a story . Kiernan creates a fantasy world of a young boy in the book .
 With little difficulty one senses the two different worlds, the land of large rats and cluttered fields, and the boy's vision of Indians and defenseless Howard Johnson stands .
 She writes as though though though she were gazing up at a cumulus cloud-filled sky and identifying each white puff with some pleasant remembrance . She writes .
 Anne creates not characters, but fleeting impressions; her fragment is more subjective than Kiernan's . Anne creates a fragment of the fragment .
 In the penultimate paragraph, she becomes sentimental; she sheds a tear over the image, moistening it too much .
 She displays neither the poetry of Kiernan nor the sentence agility of Toby . Yet she convincingly portrays a woman and a sandpiper, with much in common .
 The series of declarative statements describing Laura's environment jar the reader . They should either £e a part of Laura's memories, or developed more fully and unobtrusively in a longer story .
 The essays should have been entitled research papers, for all three writers seek from minds other than their own . Perhaps, perhaps, was submitted? Perhaps? Perhaps it was submitted .
 Cummings presents the problem clearly and logically . Althrough the examples he chooses might alienate the novice, in spite of his illuminating comments, Cummings says .
 Few reading his paper could now go to a Cummings poem not better prepared to cope with the verbal monstrosities . Cummings poem is now a classic of poetry that has been published in the world .
 Clancy Lowenberg's plot summary doesn't require comment . Peter d'Errico's ""A Juxtaposition,"" however, needs editing . Clancy Lowenburg's plot summaries need comment .
 The introduction and conclusion are excellent . Yeats and Eliot for their success here. The introduction is excellent .
 "Nowhere does he substantiate or document his assertions %bout contemporary man," he writes .
 An occasional fragmentary image emerges, Doug Smith's for example, which arbors a possible poetic embryo; but generally the rest is sophomoric . The rest of the book is "sophomoric"
 "To develop, however, he must break the bonds of his subjective, personal little impressions," he says . To develop he must "break the bonds" of his personal impressions .
 The rhythm of the inital stanza flows as smoothly as a good wine, as effortlessly as fair weather clouds . It's the rhythm of an opening stanza that flows smoothly and effortlessly .
 She juxtaposes the subjective and the objective, the ""I,"" and the ""you,"" the personal experience and its setting, that the experience becomes communicable; she avoids sentimentality .
 This fact makes it difficult for this reviewer, who has read it only once, to formulate an adequate analysis and present it as an authentic document . The reviewer has read the book only once .
 The book is the root and creation,* and we must return to the creation and circumvent barbs that lie in wait . Of course, you may indulge in that graduate school pastime, ""criticism of criticism"" if you wish .
 Djuna Barnes is a handful of powerful characters who collide within time and arbitrary destiny . Each one breathing life and suffering into a spectral mosaic pieced together by some unholy master who dwells in the wood .
 It is not the depression and hatred of those angry young men, who are blinded by the age and see only the glare . However, it is not a depression or hatred, but it's not the hatred of young men .
 Doctor O'Connor, in his ""helpless power among the helpless,"" streams out dialogue to drown out the whimpering about him . The dialogue drowns out the "w whimpering" about him. Doctor O’Connor .
 Love is ultimately self-love, and the confusion drives them to the brink of insanity, says the author . "Love is ultimately love, and it's ultimately self love," she says .
 The paradox of Nightwood as a novel is that the beginning can only be fully appreciated once the end is revealed . The end of the novel will be revealed in the end of this novel .
 Stylistically, it resembles some phases of Joyce, but comparison is specious . The novel is set to be released in September 2015 .
 American vaulter, John Uelses, cleared the obstacle by clearing it for him . Not too long ago this obstacle was cleared by John Ueles, the American Olympic champion .
 The emergence of a fiber glass pole has revolutionized the sport . Fiber glass poles have revolutionized America's sport .
 Former mark of 16 feet is now cleared with the frequency of major meets . The former mark of sixteen feet was now cleared .
 The complete philosophy of the sport, such as grip and approach, have been altered to suit the magic wonder of the sporting scene . The complete . philosophy of . the sport has been altered by the sport's philosophy .
 It is not my intention to condemn the usage of this appartus on the Bates squad; that would be foolish, as almost everyone in the world is using it . The Bates squad is not using it, as most of the world does .
 Finland is home to the present world champion, Pentti Nikula . Hundreds'of boys have broken hundreds of bones in attempts to conquer this new-found sporting craze .
 "This innovation to me is somewhat analogous to a person running the hundred yard dash on a one-wheeled motor scooter," he says . The innovation is similar to running the 100 yard dash in the 100 yards on a scooter, he adds .
 A great deal of skill is involved (a point which I am not trying to discredit), but a great deal is involved . The world record is broken and rebroken with the swiftest rapidity, says author .
 There is indeed a great deal of human effort and skill apparent, but the records themselves become insignificant, defeating the main purpose of athletic competition . Though there are indeed a lot of human efforts and skill, the records become insignificant .
 It is on this basis that I feel fiber-glass poles should be disallowed, the same basis, incidentally, upon which a special shoe formerly used by Russian high jumpers was disallowed . The device would certainly have cleared an eventual eight feet .
 Nikula's ultimate goal is to break records . Nikula says he wants to set a record for the first time . He says he's not interested in breaking records .
 It might take even more time for him to recuperate from the fall following the jump .
 Next week the Student sports staff will announce its choice of an All-Maine basketball team . The Maine basketball team will be announced next week .
 Though this seleo tion is done independently, it is usually similar to those of more official status . It is usually done independently of the official status of the country .
 There are many fine basketball players in the state to choose from, making the choice even more arduous . There are also a number of talented players from the state .
 Bowdoin beat Colby last week to clinch the state series championship . Colby won the title last week . Bowdoins beat the Colby team .
 Polar Bears from Brunswick have lost but one game in series competition, that game being at the hands of the Bobcats . The Polar Bears have lost only one of their series series games . The Bobcats have won all three of the games in the series .
 Bowdoin will attempt to beat the cagers for the second time, as at present the score between the two stands at one win apiece . The two teams are currently tied 1-1 at the top of the standings .
 I trust that you will all be in the gym this evening, in spirit as well as body . I hope you will be in spirit and body this evening .
 It would be gratifying to end the season with a win, especially at the expense of the state champions . The state champions are the defending champions .
 The intramural track meet was run Sunday afternoon, and the boys from J B. found Lady Fortune smiling pleasantly as they emerged victorious .
 J. B.'s Bobby Thompson wins the "fat man's mile" Bobby Thompson won the race . Bobby Thompson was the runner-up .
 South's Al Marden finished third to add one point to the Rebel cause . Congratulations to South's third-placed finish .
 In last week's track meets, perhaps an omen of future consequences could be pointed out from the JV track meet . The JV meets were held at the end of last week .
 Pete McPhee is considered by his coach to be the best sprinter in Maine state history . He is considered to be one of the state's best sprinters . The state's top sprinter is considered the best in state history by coach .
 His speed was apparent in setting a meet record in the 50 yard dash and anchoring the relay to a victory . He also set a 50-yard dash record and anchored the relay .
 Jack Hartleb was a leading scorer in Maine with probably the best outside set shot ever in the history of Bates College basketball . Omitted from ""Ullom's All Stars"" printed last week was Jack Hartelb .
 The hot shooting, fast breaking Maine squad, led by Dave Svendsen and Art Warren piled up a quick 5-0 lead . Lawler scored a foul shot for the Bobcats .
 Johannesen's rebounding and tight defense made an attempt to stop the Maine drive . The Maine defense was inspired by Johannesen .
 Freeman returned to action, and he and Cummings hit outside jumpers to narrow the liad to six points with 8:27 remaining in the half . Freeman returns to action .
 The 'Cats couldn't find the range or contain the torrid Maine offense . None of the Cats could contain the potent offense .
 The second half was to spell little relief for the Bobcats, in quest of their first road victory . Krzynowek High High was defeated by the Bobcat in a 2-1 loss .
 At times early in the second half they spurted, but never could muster quite enough steam to overtake their opponents .
 Deemer and Svendsen continued to pace the Bears to leads as much as 31 points . The Bears led the game for 31 points in the first half .
 Willie Gardiner and Bob Lanz rallied with their hustling crew to reduce the lead to 20 in the closing minutes of the ballgame . The game ended in a loss to the Kansas City Royals at the Garden of America on Sunday night .
 For Bates, Ted Krzynowek contributed 14 points, Johannesen 11, Cummings 12, and Cummings 12 . Cummings 12 points for Bates .
 The ""Ullommen"" got off to a quick start as Pete Glanz hit a field goal and Lawler, Stevens, Castolene, Freeman, Freeman and Glanz battled in the first five minutes .
 The score was evened at 1616 with 9:50 remaining in the half . With a fancy behind-the-back pass by Cummings to Johannesen, the score evened . The match ended in 1616 .
 The scrappy Mosquitos left the game in favor of the more B E D A R D * S . MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston .
 Ken Stone continued to pour in jumpers to keep his team in the ball game . With Maine drawing closer, Fred Stevens hit two long jumpers . Fred Stevens brought back the lead back to six points .
 Seth Cummings threw a fine pass to Paul Castolene to give the 'Cats their largest lead of eight points . Seth Cummings throws a pass from Seth Cummings to give him the lead . The Cats lead the game by eight points with a score of 8 points .
 Cummings joins other Mosquitos (Beaudry, Kyzynowek, Hine, and Johannesen) with the score 5547 . Cummings is the first Mosquito to join Cummings in the top five .
 Bates could not seem to regain his early second half form . Bates had an early lead in the first half but struggled to cope .
 The go-go Bobkittens ran their record to twelve wins and three losses by virtue of splitting the two games played this past week . The Bobkettes split with Maine, Colby; Johnson High .
 Bob Johnson sparks the JV's by throwing in fifteen points in the first half . Bob Johnson throws in 15 points for the team .
 Johnson paced the JV's with twenty-six points, followed by Paul Savello with thirteen, and Bob Mischler with nine . Savello also scored 13 points, while Mischlers scored nine .
 The 'Kittens defeated a tall and talented Colby freshman squad Saturday night for the second time in as many attempts . Johnson Sparks Sparks Win for the 'Kitties .
 Colby fought back and cut the deficit, pulling ahead 7775 with 1:00 remaining . In the second half, the 'Kittens managed to protect a small lead, largely due to the fantastic jump shooting of Bob Johnson Colby .
 Johnson then went to work for one last shot, canning a twenty-five foot jumper to tie the score with only one second remaining . Johnson's last shot was a 25-foot long jumper from Johnson .
 The JV's were led by Johnson, scoring thirty-two points, twenty-six coming in the second half, Mischler with twenty points, and Hillman with thirteen . Johnson scored thirty-32 points, twice coming in second half .
 Coach Leahy said, "It was a great one to win. When asked to comment on the game, coach Leahy replied, "Yes, yes"
 The completion of the W.A.A.'s volleyball season took place Friday night as an added entry to the proceedings of the Betty Bates competition . Louise McCabe presents volleyball plaque to Cheney's Judy Warren .
 Cheney House had eight wins and no losses throughout the season . Louise McCabe, Betty Bates and Betty Bates of 1962 and the mistress of ceremonies, announced that the team had been victorious .
 She explained that there had been ties for both first and second places, and that a round-robin tourney had been necessary to decide the winner .
 Judy Warren, captain of this excellent senior team, was presented with a plaque by Louse . The plaque will remain in the winning dorm until next year's season .
 Because of the events of Betty Bates Week, there was little action in the basketball court . The girls' basketball team was playing in honor of the event .
 MillikenMitchell over Wilson-Hacker, and Frye-Chase over Page . Only two games were played which resulted in two victories . Milliken Mitchell over Wilson Hackers over Wilson Hacker .
 Milliken-Mitchell looks like a tough team to beat . Outstanding play on the parts of Barb Remick, Nancy Nichols, Eileen Sylvia, Kathy Mincher, Pris Clark, Sue Cottrell and Linda Pacquet poses a problem to any opponent .
 Bowditch was awarded first on the fewest number of misses . Johnson picked up a third place in the final round of the competition .
 Consistent Bob Kramer cleared 12 feet to pick up the other Bates first place . Kramer cleared the field 12 feet in order to win the other first place spot .
 Arnold Delaite won both the discus and the shot put, bettering a meet record in the shot by more than three feet . Arnold delaite also bettered a meet meet record by over three feet in his shot put .
 Speedy Pete MacPhee tied a meet record in the 50 yard dash with a time of 5.2 seconds . He also anchored the mile relay team to a victory . The distance relay team won the race .
 Barron Hicken set a new cage record in the high hurdles, beating Captain LaVallee and Al Harvie . Barron also ran on the mile relay team . Barron set a record for the cage cage record . Barron ran a new high hurdles record .
 John Curtis averted the expected Maine sweep in the weights by grabbing a third in the 35 lb. weights . Curtis won a third of the 35lb. weights in the weight category .
 Finn Wilhelmsen ran his specialty, the two mile, and came in second . Bob Kramer cleared 12 feet as 'Cats lose to State U with a time of 9:43. Bob Kramer clears 12 feet .
 Paul Planchon gained two Garnet points by coming in third in both the 50 yard dash and the broad jump . Paul Planchon gave two Garnet points by coming third in the 50-yard dash and broad jump.
 Captain Bill LaVallee gained his third point by placing third in the lows . Harvie had seconds in the broad jump and high jump and the broad jumper .
 Wakefield of the Black Bears cleared 20' IO14"" in the broad jump to better the winning effort in the varsity meet by two inches . Wakefield was the first person to clear 20'IO14" in the long jump to win the v.J. Wakefield .
 The Maine Freshmen seemed to be loaded with Track talent and will provide stiff competition for the Bates Track teams in the near future . The Maine freshmen will compete for their first time at Bates .
 Freshman Ken Trufant turned in the best performance for the junior varsity men . The freshman was a standout performer for the team .
 The lanky newcomer finished third in the mile, came back to grab a second in the two mile, and then finished off his afternoon by taking another second in pole vaulting .
 Ken Child took a second in the 50 yard dash, another in the hurdles, and came back to earn a third in the lows . Ken Child, another versatile performer, earned a second and third .
 The Home Life representative will be on campus on March 7 . Summer programs are offered at the Home Life Insurance Company .
 There are two programs — the Summer Internship for men interested in a general business management career and the Summer Actuarial Program for Math Majors . Home Life's summer programs include internships for men and math majors .
 The Summer Actuarial Training Program is available for students interested in exploring a career in law . Math major with at least a ""B"" average, and have successfully completed your Sophomore or Junior year .
 "We're continually searching for imaginative, forward-thinking men. And since one of the chief prerequisites of management is a strong educational background, we're continually looking for imaginative men," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 You'll start in management with advancement dependent upon your ability . You'll be promoted to management in a management position .
 Bell System is synonymous with job satisfaction, because of the importance of the job you'll do, and your potential to do it well . And the Bell System means you can be satisfied with your job, either as a technical or non-technical graduate .
 Applicants will be interviewed for all regional operating companies in the U.S. and Canada . Applicants have been selected for interviews with all regional regions in the United States and Canada.
 This past week ended the regular season of the intramural basketball leagues . This week is the end of the season for intramurals .
 Smith South J was the A-League champion and completed its second undefeated season in three years . It was Smith's second undefeated league season in a row . Smith's South J won its second consecutive undefeated season . Smith was the first team to win an undefeated league title .
 Smith Middle came through with a championship in the B-l League . The 'elegants' of Smith Middle won the title . Smith Middle also won the championship .
 Smith South's C-l team won in its league, while Roger Williams' C-2 League belonged to Roger Williams . Undefeated Smith South team won its league .
 The playoffs begin next week when South's C-l team plays Roger Bill's C.-2 champs . South's team will play Roger's team in the playoffs .
 The winner will play the winner of the B-lB-2 contest, and the ""rebels"" of South for the championship of the intramural league . The winner of that game will then play the "rebels" of South in the championship .
 Ian Pravda led J.B. with 18 points, while Billy ""I'm Not the Preacher"" Graham led all scorers with 19 points . Billy Graham scored 19 points for J.A. J.C. Graham .
 The boys from West win their first game of the year with a hard-fought victory over the ""Penthouse Playboys"" from downtown . The next night saw the boys from the West win the game against the "Penthusiastic Playboys"
 Gene ""Play"" Safir hooped 14 for the winners . Phil Tamis hit for his usual 15. Gene ""Safir" Safir hit for 14 . Phil "Tamis" hit for 15 .
 The ""Silver"" BOBCAT OF THE WEEK is an Equal Opportunity Employer . It seems that a new first in an area noted for its firsts has occurred this week .
 The sports staff of the Bates Student proudly presents a member of a Garnet Junior Varsity Team for the first time . The selection for this week's Bobcat of the Week was made by the sports staff .
 Bobby Johnson, a freshman guard on Coach Chick Leahey's Jay Vee basketball squad, was unanimously selected to the honored Bobcat of the Week . Johnson was unanimously chosen to the honor .
 Johnson scored 32 points against Colby in one of the most spectacular individual performances of outside shooting ever seen in Alumni Gymnasium . Johnson, a native of Wethersfield, Conn., where he captained his high school baseball and hoop squads, scored 32 .
 Smith South continued its defeated ways by losing to the Faculty 4440 . Middies Take ""B"" In the B-l League, Smith South lost 4440.
 The Faculty, led by Walt, Chick and Verne, held intact the ""elephant backcourt"" of the younger and slower undergraduates .
 The ""trinity"" along with Hank ""Yes, We Give Greenstamps"" Stred proved again that age means wisdom and cheating .
 In ""C"" There are two possibilities open when a C League game is scheduled . In ""B" There are also two possibilities when a game is played in ""C"
 Last week saw about three games lost to lack of interest, initiative, and, of course, players . Last week's games were lost to a lack of play .
 The games are an opportunity for all the men on campus to take part in some form of organized physical activity . The games will be a chance for all of the men in the U.S. to participate .
 Let's not let your fellow dormsmates and your crumbling bodies down this spring . Let's hope you don't let your dorms and your friends down this year .
 Al Cruichshank netted 11 for the winners, while Revoir scored half of East's points . Al Revoir also netted half of the points for East .
 Refereeing this year has been of a much higher calibre than of past years . Referees this year have been much better than in previous years . The refereeing is of a high calibre this year, according to FIFA .
 Oftentimes under conditions . of great emotional and physical stress, a player will blame the unassuming ""whistle-blower"" for his own mistakes .
 Intramural games have picked up a new rationalistic style of play and throws away the ""guillotine style" that was so popular in the past . The likes of Dick Love, Russ Henderson, John Bart, Charles Lasher, Al Williams, Joe ""Boogie Man""
 The Student sports staff this year is presenting the ""First Annual Stoic Award"" to the coed who sat in the balcony of the gym for one complete game . Coed Award is presented to the student who sits in a complete gym balcony for a complete game.
 Les Jones fought off many forms of the English language to cheer her favorite team on to victory . This year's winner is Les Jones, who fought off numerous forms of English language .
 I will not give you a quotation for the week, because I forgot to do my classical outside reading . I will instead give you an excerpt from a classical quote .
 Art Valliere picked up a point for his third-place finish in the high jump . Valliere finished with a point in his high jump event .
 Don Celler and Mike Biel avoided a complete sweep for the Black Bears in the 1000 yard run . They earned second and third place in the race .
 Harry Mossman got the only points for the weightmen, picking up a second in the 35 lb. weight category .
 Robert Lanz Chosen As Business Mgr. at Bates College, Maine, March 6, 1963 . Lanz chosen as business manager at Bates University .
 Robert Lanz '65 will succeed Stephen Barron '64 as business manager of the STUDENT, the Publishing Association announced Wednesday . Lanz "65" succeeds Stephen Barron "64" Barron .
 An economics major from Rockville, Conn., Lanz held the post of STUDENT advertising manager this year . He has been a staff member since his freshman year .
 In addition to his newspaper work, he is a member of the varsity basketball and baseball teams . He was the soccer team's leading scorer this fall . He also plays basketball, baseball and soccer .
 Despite the increased responsibilities of his new Student position, he hopes to be able to continue all these activities .
 Lanz first became interested in newspaper work at Deerfield Academy where he was a member of the student newspaper . Lanz was a student newspaper member at the school .
 He has just been given a post on the STUDENT staff at the University of Cambridge . He has a real interest in newspaper business management, which has made him aspire to the post .
 Countryman heads the national staff of the Northern Student Movement office in New Haven . Countryman is a member of the organization's national staff .
 Under ordinary circumstances, he would have been a senior at Yale this year, studying philosophy . He would be studying philosophy at Yale, but would be a senior this year .
 NSM's main objective is to get Northern students to lead the attack against prejudice and discrimination in the North . With the rest of NSM staff, he has interrupted his education to work for this movement .
 Final Candidates Vie For 1963-64 Positions for 1963-1964 Positions . Final All-Campus Elections, March 11 Student Council Senior Representatives, Class of '64 Robert Ahem Douglas Dobson John Meyn David Piasecki Paul Planchon Paul Sadlier .
 They spend much of their time waiting for it to come to them and in so doing commit the fateful sin of passivity . As a result of their lack of action, they spend a lot of time waiting and waiting .
 The accumulation of facts is an irttegral part of the educational process, but if the process ends here so does education . Education is an important part of education, but it ends here as so does the process .
 "The essence of a full education is the active process of making these facts meaningful," says the author of the book . "It's the essence of the full education," she says .
 This additional process must be put into action by the student himself and cannot be drawn out against his will . The student himself must be involved in the process, which must be followed by his parents .
 "The professor finds his greatest limitation in this failure of the student's will to learn actively," says the professor .
 Many times times the student will find himself limited by time, and by a strenuous amount of busy work . External Substitutes can be used to substitute time for time and busy work.
 By self dedication rather than procrastination, the cause of oself-realization can be approached . Yet, by self dedication, self dedication can be overcome .
 External causes cannot become substitutes for the central cause, says Julian Zelizer . "Just activism cannot be a substitution for intellectual activity," he says . Zelizer says .
 It is the duty of the institution to prevent the encouragement of the superficial education so prevalent today. It is also the duty to prevent it from encouraging superficial education .
 Too many students are emotionally dead and this is the first step to intellectual inactivity, says author . "This is not the first time students have been emotionally dead," she says . "Too many students have to be emotionally dead"
 Note taking is not enough; the student must participate in the process itself . Students must also take part in the note taking process itself, the author says .
 One must basically care about certain things in order to understand them, says author . One of the most important things in the world is to understand, he says .
 Knowledge for knowledge's sake is passivity; intellectualism for intellectualism's sake  is insidious . Intellectualism for intellectuals' sake is insidious. Intellectualism is not knowledge for its own sake .
 Dante originated at a conference to raise funds for the Freedom Riders sponsored by the New England Student Christian Movement in June, 1961 . If one is emotionally alive he will come away from Dante caring for it .
 A committee was formed to investigate the possibility of creating a Northern student civil rights movement . Committee formed to look at possibility of forming a Northern Student Civil Rights movement .
 The following October, representatives from 20 colleges gathered in New Haven, Conn., at the committee's invitation to adopt a structure and a general program . The committee was invited to New Haven in October .
 NSM worked to provide support for the Southern student movement and develop programs relating to the Northern civil rights problems . NSM supports Southern program .
 Some $9000 was raised for the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee's voter-registration program in the South .
 Busloads of New England college students participated in weekend sit-ins on the eastern shore of Maryland . Students participated in the sit-in in Maryland on Saturday .
 A large conference dealing with discrimination and deficiencies in the areas of employment, education, housing, and politics was held in April at Sarah Lawrence College .
 NSM sent 10,000 books donated by students from eight colleges to Miles College in Birmingham, Ala. In spring term, NSM students from 8 colleges donated books to the college . NSM: NSM is proud of its efforts to educate students in Alabama .
 NSM implemented four student projects, being in Philadelphia, Pa. This past summer, NSM students implemented four projects in Philadelphia . NSM is based in Philadelphia.
 22 college students lived in the Negro community, held jobs and administered an educational program for high school students from the community .
 Philadelphia Program Cooperation for the tutorial program was obtained from the Philadelphia school board . Project was publicizing the project in the five high schools in the Negro community .
 Each tutor met with two to four students for an hour and a half a day, twice a week . Each tutor had to meet with two-to-four students for about an hour .
 Today there are over 30 tutorial programs in college towns throughout New England, involving 1200 tutors and about 2100 students .
 Coram Library institutes the) first of a, series of exhibits featuring faculty readings suggestions this week . The library will display the exhibits .
 In response to requests for suggested reading, faculty members have prepared selective, but inclusive, bibliographies .
 These exhibits are primarily a result of a poll taken last year to determine student reading interests . The exhibits were created as a response to a poll conducted last year .
 Miss Foster reports that many students seemed to indicate a strong preference for faculty suggested reading . Miss Foster says students seem to indicate that faculty suggested readings are preferred .
 This series of displays will familiarize students with faculty preferred reading matter . Hopefully, this series of . displays will . familiarize them with faculty . preferred reading . matter .
 Presently in the catalog alcove area are several works dealing with The Contemporary French Theater selected by Dr. Dr. Martin. Martin . Martin .
 Plays by such representative dramatists as Jean Anouilh, Albert Camus and Eugene Ionesco are featured . Many in the original text and translation, many in translation .
 These titles have been chosen from the library collections as particularly worthy of notice for students seeking to broaden their reading horizons . These titles are chosen from library collections .
 For some ten days these books, initiating the program, will be available for browsing or for circulation . For some 10 days, these books will be free to browse or circulation .
 This past week ended the regular season of the intramural basketball leagues . New England Broadcasting Company is an Equal Opportunity Employer .
 Smith South was the A-League champion and completed its second undefeated season in three years . Smith South won the title in 2012 and 2013 .
 The ""Silver"" BOBCAT of the week is the first of its kind . It seems that a new first in area noted for its firsts has occurred this week .
 Johnson scored 32 points against Colby in one of the most spectacular individual perform ances of outside shooting ever seen in Alumni Gymnasium . Johnson is a native of Wethers field, Conn., where he captainec his high school baseball and hoop squads . Johnson, a native
 Last week saw about three games lost to ack of interest, initiative, and, of course, players . Last week's games were lost due to a lack of interest and initiative .
 The games are an opportunity for -all the men on campus to take part in some form of organized physical acivfty . The games will be an opportunity .
 Oftentimes under conditions . of great emoional and physical stress, a player will blame the unassuming ""whistle-blower" for his own mistakes . Oftrequently under conditions of great .emoional . and physical . stress, players often blame the "wh
 Harry Mossman got the only points for the weightmen, picking up a second in the 35 lb. weight . i Hates Stufant Vol. i Hated Stufants Vol. Vol.
 Nominations for Final All -Campus Elections, March 11 Student Council Senior Representatives, Class of '64 Robert Ahern Douglas Dobson John Meyn David Piasecki Paul Planchon Paul Sadlier Robert Sherman Daniel Stockwell Junior Representatives. The Northern Student Move . The Northern
 Meetings are held informally at the Baptist parsonage home of John Schroeder at 8:00m. These meetings are held at 8 a.m.
 The topic, ""Judaism — A Miracle of Survival without Assimilation -Ethical Monotheism, Parent to Christianity"" will be discussed .
 A local rabbi will present a talk on this religion which has endured through world-wide dispersion, ghetto, and continued persecutions climaxing in the attempted genocide of Nazi Germany .
 Some of the sights of this religion which eludes much of Judaism and some of Christianity will be sought . Also, distinctive in sights of . this religion . which in eludes . much of the . religion eludes many of . Judaism and Christianity .
 These meetings are open to everyone for the presentation of doubts and convictions concerning religion . Meetings are open for everyone to present their doubts about religion .
 Chase Hall Dance Committee Elects its officers for the coming year . Elects Gomes Chairman of the Dance Committee .
 Peter Gomes '65 succeeds Paul Sadlier '64 as chairman, Russell Wagenfeld '65 will follow Gomes as treasurer . Pauline Grimmiesen '65 replaces Sally Walker '63 as secretary . Russell Gomes follows Peter Sadlier "65" as chairman . Russell W
 CHDC will prepare its first report to students . Additional information will appear in a subse quent issue of the STUDENT after the group prepares its report .
 Educational Guidance and Curriculum Committee has recommended to the faculty that certain changes be made in the curriculum . Committee recommends changes to the curriculum for students . Committee also recommends changes for students in the classroom .
 Most important changes under consideration concern the B S. departments . The most important changes are to be made by the government .
 The courses that would be required would include General Biology, Genetics, Physiology, Botany and Botany . A new senior level course, Special Topics in Biology, would also be required for all biology majors .
 Health-Education 101W would be added to the curriculm as of September, 1963 . Health-Eduction 101W was added to school curriculum as of Sept. 1963 .
 Bates will host the ""Maine College Forensic Festival"" in the Little Theater on March 7th . Bates will hold the event in the little Theater .
 John Strassburger '64 and Howard Blum '63 will each deliver a persuasive speech . Howard Blumm '63 '63' '64 '64' '63 and '64's '64 will deliver persuasive speeches . The speech will be broadcast at 8 p.m.
 Thomas Hall '64 and Robert Ahern '64 will each give an extemporaneous speech . The speech will be followed by a speech from each of the two men .
 Professor Quimby is in charge of the festival . He will be assisted by his speech teaching class .
 Monday, March 11 Spring Elections, Alumni Gym, Guidance INTERVIEWs on CAMPUS . Men interested in training programs in credit, operations, and branch banking .
 On Wednesday, March 13, Wendell K Whipple Jr. will meet with men from CONNECTICUT MUTURN MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY . The meeting will take place in Connecticut .
 Mr Richard J Malatesta '45 will interview men and women interested in FILENE'S training program in re tailing . Filene's training program will focus on re-tailing .
 Ryder from MU TUAL FIRE INSPECTION BU REAU of NEW ENGLAND will be here on Thursday, March 14, to discuss fire protection engin eering . Ryder will be at the center of the discussion .
 Seniors and undergraduates will also meet with Mr Harold C Harlow, Jr., from SPRINGFIELD COLLEGE if they are interested in 'graduate training for careers in com munity agency, intergroup rela tions, international service, or community development .
 Keene, New Hampshire, has a medical secretary to work with four doctors . The medical secretary will work with the staff of Keene's medical clinic .
 Work consists of general and medical dictation . The work consists of completing workman's compensation and personal insurance forms .
 If you think your degree offers you the base for a rewarding career in our management, then come talk with us when we interview . If you're in the upper half of your class, then you should be at the top of the class .
 She feels Bates allows the individual to grow, .and stressed that the happiness which . the student seeks at any school must come from within .
 Hudson feels that Bates offers other concrete advantages . Hudson says Bates offers more concrete advantages than other areas .
 These numFraternities and sororities serve a function at large universities as smaller social units . Fraternities are smaller social groups that serve as smaller units .
 Rushing can be very cruel, and at a small college these fraternities could turn into cliques . Rushing is very cruel and at small colleges it could turn to cliques, the author says .
 Students who have social problems will not find a paradise at a large university where social life can be overwhelming . Social Life Adequate at U.S. universities is not a paradise for students with social problems . Social life is adequate at large universities, she says .
 Bates, although it is not socially oriented, allows students to know each other on other than festive occasions . Bates is not social-oriented, but it's not socially-oriented .
 The STUDENT Editorial Staff bers offer stiff competition in outside activities such as drama, the arts, and sports . Cultural opportunities are not entirely lacking at Bates, says Hudson .
 One of Bates' outstanding qualities is that it allows the amateur to participate in Bates' annual event . Bates is known for its low-cost cost of $100,000 per person .
 Bates provides students needed opportunities to develop in untried areas . Bates College provides students with opportunities to learn and develop in new ways .
 Bobbie feels that the California-style beach parties and nightclub jaunts are a little out of keeping with the Maine climate . Bobbie says that the beach-style parties are too out-of-keep with Maine's climate .
 Students who are not ski fans could use a student union for more sedentary activities support . Perhaps those who aren't ski fans would like to use the student union to provide support for those who want to be active .
 By pooling funds and organizing student transportation, much could be done in this direction . Students need to pool funds and organize student transportation .
 Already Bowdoin extends invitations to Bates which few students take advantage of . Bates is a small college school in the Northeast . Bates has a history of hosting invitations to Bowdoins .
 Seminars Valuable Hudson believes our seminar classes are important as well as the core program and Cultural Heritage . Hudson believes this is important to the core of the program and cultural heritage .
 At large universities exams are often multiple choice which can be graded by a machine . The exams at large universities are often multi-choice exams which are often graded by machines .
 Bates exposes students to exams which give students an opportunity to reason . Bates exposes them to exams that give students opportunity to think . Bates: Exams give students a chance to reason.
 Students considering transferring should know well the school they hope to attend . Students consider transferring to a new school in order to get a better education .
 Free Parking is available at most Sheraton Hotels and at all Sheraton Motor Inns . Free parking is available in most of the world's largest hotels .
 Get these discounts at any of Sheraton's 80 hotels in the U.S.A., Hawaii and Canada by presenting your Card . The discounts are available at Sheraton hotels in Hawaii, Canada and Hawaii .
 The opinions expressed in this article are not necessarily those of the management . The opinions of the author of this article do not reflect the views of management. We are happy to clarify that this article does not refer to the management of the company .
 The new staff of the STUDENT, under the dynamic leadership of Norman Gillespie, is, for the most part, a modification of the top-notch staff which worked under the sparkling direction of John Wilson . Norman Gillespie is the dynamic leader of the University of Cambridge .
 Marge Zimmerman, formerly assistant news editor, is now managing editor . "I am quite confident that she can manage things with ease," she says .
 Herb works at WRJR where he takes The Masterworks Hour on Thursday nights from 8-10. Herb works for WRJR and hosts the Masterworks hour .
 Peter d'Errico '65, comes from Fargo, North Dakota, and because we aren't prejudiced against furriners, we let him be Feature Editor . He is a senior member of the staff at Fargo University .
 Peter is a philosophy major whose major outside interest is ""people" Peter is an outside interest in philosophy . Peter is also a major student at the University of North Carolina .
 Linda comes from Boxford, Mass., and is undecided English or Government major . She is undecided on whether she wants to study government or English .
 He likes short pipes, long cars, the stock market, and enjoys popular novels .
 Don ""Frosty"" Frese, otherwise known as Long John, Jenkins, or Cap'n, worked for a newspaper last year . He is an editorial assistant for the Daily Mail .
 Sally O Smyth just wandered in and isn't quite sure what she is going to do here, but it is sort of nice to have her smile around . Still More Sally will appear in the new series, which airs tonight at 9pm on BBC One .
 All those interested in cheer leading, either male or female, should attend the squad-tryouts which begin following spring vacation .
 Preliminary meetings will be held before vacation begins, the first on Monday, March 11, at 4:30m. in the Purinton Room in the Alumni Gymnasium . The first on March 11 will be at 4.30m .
 The opportunity is especially great for making the squad, since five girls are leaving . The opportunity to make the squad is great for the girls, with five girls leaving .
 The Constitution states that it may consist of either eight or nine members . The Constitution says that the Constitution may include members of either 8 or 9 members of the Senate .
 The sophomore members and the subs will be required to try out again this year . The junior members and subs will need to be asked to make up the team .
 Instruction and practice will continue for the two weeks following vacation . Tryouts will be held for the next two weeks after vacation .
 The team of judges will consist of the four senior members of the squad, one representative from both the Women's Student Government and the Men's Student Council . The judges will also include a representative from the Physical Education Department and one from both Women's .
 "Bates is not high school, and we don't spend two or three hours a day practicing," coach says . True, the squad is far from perfection but Bates is not a high school .
 There are too many other things to take into consideration, eg., studying. There is too much work to do, eg. studying. It's not just a matter of studying, it's important to be in the right place .
 We hope that anyone trying out for the squad will feel free to express his or her ideas . We hope anyone who wants to be included in the squad can express their ideas .
 It is not an easy thing to try to foster school spirit when one is rewarded with only the sound of eight voices . The school spirit is not easy to foster when it is only eight voices playing .
 As the name cheerleading denotes, we are supposed to lead or direct the crowds in displaying their enthusiasm for the team . We are meant to lead, direct or direct crowds in expressing their enthusiasm, she says .
 Maybe you've got some fresh,; new ideas — if so, come to tryouts and bring them with you . Maybe you have some fresh ideas .
 These meetings are held informally at the Baptist parsonage home of John Schroeder at 8:00 on March 10 . On March 10, the topic will be discussed .
 These meetings are open to everyone for the presentation of doubts and convictions about religion . A filmstrip preceeds this program .
 Peter Gomes '65 succeeds Paul Sadliei '64 as chairman, Russell Wagen feld '65 will follow Gomes as treasurer . Pauline Grimmiesen '65 replaces Sally Walker '63 as secretary . Russell Gomes will be treasurer, and Paul Gomes succeeds Paul
 CHDC will prepare its first report to students . Additional information will appear in a subse quent issue of the STUDENT after the group prepares its report to the students .
 Miss Alice R Brooke '56 will interview women interested in positions as secrere taries, office assistants, computa tional and statistical workers, course assistants, library assist ants, and research assistants .
 On Wednesday, March 13, Wendell K Whipple, Jr., from CONNECTICUT MUTICUT LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY will meet with men interested in the sales and management training program .
 Senior students will also meet with undergraduates from the University of Cambridge . They will be preparing for careers in community agency, intergroup relations, international service, or community development .
 Hudson feels that Bates offers other concrete advantages . Hudson says Bates is a good option to explore the area .
 The sheer number of stusuch as bridge, co-ed studying and good conversation is one of the reasons for the school's success .
 Fraternities and sororities serve a function at large universities as smaller social units . Fraternity and sorority societies are smaller social groups .
 The STUDENT Editorial Staff dents is a handicap. Hudson feels, are not entirely lacking at Bates, although they could be added to with student additions . Hudson feels that the lack of dents at Bates could be a problem .
 She enthusiastically enbers also offer stiff competition in outside activities such as drama, the arts, and sports .
 On campus, Herb works at WRJR where he takes The Masterworks Hour on Thursday nights from 8-10. On campus he also works for WRJR . Herb is also a radio personality on the campus of the University of Wisconsin .
 Students must use the STUDENT to express their ideas, this state of affairs must necessarily continue .
 Hopefully, succeeding issues will evidence some changes in layout and content . Hopefully the next few issues will show some changes .
 Such innovations will be designed to improve the STUDENT both by journalistic standards as well as in the eyes of the studentry . The studentry will benefit from these innovations .
 Comments on what this newspaper should present or represent are welcome . Comments are welcome at the end of this article .
 Criticism of the STUDENT, past and present, does not have to take the form of a letter or article, but can simply be expressed to any Editor . Criticism does not need to be taken to the page of the Editor .
 The following Guest Editorial emphasizes the policy of this newspaper, and also provides an example of a student taking advantage of the opportunity the STUDENT affords for expressing opinion .
 The Bates STUDENT is a weekly paper that contains articles in various fields . Guest Editorial is a guest editorial .
 Some of the articles are merely informative, but others are sometimes provocative . Some of these articles are simply informative . Others are provocative .
 These articles are not meant to be read and then thrown away with a shrug of complacency and a ""So What"" attitude . These articles were not intended to be thrown away . Instead, they are meant to have a 'So What' attitude .
 Students who read this newspaper are not concerned about what they read . From the very few, if any, letters received by the Editor of the STUDENT, it would not be unfair to say that .
 Every student knows that this weekly newspaper belongs to the studentry of Bates College . This weekly newspaper is published by Bates College students at the school .
 It would not be harsh to say that very few take advantage of this medium . It would be not be fair to say many people would be interested in using the medium .
 Students prefer to complain about things they do not like to other students . Instead of complaining, students prefer to talk about things with other students, they complain .
 The STUDENT is not only read by the student body of Bates College, but by subscribers and alumni, alumni, trustees of Bates, and parents of students . It is also read by subscribers, alumni and alumni .
 This weekly newspaper is the best medium to let others know about your grievances, opinions, and attitudes on different topics of campus as well as universal interest . Surely this week newspaper is best medium for people to vent their grievances .
 Peter d'Errico '65, Editor; John Holt '64, Richard Dow '64 . Richard Derby '66, Richard Olson '65 . Jennifer Wingate '64; Carole Cooper '66; Carol Cooper '65; David Olson '66 .
 Russell B Henderson Jr. and Nicholas Basbanes '65, Editors; William Davis '66, Cartoonist; Allan Williams '64, Leigh Campbell '64 . William Goodlatte '65 and James Fine '65; Steven Edwards '65 . Robert Segersten '63,
 The news article covering my chapel address on Atheism and more especially your editorial of last week make it clear that, whatever my objectives, I did not fulfill them. The news articles covering my . address on atheism and more than your editorial make it . clear that . whatever my . objectives
 "I thank you for the recognition . of the limitation of such a brief address, and for the editorial, which gives me the opportunity to correct the misunderstanding," he said . " I thank you . for . the recognition of the . limitation of the limitations of the limited address," he
 I am not the complete relativist you describe, although I may have created that impression . I may be a relativist, but I'm not a complete relativist . I'm sorry for that impression. I'm happy to clarify that I'm a relativistic .
 "I believe in an ethical code just as I believe in a system of taxonomy for animals and plants," she says . She says she believes in ethical code as well as an ethical system for animals, plants .
 Things are all different, and to present a basis for reasonable action they must be classified . Things must be different to be classified, and that's why they're classified .
 A particular response may be considered as ""the right" response to a class of situations . Thus a particular response is considered to be the 'right' response to certain situations .
 Whatever any of us would like to believe, meaningful action without presupposition is not possible . We need to be able to take action without a prejudgement, we need to believe .
 Atheist could adopt, as a code, as an interpretation of the teaching of Christ, of Mary Baker Eddy, or of my Uncle George . Atheists could adopt a code of interpretation of Christ's teaching, or that of my uncle George .
 All I ask, if the Atheist wishes to be a member in good standing, is the recognition, as an individual of the responsibility for the selection of the code .
 Atheism provides as good a basis for morality as any other system, if, and the if is the key, we accept the principle that all ethical codes are subjective . Viewed in this light, Atheism is a good moral basis for any system, and Atheism can be a
 Atheist may be as moral or immoral as the next fellow, but he must accept the responsibility for his acts and code . Atheists must accept responsibility for their acts and their code, he says .
 He will admit no authority higher than man to which he can appeal decisions, no ""other life"", no transcendent purpose, no transcendence . No dipreparation for which may induce him to allow ends to justify means during this one, he says .
 Robert M Chute published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, during' the college year . Chute is published by Robert Chute .
 Good judgment is a ""halo"" realized by only a few, and only discovered after years of learning and making mistakes . Good judgement is a "halo" realized by a few . Good judgment only discovered by years of making mistakes and mistakes .
 "I have not reached that level, as witnessed by my Betty Bates performance," she said . "I'm not going to reach that level. I'm not sure if I'm going to get that level."
 As a result, I am using the STUDENT to mediate my apologies to anyone offended by my music . As a . result, he is using a . student to . mediate his apologies . The STUDENT is using the . STUDENT .
 The songs were parodized merely to add a little humor to the dull interim when the votes were being counted . The songs are parodies of the political process .
 "I had no conception of their apparent inappropriateness nor resulting controversy," says the author of the book . "I was not aware of the inappropriatseness nor controversy"
 I say I am sorry to all those who thought my songs were a sour note in the night's competition. However, again, I am . However, I say . I'm sorry for all those thought my song was a sour hit in the evening's competition .
 Perhaps the ""mistake"" will, in the future, help and direct me to wear that ""golden circle"" of good judgment . Perhaps the "mistake" will, for example, help .
 Any letter which does not constitute a personal attack or exceed the limits of good taste will be published . It will not be published unless it is written in good taste .
 In reply to the article appearing in last week's ""Sporting Scene"" regarding the validity of the use of the fiber-glass pole, I would like to present the opposing side of the argument .
 Charles Dvorak vaulted 11 ' 6"" with a plain, old-fashioned hickory pole in 1904 . In 1904 an Olympic champion in 1904 he vaulted an Olympic record 11 " 6" with a simple old fashioned pole .
 Dvorak remembers a similar controversy upon the introduction of the bamboo pole . According to his statement in Life Magazine, the bamboo poles were introduced in 1972 .
 Cornelius Warmerdam, using a bamboo pole, soared over 15' consistently . He soared from 15' to 15' using bamboo pole .
 The greatest fault with the bamboo pole is the danger of its breaking while in a bent position . The bamboo pole can also be broken in bent position, experts say .
 A high-school vaulter in Bristol, Conn., was vaulting with bamboo when the pole snapped below his hands and fatally speared him . The pole was vaulted with bamboo .
 Following this, the bamboo pole was outlawed — because of its danger only . The bamboo pole is now banned in Japan .
 Don ""Tarzen"" Bragg held the record of 15' 9 l 4"" with an aluminum pole until fiber-glass pole was introduced . Bragg set the record with a 15'9 l 4" pole . Don Bragg was the world record holder .
 In his opinion, pole vaulting is merely going through an evolutionary pattern all over again . In my opinion, poles vaulting has evolved through evolutionary patterns, he says .
 The switch from metal to fiber-glass is comparable to the switch from the hickory pole to bamboo . The switch is similar to a switch from a metal pole to a bamboo pole, experts say .
 The February 23rd issue of Sports Illustrated states that today's science is capable of developing a metal pole which will surpass fiber-glass in flexibility . The pole will be able to be flexible enough to withstand bending bending and bending .
 Budd Held developed a new, more streamlined javelin which would go much farther than the type formerly in use . Held developed the new type which could go much further than the old type .
 There was no fuss about its entry into the sport, although it radically revised records . This was introduced into track and field and there were no fuss with its entry .
 Formerly, hitting a hurdle on the way over was like hitting a stone wall . Formerly it was like 'hitting a hurdle' was 'like hitting a wall' Formerly the hurdle was 'hit by a hurdle', but now it's a hurdle .
 Today's hurdles have been streamlined, both in style and in the introduction of aluminum as the basic material, allowing it to give upon contact .
 These examples are merely to illustrate that various ""evolutionary changes"" are, in actuality, very common and normal occurrances . These examples were merely to . illustrate that evolutionary changes are very common .
 The vault is sup posed to have a foreign implement incorporated in its tech nique . The vault was built in the 1980s .
 Unlike the pole vault, the high jump is an event requiring only an individual and a bar . Unlike pole vaulting, the event requires only a single individual and bar .
 The introduction of this outside help in the form of a special shoe defeats the original purpose of an athlete using his own ability to clear the bar .
 The introduction of the fiber glass pole has definitely in creased the spectator interest in the pole vault . The introduction has creased interest in pole vaulting .
 Although they paid for various services, they were not allowed to decide how the money they supplied was to be spent . Basically, although they paid . for various . services, the . money they . supplied was not . decided how they were to spend .
 As part of our bills, we pay for the activities of certain campus organizations such as the Student Council, Student Government, and the Christian Association . We pay for these activities as part of the bills .
 According to the Extra-Curricular Activities Committee, the funds of these organizations are alloted according to the decisions of the committee alone . The funds will be alloted by the committee .
 The committee voted February 26 to forbid the proposed transfer of funds to the junior class . The committee votes February 26 .
 One of the two student members of the committee joined the majority in rejecting the proposal .
 It is the administration that feels uneasy about getting involved in subsidies . The administration is wary of getting involved with subsidies .
 The group has but two members . It seems to be dedicated to providing a "broad base for democratic" education .
 The Extracurricular Activities Committee, it seems, has the unchallenged right to control, in whatever way it wishes, the expenditures of organizations run by the students . Students run the organizations with money supplied by students, the committee says .
 The offensive team must attempt to make a basket within 24 seconds of their possession of the ball . Now the offensive team has to attempt to score a basket in the last 24 seconds .
 Even with a metal pole, one must be somewhat of a gymnast to assume a vertical position while flying through the air over a bar and then falling into a pit, supposedly landing on his feet . The argument states that it only takes a gymnastic to master the fiber-glass pole
 This does not place too great a burden on a small family with a substantial income, but for families with several college-age children, expenses can be more than a strain .
 Few men can earn anywhere near $1200 in a summer . John David Sleepy-Time Express features Bob Livingston, Peter Heyel and Doug Wakefield .
 College students are consequently forced to seek aid outside the family . College students need to seek help outside of the family to help them cope .
 SINGER Sewing Machine Company has 1600 branches near your home . Work this summer in one of the 1600 branches of the company's sewing machine company .
 Gain valuable experience while earning salary plus commission . Gain valuable business experience . Earn salary and commission plus pay-and-commissionary pay .
 Your potential abilities will be developed by our proven training program . We are committed to developing your potential abilities by developing your own skills .
 Successful men who wish to finance their education may continue on a part-time basis during school term . Successful students may continue to work part time during the term .
 If benefactors come from Massachusetts, Maine, or Connecticut, the gifts go into a fund % for their state . If the gifts come from their state, the gift will go into the fund % .
 Friends from outside these three states contribute to the $447,000 General Scholarship Fund . Friends of students from outside the three states contributed to the fund .
 Last year's Bates College Bowl victories won for the college eight $1500 grants . Bates College won eight grants from the College Bowl .
 Last year, forty Bates students received aid from sources other than the school . Bates students are students who receive aid from other sources .
 Churches, high schools, clubs, and businesses grant many awards . There have been several National Merit Scholarship winners . There are also many awards for scholarships .
 In addition to grants, many students depend on loans from the Federal Aid programs . Many students depend heavily on federal grants and loans to help pay for their education .
 Up to a thousand dollars a year may be borrowed at low interest; and the student has ten years from his graduation to repay the loan . Up to $1,000 a year can be loaned out to a student .
 Oligarchy gest open protest to faculty, student representatives, and administration about the Bates financial oligarchy . These jobs include assistance-ships, cafeteria work, and cafeteria work . The Bates Financial oligarchy is the subject of an open protest at the university .
 Challenge the right of the Bates financial ""brain trust"" to determine what happens to our money . Challenge the financial "brain trust" to determine how our money will be spent .
 Next year I hope to keep the campus in touch with France, where I expect to spend my junior year . Next year, I will be spending time in France with my family .
 One family sized cabin with lakefroni, heating (oil and wood), running water, running water . One family-sized cabin .
 Pay is by the hour, and students work according to the hours they can afford . Students work by the amount of time they want to earn .
 The effect of rising expenses on student aid is demonstrated by comparing last year's figures with those of a decade earlier . The College of Edinburgh College of Technology has seen a rise in student aid costs .
 The Bates financial aid program is expanding rapidly, as each year the aid given increases more than the costs . The aid given to students is not astounding when compared with large universities .
 Bowdoin Polar Bear sporting a state-series championship and five starters as double figure scorers rolled into Alumni Cage Wednesday night . The Polar Bear's season record now stands at .500 .
 The cellar-dwelling Bobcat was ready and Bowdoin College was ready . The 45 minutes of spine-chilling basketball was all over but the shouting for the Bobcat . Bowdoins won their first game of the season .
 In the process of dropping the rubber game of the 3 game series with Bates, the White Bears staged the most disgraceful exhibition of sportsmanship this observer has ever witnessed . The White Bears dropped the series 3-1, but the game was the last .
 The Brunswick student-athletes were doing their Alma Mater a deep moral wrong . Displaying the middle digit on several occasions and a vocabulary from the bowels of the earth .
 It makes one wonder at the caliber of a coach that would knowingly allow such a display . It's not known what happened to the coach who allowed it .
 He must have been the only one in the gym who didn't hear what one Black and White forward let go at him wordwise . He didn't know what he was saying .
 Intercollegiate athletics has no room for exhibitions a la Bowdoin or officials or coaches that tolerate it as a part of the game . Bowdoins have been criticized for allowing exhibitions in college football .
 ""Oh That Cummings Boy"" is back for two more seasons . Castolene, Freeman and the Mosquitos were fantastic and the show was great .
 Currently running at the Clifton Dagget Gray playhouse is a two week preview of Bates football, 1963 . Bates football is currently being shown at the playhouse .
 Coach Hatch is casting for line depth that could prove to be the deciding factor next autumn . Howie Vandersea, Phil Tamis, Paul Castolene, Bill Davis, and Willy Williams are among those missing .
 The I-formation with its extra blocker is a new feature that possibly might figure in Coach Hatch's multiple offense plans . Coach Hatch has a tendency to rely on a power-running running back .
 Vern Ullom and his "Iron Monster" run the line hopefuls through their paces . The line coach and coach of the Garnet line hopes to be a permanent fixture on the sporting scene . The team is currently at the bottom of the league table .
 Coach Hatch has invited thirty area football coaches to observe the final Spring scrimmage Saturday afternoon . The event is an out of season view of ""King Football"
 Coach Chick Leahey's defending champion National Pastimers move south of the Mason-Dixon line for a renewal of the baseballer's swing into Dixie .
 The 'Cats face a possible shakedown against the Naval Academy at Annapolis . Scheduled against Rider and Washington Colleges, the team will play Rider and D.C. Colleges .
 Talented returning veterans include Monty ""Woolen"" Woolson, Bud Spector, Bill Davis, Paul Holt, Archie Lanza and Thorn Freeman . Returning veterans include Bud Spectors, Bill Holt, Paul Lanza .
 Indications point to a strong Garnet tint in the the the spring tide sporting scene . Baseball, tennis and golf travel north to the Pine Tree State this year .
 The professional pugilists return to the local Armory Monday, March 11, with an All-Star card . The All-Stars card will be held at the Armory on March 11 .
 The ""Sugar Man"" himself, in the twilight of a fantastic career that saw him regain the world title five times and permanently engrave his name on the fistic honor roll as the greatest middleweight of all time, highlights promoter Chick Wergele's showcase .
 Billy Thornton, the veteran Memphis, Tenn., slugger could make it an interesting ten rounder for Sugar Ray Robinson . Robinson is fresh from a comeback win over Ralph Dupas .
 The sordid prelim action that has weakened Chick's first three Lewiston cards gives indication of being a thing of the past . He features as a supporting cast of tough, hungry, young pros that any arena in the country would be proud to present .
 Freddie Butts takes on Willy Mitchell of Boston . The welterweight was split-decisioned by Freddie two months ago in a close fight .
 A roaring crowd was kept on its feet throughout much of the last few minutes, as the two teams battled back and forth in the season's tightest and best game at Bates . The game was one of the best of the season at Bates, with a scoreless score .
 Bowdoin had al ready clinched the State Series title, but wound up with an 8-10 record . The team finished 8-8 in the league, but had a record of 8-9 .
 Only two defeats in nine Series games were here in Lewiston against Bates . Bates has only lost two of their last nine games .
 Bowdoin led 9-4 after four minutes . Paul Castolene's two driving layups and a jump er by John Lawler gave the Bobcats a 10-9 advantage .
 Al Loane had ten points in the first half, but these were to be his last for the evening . The Polar Bears' fine guard, Al Loanes, had 10 points in first half . Loane was a fine guard for the Polar Bears .
 Beaudry hit a field goal to put the Bobcats in front . Castolene and Beaudy also scored free throws . The Bobcats won the game by two points .
 Loane committed his fifth foul, and referee Tom Kiley slapped a technical on him for beefing . On the latter hoop, Loane was slapped with a technical for being beefy .
 Beaudry made two foul shots after a basket by Bowdoin's Pete Finn . The Mosquitoes had then scored eleven straight points . The team then scored 11 straight points in the first half .
 The Polar Bears were far from dead, however, and pecked away at the lead . Overtime Decides the Polar Bears won the game .
 There were ties at 58 and 62, when Cummings took matters into his own hands . Cummings: "I'm not going to let it go, I'm going to do it"
 He scored twice from the floor, and Harry Silverman and Finn quickly tied it up . He scored two goals in the first half .
 Cummings scored again to even the count with 55 seconds left . Silverman's long jump shot put Bowdoin ahead, but Cummings' second goal put the game back on level .
 Bowdoin missed several chances in the late minutes and the game went into overtime . The game went to overtime after Bowdoins missed several late chances and the match was tied for overtime .
 Krzynowek wrapped up the victory with two foul shots in the last seconds . The win was the first of the season for the Polish national team .
 Cummings led Bates with 17 points, followed by Freeman's 15, Castolene's 11, and Krzynowek's 10 points . Bates led Bates by 17 points .
 Bates won the game on the foul line with 15 for 23; Bowdoin was 10 for 14 for 14 . Bates won on the free-line with 15 from 23 .
 Dick Whitimore, Loane, and Silverman all fouled out, and neither was pleased with these events . The game ended in a 1-1 draw .
 Bates completed a 7-13 season with one more win and four less defeats than last year . Bates completed the season with just four defeats less than last season . Good Home Season: Bates finished seventh in the table .
 The opposition outshot the Bobcats from the floor by 4 per cent and 50 goals . Overall statistics show that the opposition out shot the Bobcat . The Bobcats were outshot by the opposition . The opposition scored 50 goals in the game .
 Bates was out-rebounded on an average of 50 to 45, a margin of five per game . Bates was rebounded on average of five times more than the other team .
 All the away games were lost; this offset an impressive 7-3 home record . All the games lost were lost away, but this offset a 7-4 home win for the club .
 Glanz were the leading floor shooters, all hitting better than 40 per cent . Will Gardiner, Carl Johannesen, Castolene, and Pete DeWITT were the top floor shooters .
 Doug Macko had 12 for 15 for a .800 percentage at the foul line, and Doug Cummings was .792 with 57 for 72 . Cummings was the only player to score more than 50 points in the first half .
 Bates Jayvees had a 14-3 record, including a forfeit win over Topsham Air Force Base . The Jayves won two games last week, giving them a record of 14 .
 Bob Johnson had 24 points each night and Bob Mischler was runner-up scorer in both games . Bob Johnson scored 24 each night .
 John Wyman had six of Bates' last seven points in the win over UMP . Wyman's clutch shooting helped UMP to a win over Batesville . Batesman scored six points in all three quarters .
 Johnson averaged nearly 17 points, and had a 25-point average in his last six games . Johnson averaged 17 points and had an average of 25 points in six games.
 "The rebounding of Wyman, Russ Reilly, and Joe Matzkin was very valuable," coach said . The team won't have a repeat of the season opener against the Mets .
 Paul Savello's late season improvement was also important in the Bobkitten victories . Savello improved his late season performance for the team .
 Coach Ullom was speaking to Thorn Freeman, captain of the Garnet Five . Freeman was captain of Garnet 5 . Freeman is a member of the team .
 Coach Ullom went on to say that some of Thorn's ""fringe benefits"" had to be sacrificed to the faster type of game that was initiated at Bates this past season . Coach said some of the "fringe benefits" of Thorn were sacrificed .
 During the season, he averaged 11 points per game, hitting .331 from the floor and .750 from the free throw line . He hit .331 on the floor during the season .
 In addition, the lanky center managed to pull down on the average of 10 rebounds each game .
 The psychology major commented on the excellent team spirit and and hustle of this year's squad . She said the team spirit was excellent and the hustle was the reason for the success .
 Thorn considers his most thrilling basketball experience to be the 1961 E.C.A. small college in preparation for a possible career in social work . Thorn was a member of the 1961 college basketball team at the time .
 Bill LaVallee was a captain for the University of Washington . He was named one of the Bobcat's top players in the field .
 The leading varsity scorer, with a total of 70 points, Bill is known as the ""jack of all trades" on the track team .
 Coach Slovenski said Bill has exceeded his normal expectations of a team captain through his qualities of leadership, devotion to the team, and loyalty to the college . Bill has been a captain for the University of Wisconsin since 1984 .
 Bill LaVallee graduated from South Portland High School where he lettered in baseball as well as track and baseball . He graduated from high school with honors in baseball and track .
 He considers his most exciting moments in track to be the E.C.A.A.'s triumph and the victories over Maine in his freshman and junior year .
 Sports Staff of the STUDENT reflects upon the top individual performances of the past hoop season in order to select an All-Maine squad . Bill is looking to a good spring, although the thinclads will face tough tests .
 Seth Cummings and Allan Loane of Bowdoin were named first team All-State guards . Seth Cummings of the 'Cats were named as first team first team guards .
 Dick Whitmore of Bowdoin, Ken Stone of Colby plus Art Warren of Maine . Also in Maine: Ken Stone, Art Warren and Art Warren . Also on Maine's list: Art Warren, Dick Whitemore and Ken Stone .
 Second team selections were Laddie Deemer of Maine and Harry Silverman of Bowdoin in the back court, Thorn Freeman of the 'Cats at center, and Dave Svendsen of Maine at forecourt . The Maine men's basketball tournament was held in Springfield, Mass
 Thorn's thoughts natur ally turn to baseball after the close of basketball season and the gradual approach of spring . Thorn: Baseball is not just baseball, but it's a good time to think about spring training .
 AllMaine choice last season . Number one hurler for Coach Leahey's Nine . An All-Maine .
 Thorn' hopes to continue his education at Loane, Bowdoin Cummings, Bates Bill LaVallee . Thorn' plans to study at Bates College in Maine .
 The STUDENT Sports Staff salutes Garnet standouts Thorn Freeman and Bill LaVallee . The Garnet duo are a two-time Garnet legend .
 Cummings, a sophomore, and Loane, a senior, present an interesting contrast in playing styles as well as in appearance . Cummings, the sophomore, is a senior . Loane is also a senior and a sophomore .
 Cummings possesses one of the deadliest jump shots in the State . Cummings was a tremendous clutch performer throughout the campaign .
 Loane, a short and stocky competitor with catlike reflexes, is perhaps the most outstanding driver in the State . Loane's passing surely must be rated excellent .
 Sophomore Dick Whitmore of Bowdoin was a unanimous selection at center . Whitmore was named a unanimous choice at center for the first time .
 Whitmore was able to give an advantage of three and four inches to taller opponents and still emerge the winner in the battle of the boards . Whitmore is an extremely strong rebounder, giving an advantage three to four inches .
 Forwards Ken Stone and Art Warren of Maine would make a very successful forecourt . Forwards Art Warren and Ken Stone would be a great forecourt duo .
 Stone, a senior, is a prolific scorer, able to hit his amazing jump shot with radar accuracy from as far out as thirty feet . Stone is a senior at the University of Washington .
 Many teams realized this year that Colby needs little rebounding as long as he does the shooting . Colby's shooting ability has been a problem for many teams this season .
 Norris Hayden | Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents . Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS fensive wizard. Bill DAVIS is a defensive wizard. Phone 2-35 .
 Art's ruggedness helps him battle taller opponents for rebounds and loose balls . Art is known for his rugged physique and rugged playmaking style .
 Second team selections show the backcourt pair of Laddie Deemer of Maine and Harry Silverman of Bowdoin . Deemer and Silverman are Maine's two backcourt players .
 Although Deemer lacks height, his quickness allows him to get off a deadly jump shot, often uncontested . Deemer's quickness gives him the chance to get his shot off uncontested.
 The center of the second unit is senior captain Thorn Freeman of Warren, Maine the ' Cats .
 Joe Brogna, a senior from Bowdoin College, and Dave Svendsen of Maine, a sophomore, are the forward selections . The two men are selected for the U.S. college hockey team .
 ALL-MAINE SELECTIONS 1st Team Allan Loane G Bowdoin* Seth Cummings G Bates G Bates Dick Whilmore C Bow Doin Ken Stone F Colby* Art Warren F Maine* 2nd Team Laddie Deemer G Maine Harry Silverman G Bow
 Bowdoin Polar Bear sporting a state-series championship and five starters as double figure scorers rolled into Alumni Cage Wednesday night . Cats drop State Champion bowdoin to bring season record to .500 .
 Coach Hatch is casting for line depth that could prove to be the deciding factor next autumn . Minus several leading characters from last year's successful production, Howie Vandersea, Phil Tamis, P^ul Castolene, Bill Davis and Willy Williams .
 Silverman hit to give the Pol, 1 r. 1 r . Tough 'Cat defense prevails. Silverman hits a single .
 % again Cummings scored, making twelve straight points for him, to tie it up . Finn's basket and two free"" throws returned the lead to Bowdoin .
 Second team selections were Laddie Deemer of Maine and Harry Silverman of Bowdoin in the back court, Thorn Freeman of the 'Cats at center, and the forecourt combo of Dave Svendsen and Joe Loane .
 Following his major league career, Thorn' hopes to continue his education . Thorn' says he wants to stay focused on baseball .
 Lewiston | Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 m i m mm i mmm J Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS fensiye wizard.
 ALL-MAINE SELECTIONS 1st Team Allan Loane G Bowdoin* Seth Cummings G Bates Dick Whitmore C Bowdoins Ken Stone F Colby* Art Warren F Maine* 2nd Team Laddie Deemer G Maine Harry Silverman . Thorn Freeman C B
 Last weekend ushered in the end of the intramural basketball season with Smith South the victor . Lewiston, ao BATES STUDENT , ao
 Tex Ritter was top dog for the ""Middies"" with 18 points and Pete Bowman led the J.B. team with 13 . Pete Bowman was top scorer with 13 points for the "J.B." team .
 B-l team and Roger Bill C-2 team to determine which team will have the divine privelege of facing Smith South . Smith South will face Smith South at the end of the season .
 Don ""featherfingers"" King led his boys with 12 big ones (not points, just big ones) while ""Punchy"" Cruickshank led the vanquished ones with 10 .
 The final game was played in the Alumni Gym, not out at Lou's, not Lou's . The Rebels Hoop Champs were crowned champions at the end of the season .
 Smith Middle, having soft sledding in the lesser leagues, fell like the proverbial strawmen to the powerful Smith South combine . Smith Middle was having soft-sledding, but Smith South had a strong edge .
 Red Vandersea, writer, poet, and prophet, was the outstanding player of the game . Vandersea pulled down innumerable rebounds and scored 12 points .
 Web ""Tiger"" Harrison put on a fine ball handling demonstration for the BBC .
 Our Experienced Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind . A gift to your college can result in a larger income for your family .
 Sports Staff extends its weekly honor to the ""Mosquito"" duet of Don Beaudry and Ted Krzynowek . Meet for this week's selection of the Bobcat of the Week .
 Garnet Garnet's coach called the team Mosquitos for their speed, dexterity, and ability to harass the opposition . Garnet beat Bowdoin in Wednesday night's victory over the University of Maine .
 The mile relay team consists of Jon Ford, Gerrit Binneweg, Pete Peterson, and co-captain, Bill LaVallee along with Coach Walt Slovenski boarded their plane bound for Madison Square Garden .
 La Salle, Lafayette, Rhode Island, and our own leadoff man, Bill LaVallee, were set at the starting line . That night LaSalle was set to start at the start line .
 A quarter of a mile and a little more than 53 seconds later, Bill handed off to Pete Peterson twelve yards behind first place Rhode Island .
 Pete, turning in the best time of the Garnet four, shortened the lead by half with a 50. second leg . Pete's time was the fastest time of all four men in the world, with a time of 50.2 seconds . Pete turned in his best time in the
 Baton in hand, John Ford took over continuing to close in on the lead . John Ford ran a 51 second leg, running 51 second legs .
 As Jon passed off to Gerrit Binneweg, there were breathless hopes for a victory . Gerrit passed off on to anchorman Gerrit .
 Gerrit crept up on the leader's shoulder, but the Rhode Island trackster ran a strategic race, and kept Gerrit hovering at his side until he dipped into the tape, just nipping Gerrit by twotenths of a second .
 They fought hard, lost, however, turned in their best relay time of the year . The U.S. team turned in its best relay race in the history of the season .
 The ""green and gold" were in the process of moulding their untested track squad, and simply could not stand up to the proven strength of the Garnet regiment . The ""Green and gold"" were in an attempt to moulding the untested squad, but were beaten by
 In the hammer circle Dave Harrison flung the 35 lb. weight 48' 8%"" to wrap up first place . Whirling the discus for second place was frosh Bill Davis, while in the . discus, Bill Davis and Dave Harrison threw the 35lb. weight .
 Freshman Martin Saur flipped the shot for second place in the shot put . Martin Saur was the first to flip the shot .
 Eric Silverberg is one of our better endurance runners to date . Silverberg won the mile in a casual time of 4 min., 36. sec. and 4 min. 36 sec.
 Finn Wilhelmsen conserved himself for the two-mile and eased nicely behind Eric for second place . The prancing Norwegian, Finn Willemensen, conserved his pace for the race .
 As had been his habit throughout the season the ""Finner" tore up two miles of track to scuttle across the finish line in 9 min., 49. sec. The 'Finner' finished the race in 9min.49 sec.
 Bob has come extremely close to clearing this height previously, but wasn't quite used to his new fiberglass pole . Bob has been very successful at this height, but isn't used to it .
 Paul Planchon won the 50 yard dash in 5.2 seconds . Plancho ran across the finish line in a time of 5.3 seconds .
 Paul's injuries have hurt the Garnet cindermen during the season as many of his 5 point wins were missed . Paul's injury has hurt his team in the past few weeks .
 It was a clean sweep in the 55 yard high hurdles as Bill LaVallee won in 7.2 secs . Al Harvie and Bill Evans finished second and third respectively .
 In the low hurdles it was LaVallee again in first place, followed closely by Harvie and then Jon Olsen .
 Jon Ford, the other half of the middle-distance duo, sewed up second place . Jon Ford was also in the top three places .
 Paul Williams, unable to make the trip because of a pulled muscle, was missed especially in the broad jump where Al Harvie secured a third place . Paul Williams was unable to attend the event due to a pull muscle .
 Dave Harkness was again seen wandering from event to event to post a total of 12 points . He was able to score 12 points in the event .
 Dave placed second in the broad jump, third in the 50 yard dash, first in the 55 yard hurdles, and second in 55 yard low hurdles . Dave also placed third, third, and third, in 50 yards dash .
 John Meyn completed the 1000 yard run in a time of 2 min. 27. sec. He finished the race in 2 min., 27. seconds .
 The talent shown by the Jayvees this season will, no doubt, be put to good use next year to fill the Varsity squad with the depth it lacked this year . The talent will be put into good use to fill out the squad .
 Look for fine performances from Dave Harkness, Ken Child, Dave Fullenwider and Mark Biel . The Traiser twins also star in the film .
 Coach Slovenski says the squad had excellent performers but there just weren't enough of them . The squad had a lot of good players but there wasn't enough for them . Slovenia won their first game of the season on Saturday .
 Stricken with a number of drop outs, and continuous injuries, the team simply lacked the depth necessary to win . The team was forced to rely heavily on the strength of the players .
 In spite of all the shortcomings, a greater crew of athletes couldn't have donned the Garnet uniform . The Garnet uniforms have been worn by a greater team of athletes .
 This time, the sport will be volleyball, with hopes of better results than those of the fall hockey playday . The volleyball match will be played in the fall .
 The decision for this game came on such short notice that our team has a very short time to pracice. The decision was made for this match at short notice . The decision to play the game was made by a short notice from the club .
 Coach Hinman will have to pick her team because of the time element . The time element will be difficult for the coach to pick his team .
 According to the """"""Spiking Smith Southers,"" she has some good material from which to choose .
 Milliken -Mitchell team is still on top with five wins and no losses . MillikenMitchell has won five of their last five matches and lost one . Mill
 Cheney by a smashing score of 10-3 Friday, they have pretty well cinched their victory . STate 2-3771 • Cheney . Cheney . Friday's victory .
 Barb Remick of Eliot, Maine, has added well coordinated skill, coaching, and a majority of the points scored to this season . Remick is a member of the MillikenMitchell team, and has scored most of her points this season.
 Her high school team had a record of 78 straight wins, beginning with her first game as a freshman until her last game as senior when she was captain of the team .
 Basketball is not her only sport for she played well on the hockey team this fall . She also played well in her hockey team .
 Lefl to right, Robert Ahern, Stu-C, William Holt, Alumni Pres., Norman Bowie, '64, Newt Clark, '65 . Norman Bowie was Alumnus of '64 and '65; Newt Clark of '65' Newt Clark was Al
 Listed here are the successful candidates who were elected to the various campus positions in last Monday's elections . The successful candidates are the winners of the election .
 The Student Council and Student Government members will serve until the new Student Senate Constitution and Proctor Councils have been approved by both faculty and students . The Student Senate constitution and Proctors Councils will be approved .
 Next Fall, hopefully next Fall, an interium election will be held to choose the members of the Senate . At that time, the interium elections will take place in the United States .
 Stu-C and Stu G will no longer be separated, but united in the Senate . When that occurs, Stu C and StU G will be united, but not separated in the House of Representatives .
 Countryman's attack is aimed at what has come to be called the ""Negro ghetto"" so prominent in many of our Eastern states' largest cities . Countryman: "I'm sorry for what has become known as the 'negro ghetto'
 The problem is acute and will alter the future of the country""s cities," says the government . "The problem is severe and will change the future," says President Vladimir Putin .
 "He comes seeking a degree of personal freedom and finds instead the enigma of helplessness," he says . He comes seeking freedom but finds instead of finding it in a "enigma"
 A job (a sort of serfdom to the elevator and the janitor's mop), a home (three rooms in a firetrap), and here he remains. A job, a home, a job, and a home .
 Business in its purest form has become mass production at the lowest possible cost . "Mass production" is mass production, mass production in the way of mass production .
 Those jobs ""traditionally"" held by Negros, no longer require a human being. Negros are no longer employed in the Philippines . Negros no longer need to be employed in order to survive .
 "All around him the Negro sees the status symbols of a life that has no place for him," says the author . The Negro lives in a life of status symbols that have no place in his life, he says .
 In the ghetto, isolation replaces gregariousness. Eventually, he withdraws from his own community in the ghetto . "Imitigating" is a form of isolation .
 Political concerns cease to be important to him mainly because they, in fact, don't concern him and never have . Political concerns stop being important because they are not important enough to him .
 "The black man adopts this spirit as an alternative to what is offered by the white man's world," says the author . The black man's spirit is "an alternative to the white world"
 Such unrest is prevalent today among the masses of of of lower class Negros . Such unrest was prevalent in the Negros in the 1960s .
 Countryman pointed out that organization within the Negro community itself can mobilize the collective efforts of well over One million Negros in this country . Countryman said organization within Negro community can mobilize collective efforts .
 Unless conditions in the Negro's immediate environment are changed drastically, this force can become a formidable form of violent expression . The Negro is a powerful force that can only be found in the immediate environment .
 First, by making the North as aware of the imminent dangers of allowing this persistent degradation of the Negro, and secondly, by giving the Negro a fresh look at himself . The North should be aware of this imminent danger, says the author .
 The individual must have a sense of belonging to a society, of being a participant . The latter is the more important, for the individual to be a member of a society .
 The Negro must be acutely aware of the political and social mechanism available to him for improving his lot . The Negro is aware of what is available for him to improve his lot, he says .
 "He must learn to fight that which he presently cannot understand," he says . He must also fight a system of institutionalized prejudice, he writes .
 Pops Concert Features Seasons Of The Year . Spring pokes its welcome face through the slush and snow .
 The sun will be shining, the wind warm, and the blue sky reflected in the little rivers of melting snow . The sun is shining and the wind will warm .
 The Bates College Concert and the Choral Society perform at Bates College . All to create an acute awareness of the seasons, and set the mood for this year's performance .
 The topic for debate, ""Resolved, that the non-Communist nations should form an economic community,"" will be affirmed by John Strassburger '64 and Howard Blum '63 . The topic will be discussed at the end of the debate .
 Blum will participate in the oratorical contest, Ahern will enter the extemporaneous speaking contest . David Kramer '63 will represent Bates in oral interpretation . Blum and Kramer will also compete in the extramarital contest .
 Colby, Bowdoin and Bates held a ""Forensic Festival"" March 7 in the Little Theater as a preliminary to the New England Conference . The festival was held in a bid to promote forensic evidence .
 Ahern and Hall spoke extramporaneously . Blum and Strassburger presented orations . Ahern, Hall, Strassburgger spoke extremporably .
 Neither Colby nor Bowdoin had entrees for the after dinner speaking contest, which was canceled as a result . The contest was canceled .
 The GARNET board is now accepting material to comprise a spring issue .
 All students invited to submit poetry, fiction, essays in all subjects, and illustrations in the form of ink sketches or other black and whie media .
 The deadline for material submitted for publication will be March 31, the first Sunday after Spring Vacation .
 NSM has 2,500 workers spread throughout four major Eastern cities . NSM is fostering an awakening in the Negro youth, a renewed sense of values and a national perspective rather than the usual tenement outlook .
 Countryman concludes by asking each individual to re-examine those beliefs and traditions which have been the prominent influences in his development . Countryman concluded by asking everyone to re examine those beliefs which have led to their development .
 Only by doing so can one uncover those latent prejudices which possess a society and one's self appropriately decorated to signify one of the seasons . Only by . doing so, one can uncover the latent prejudices of a society .
 Al Corey's band will provide the dance music between the Band's performance at 9:00m. and the Choral Society's presentation at 10:20m. The band's performance will be performed at 9-00m .
 Tickets for reserved tables may be purchased at her house, 32 Frye Street . Norman Ross is a friend of Norman Ross, who died at the age of 92 .
 Since these tables are reserved, it is important for you to get your tickets early in order to have a desirable loca-. .
 The general chairmen of the Concert are Jean Stahlin '63, and Kevin Gallahger '64 . The committees have been selected for the Concert .
 David Williams '65 and Frank Sroka '65, publicity; Don Fredenburg '63 and Larry Trufant '64, tables; Mary Ingraham '65  refreshments' Sherrie Templeman and Merrilyn Brown '65 were ushers . Joyce Killay '
 Chase Hall Dance Committee will sponsor a dance from 8:00 to 11:00 a.m. Friday evening, March 15 .
 The Student Senate Constitution is now well on its way to becoming a reality for Bates students . If* TWO BATES STUDENT, MARCH 13, 1963 Senate Constitution Passes Extra-Curric Committee .
 Women's Student Government and men's Student Council would be incorporated under the general heading of Student Senate . Under this system of government, the now separate women's Student . government would be merged into the General heading of Senate .
 The composition of the women's Proctor Council would remain the same, but the men's government would be revised to the same form . Men's Proctors Council would have the same composition as women's government .
 The proposed constitution passed a preliminary vote of the student body last Spring . Last Spring, the proposed constitution was approved by the student population .
 This fall, the committee made minor revisions, and sent the completed constitution to the Extra-Curricular Activities Committee . The committee has made minor changes to the constitution .
 ExtraCurric passed the Senate Constitution two weeks ago . The Extra-Curricular Activities Committee vetoed plans for the Ivy Day Dance .
 The committee has resolved that any class dance must provide a budget based solely on anticipated ticket sales . The committee also resolved that the committee has a budget for the event .
 The junior class had initially intended to feature a ""big name"" orchestra for their Ivy Dance . The Ivy Dance was originally intended to include a 'big name' orchestra .
 In light of committee's decision, the class has decided to present the dance in traditional style .
 It will be held in the Alumni Gymnasium on Saturday* May 11, with music by Bob Hall and his orchestra . Bob Hall's orchestra will perform .
 Augusta, Maine Proctor Council Constitutions, which are still being revised and printed, have not yet been approved . Augusta's Proctors Council Constitution is still being updated and printed .
 In the near future, the Constitution will be presented to the entire faculty . Future Prospects in the University of Cambridge, Massachusetts .
 Next Fall the Constitution will become operative . Stu-G and Stu C will then re-educate the campus concerning the plan of the Senate . The Constitution will be re-learned from the plan .
 In 1955 the Extra-Curricular Activities Committee and the faculty voted on and passed a similar plan which had been presented to them . The plan was passed by the faculty at the time .
 It failed to go through because the students voted against it when it was put to an all-campus vote . Students voted against the proposal when it went through . The proposal was put up for all students to vote on whether to support it .
 Those accepted attend a summer orientation course followed by supervision in a teaching position . Those accepted will receive a salary .
 Liberal arts graduates with depth of background will be prepared for secondary school assignments in Central, East, and West Africa . Liberal arts students will be preparing for assignments in the region .
 BOSTON University anticipates over thirty openings in June for non-teaching employment . Over thirty openings expected in June .
 Research assistants, librarians, medical technologists, secretaries, and business machine operators are available in the U.S. positions .
 McLEAN HOSPITAL, a division of the Massachusetts General Hospital, has several positions open for research assistants . Research assistants are required at the hospital in Massachusetts .
 The positions call for college graduates with a chemistry and/or biology background . The positions are open for anyone with chemistry and biology backgrounds .
 Six-week summer program is intensive six-week program for recent college graduates . Course is intensive summer program .
 The purpose is to give men and women an idea of the job opportunities and requirements in the field, as well as a basic preparatory training in publishing techniques .
 The EUROPEAN SAFARI program offers men and women summer jobs in Europe . A descriptive brochure is available in the Placement Office .
 Exact working hours and wages depend upon the position in which one is placed, and in turn, that position is determined by the candidate's basic skills, language capabilities and past experience . The salary of a successful candidate is dependent on the quality of the job .
 Those interested are invited to read the pamphlet on this program in the Placement Office .
 Anyone interested in writing for the Bales STUDENT, on either the News, Feature, or Sports staffs should contact a member of the editorial staff listed in the Masthead .
 John Daly, Jr., is Assistant Sales Manager in New Jersey Bell's Morristown Commercial Office . John Daly is assistant sales manager in the Bell's office in Morristow, New Jersey .
 Morristown businessmen keep informed of new advances in business communications . Salesmen supervise 10 salesmen who keep business informed of latest advances .
 During that time, he earned a management level promotion by proving what he could do on two other assignments in the Commercial Office . First supervising 5, and later, supervising 36 employees, he says .
 John Daly and other young men like him in Bell Telephone Companies throughout the country help bring the finest communications serviee in the world to the homes and businesses of a growing America . Daly and others like him helped bring the world's finest communications to America .
 Brooks Quimby started his career at Bates in 1914 . He was the phone man of the month at the time .
 Since then, he has been closely connected with the college, and has wached it evolve into its present form . Since then he has become closely connected to the college .
 His comments to the present student body, may help them to better understand Bates and what it represents today, he says .
 Bales is a thoroughly traditional college . Many students commenl thai Bales are students at Bales .
 Q: Having been here since 1914, I've seen quite a few changes in traditions . Q: Have you ever seen a change in traditions? Tell us what you've seen in your own life .
 I think the oldest tradition of the college has been the thought that Bates was a place for study . Bates is the oldest place to study, and it's a place of study, says the president of Bates College .
 Some colleges are interested mainly in having a good time, or are week-end colleges . Week-end college week-ends colleges are often more interested in partying .
 The question is whether the present generation of students will do as well as those past . Present generation has perhaps more money, not so much interest in education, but certainly higher I.Q.'s .
 "Sometimes it's hard to tell just what is motivating some of our students," she says . "I'm sorry that. Sometimes it's not clear what motivates some students," the school principal says .
 Many students claim that when they came to college they were motivated by a desire to learn, but with so many rules and regulations they fell restricted, academically as well as socially . R — Many students say they are motivated to learn but are restricted academically and socially . Students claim that
 "It seems that sometime or other somebody went ahead and did something and a rule had to be made," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Practically every rule we have today was caused by the fact that some students in the past were not responsible for some of the things we now have to do .
 Q — I've found that students like to be treated as grown-ups, and I think that's fine . Q: "I think that is fine. I'm glad that students are treated as adults," she says . She says she's found students like being treated as "grown
 "I hate to see people kick themselves out foolishly and so does the faculty in general, I think. You may call me paternalistic, maybe I am sometimes, but maybe I'm sometimes, sometimes I'm paternalistic," he says .
 Q: We sometimes drop people pretty well along in their senior year and everyone puts up a howl . Q: "Everyone puts up an howl. Everyone puts up the howl" Q: It's not uncommon to drop people along in senior year .
 President's general idea was that there is a need to make better use of our manpower and equipment . Q — The President's . idea was there was a need for better . use of the manpower and . equipment .
 Q: One of the greatest advantages is in the better use of the equipment . Q: "One of the biggest advantages is ... in using the equipment," she says. Q: It's a great advantage to be able to use the equipment in a better way .
 I got through fairly young, and I think I would have developed more and got more out of education if I had had another year . I think it would have been better for me to have another year at school, he says .
 Maybe the coach is getting older, but I prefer to think the competition is much better . I prefer the competition in England to be much better, writes Sportsmail's John Defterios .
 Bates is an academic institution, and in debating we strive to better the student, not the record . Bates is a university institution, not a college school, it's a university, it says .
 It is the student's development we are most concerned about. If we can have both, of course that's fine too . But it is the students' development that is most concerned, it is said .
 The issues which Peter Countryman raised are relevant to all of us, not merely as possible supporters or workers for the Northern Student Movement, but as individuals . We are not merely supporters of the movement, but we are individuals as individuals, says Countryman .
 To understand Countryman's comments one must examine one's self and, more importantly, one's possibilities as a human being . Countryman: "To understand this is one of the most important questions you must examine yourself"
 Not the solitary self, but the human (i.e. member of humanity) self must be understood, says the author . "Not the solitary . self, the human . self needs to be understood," he says .
 The genus ""humanity"" may add little to the description of a person, but it demands a great deal from the individual . The genus "humanity" is the name of a human being .
 Countryman's reference to compulsory chapel, our strictly regulated college, and Nazi Germany were not asides, but central to his underlying theme . Countryman said compulsory chapel and strict regulation of college were asides .
 "What is essential is not the institutionalizing these references allude, but rather the individual's thought about such aspects of human life," he says .
 Chute has emphasized in his recent comments, understand that in making this choice, you and you alone must accept the responsibility of your decision . Chute: "In making this decision, understand ... that in . making this . choice, understand your decision, Chute said .
 If you deny these problems, then realize that you are denying your humanity . You deny these issues, then you are denied humanity .
 That these are significant issues and in need of correction forces the individual to decide what action he will under take . That these issues and need to be corrected forces the individuals to decide .
 In your attitude — not as a class, a team, or any group, but as an individual — lies the extent to which change of any kind can emerge, take effect, and prevail . In this attitude, you can change as a person, not a class or team, but
 The Electoral Process Elections at Bates College are noteworthy in two compleary aspects — the lack of organized campaigns and the uninformed electorate which decides on next year's officers . Bates College's election process is notable in two ways: the election and the election .
 An individual student attributes to a campus organization depends, to a large extent, on the general viewpoint or attitude of the studentry toward the organization . The main thesis of these comments is that the importance of an organization depends on the student's attitude toward it .
 If an individual knows neither what an organization is nor whom he is electing to its leadership, then he concludes that the organization is not very important . If the student is informed about the duties and powers of a campus group, he will be able to have some under standing of the organization and
 If a group allows its leaders to be chosen by an electorate that is almost totally ignorant of the candidates and their prospective duties, that group is viewed as a haphazard organization with little importance . For a group that chooses leaders for its leaders, it is seen as an unimportant group
 The enjoyment and interest which accompanies any organized campaign is absent . The enjoyment of any organized campaigns is absent, the author says . "The enjoyment of organized campaigning is absent," he says .
 No effective organization exists on campus which students can view as capable of initiating new policies . Secondly, there is no effective organization on campus that can initiate new policies. Students can also view this as an opportunity to change their policies.
 A direct increase in ""power"" will not necessarily follow an organized campaign which produces an informed electorate . A direct increase of ""power" will not lead to an increase in "power" in an election .
 Students must view the group as a capable organization with recognized leaders . But necessarily, if any group is to be effective in its pursuance of any campus policy, the students must view it as an effective organization .
 Such an attitude towards an organization is essential to any possible success that might result from attempts to change a situation . Such a positive attitude is essential for a change in an organization, such as an organization .
 The successful candidate and those who elect him mus feel that something has been accomplished . "Successful candidate" means "something has to be accomplished," says the candidate .
 The involvemen that a campaign provides for candidates and supporters will carry over and provide them with a sense of responsible concern, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The involvemen" that a candidate provides for a campaign will carry on .
 In its present form, the Student Senate Constitution does not recognize these considerations . In the present form of the Constitution, the Senate Constitution is not recognized .
 The main purpose of the Senate is to unify campus govern ment and provide an effective organ for student leadership . Yet, if the student attitude towards such organization con tinues in its present state, then the desegration of govern ment will make little difference .
 Specific changes will be presented in the next issue of the STUDENT . We ask' the new officers of the various campus organizations to consider them carefully as a means to enhancing their positions .
 Published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, during the college year .
 Chute says atheist must accept responsibility for his acts and his code . Chute: Atheists must accept the responsibility for their acts and code .
 An excellent short editorial in the February 27 STUDENT pointed out that morality plays an essential role in the health of a society, so that it cannot be left to the whims and ignorance of each individual in that society .
 The editor could have added as striking illustrations of this the stern puritanism that now exists in both the Soviet Union and in China . The editor of this article could have suggested as striking examples of this .
 When Communists want ed to ruin a ""bourgeois society,"" they busily urged people to throw off stupid inhibitions that they had inherited . Some of the propagandists themselves were probably naive enough to believe what they preached .
 "They quickly imposed curbs on every side and used all of their powers of persuasion and coercion to make the new moralism operative. But in any case, as soon as they were in charge of a whole country that had to be strong or perish, they quickly imposed Curbs on
 Edgar Snow's ""The Other Side of the River,"" a sympathetic account of ""Red China,"" gives due attention to the strictness of the present re gime . Snow's account of the country is sympathetic .
 Snow apparently served this trend with some distaste, as he is frankly very much an ex-Christian who would like to believe that individual judgment is sufficient in the moral sphere . Snow apparently wants to believe individual judgment in moral sphere sufficient .
 Russia's morality can function only because of fear or because of pride in being docile . When a country is under pres sure from the outside, these emotions are strong and freent, but these are signs that by now many people in Russia are not very impressed by ap ap .
 When a sound currency became available during the 17th century (one would not believe the amount of inflation during the Middle Ages) businessmen sighed with relief .
 Money that was now supported by the government could be used as a reserve to have and to hold for better or for worse purposes . Money could now be used to hold a reserve in the bank's hands of the government .
 People discovered that by selling their surpluses, i.e. their extra left over goods, they could make a profit with which to buy more surplus . People discover that by . selling their surplus goods, .e.i.e., their extra . left-over goods,
 This is not all that startling, but some lean and lungry guy figured that if he could apply the above fact to the aw of large numbers, the profits would be greater .
 Any letter which does not constitute a per sonal attack or exceed the limits of good taste will be published . A letter which is not published will be acknowledged .
 There you are more than likely to find the latest book of your choice, easily and inexpensively . There are many ways to buy the latest books easily and cheaply .
 If you need a book, whether for a course or for ""extra-curricular"" reading, the library staff is always anxious to help you in locating it . The library staff are happy to help students locate their favourite books .
 If the library doesn't have the book, they will look into the possibilities of obtaining a copy of it . The library is looking into the possibility of getting a copy .
 The primary objective of the Bates library is to support, the teaching curriculum . Suggestions are welcome to the library .
 'The largest part of its collection has originated from suggestions made by faculty members. Thus, 'the largest . part of the collection has been created by . faculty members'
 Bates students submit recommendations for purchase in areas connected to subjects offered at Bates . They survey the output in their various fields, and submit them to purchase items .
 Library members of faculty have been of tremendous help to the library staff . Library staff have been given recommendations by the members of the faculty . The library staff will continue to look at the recommendations .
 Suggestions from students to their instructors and the library peals to the national welfare . Suggestions for students to . their instructors . and their library .
 Spanish anarchists (the largest political party in 1935) held to very strict standards, through both pride and love, while completely rejecting theology . Spanish anarchists were the largest Spanish anarchists in 1935 .
 Coram Library has no student committee for book selection . This does not mean that student recommendations will not be given consideration . Miss Iva Foster, head librarian, said students' recommendations will be considered .
 New books are on display in the periodical room each week, Monday through Thursday .
 Students may brouse through these before they go into the stack collection . Students may also be able to browse through these books .
 Library's books are often given as gifts from private and professorial collections . Collection Expanded .
 Personal memorials and donations from alumni and other friends of the college are frequently made for book purchase .
 Miss Foster stressed that the library is always happy to receive publications by Bates graduates to be added to the Batesiana Collection . The collection contains past Bates publications .
 Gardiner Elected CaptainAtBancjuet LaVallee Gets Seavey Award; Sun -Journal Wins Photo Prize . The green lurf of Garcelon will in a few weeks accommodate the needs of outdoor teams .
 It is usually during this short duration of time when our squads aren't competing that our athletic attention turns to viewing practices and speculating possibilities . This is usually when our sports teams are not competing .
 The baseball team, for the past few weeks working out in the cage, will journey south this weekend to polish and get ready for the upcoming schedule .
 Outdoor track, on the other hand, has had ample opportunity to practice and ready through the availability of indoor track . Outdoor track has had plenty of opportunity for practice, ready through indoor track.
 The first indoor U.S. track federation track and field meet was held in Maine . The official season ended at Vermont, March 2 .
 Bates was represented by Bill LaVallee, Bob Kramer, Gerrit Binnewig, Tom Bowditch, Al Harvey, and Finn Wilhelmson . Bates is represented by Bob Kramer and Bob Kramer .
 Senior captain Bill LaVallee provided the spark for the Bobcat delegation by taking two wins . The Bobcat won two of their two games .
 His time of 7. seconds in the 65 yard low hurdles established a new Garnet indoor record . His time was 7.2 seconds in 7.6 seconds in 65 yard hurdles .
 Bruce Frost of Bowdoin and Jerry Ellis of Maine were the meet's only other double winners . Bruce Frost, Jerry Ellis and Bruce Frost also won double winners at the Maine meet .
 Finn Wilhelmson's two mile win in 9:40. time set a new Bates indood record with 9:39. time . Finn Wilselmson won the two mile race in 9-40 seconds .
 Gerrit Binneweg was third in the 600, Al Harvey second in the low hurdles and fourth in the high hurdles . Al Harvey, Bob Kramer, and Bob Kramer were also in the pole vaulting .
 They took home four firsts, one second, one third, and one fourth . They were entered in six out of eight events .
 We are happy to see this meet initiated as an annual affair, and are more than satisfied with the results. We are very happy with this year's success, and we are very pleased to see it become an annual event .
 The Bobcat power displayed at Maine gives an indication of the outdoor strength to come in a few weeks . Maine is in the midst of a winter storm .
 Spring football practice is now over . The official season begins in the fall when the season begins .
 With the arrival of the new season will come two significant rule changes . The new season kicks off on Monday .
 Perhaps the most significant innovation is the one allowing free, unlimited substitution . Perhaps the biggest innovation is that allowing free substitution .
 Coach Hatch feels that this rule change is to the disadvantage of small clubs like Bates . He says opponents from larger schools have larger squads and more depth and will now be able to substitute them at will .
 The other change is that the quarterback, previously ineligible to receive a pass, is now free to do so . The quarterback is allowed to play in the game .
 The rules committee didn't consider the consequences now presented to small schools such as Bates . With regard to the former change, it is unfortunate that the rules committee failed to consider the implications .
 Coach Hatch's second squad functioned the other day . The Bobcats will again prove to be a formidable team, he says .
 The quality of the roast beef promised an impressive evening at the event . Those attending were rewarded that double pleasure .
 William Gardiner of Framingham, Mass. Mass., was unanimously selected as captain of the 1963-64 Bobcat basketball squad . Gardiner was selected unanimously by the team .
 The six foot one inch senior to be, who saw but limited service this past season as a reserve guard, was tabbed as a leader and hustler by his coach, Vern Ullom . The six-foot-one-in-a-foot senior guard saw limited service
 Director of Athletics, Lloyd Lux, presented senior indoor captain, William LaVallee, of South Portland, Maine, the John Stark Seavey Award . Director Lux also presented the award to senior indoor team captain William Lavallee . The award was given to the senior indoor
 Lux explained the dedication to track of the late John Seavey, in whose name an anonymous donor presented the award . Lux explained that the anonymous donor gave the award to track track legend John Seavesy . Lux also explained that an anonymous donation was made to honor the late Seave
 The award is to honor the Bates senior who has contributed most to track while at Bates . The award will be presented to students who have contributed most during their time .
 Garnet Athletic Publicity Director, Arthur Griffiths, of Maine, awarded the Publicity Department's Picture of the Year Award to the Lewiston Sun-Journal .
 The Journal's winning picture was an action shot of a Bobcat footballer Grant Farquhar stopping a Colby ball carrier in this past season's mud bowl encounter .
 As the evening moved to the coaches and presentation of letter and numeral awards to the individual players, the audience was prodded into a jovial mood by the toastmaster Reverend Schroeder .
 Coach Chick Leahey voiced some comical incidents from the past year's action . Coach Chick had another fine year as JayVee hoop coach .
 Vern Ullom Speaks to honor his fighting Garnet squad with words tinged with the strains of the dedicated spirit of fair play and sincerity that mark the coaching profession in its aspired ideal .
 The hush that settled over this assembled group of athletic supporters provided fitting tribute to the real qualities of Vern Ullom, a coach that gives a player needed lift .
 Anchoring the speakers podium was former Syracuse football great, coach Walt Slovenski . Slovenski is a former Syracuse coach .
 Coach Slovenski lauded his hard working squad on their successful season . Slovenski is the breeder of the Garnet track track successes .
 Last Saturday afternoon at Alumni Gymnasium an audience of students and approximately 30 high school football coaches viewed the final scrimmage of the spring football workout for the Bates eleven .
 Of special interest during this scrimmage was Coach Hatch's experimentation with the I formation on offense . I Revealed: The I formation is a new look at the offensive formation .
 This is a pattern where the quarterback, halfbacks and fullback line up in a straight line perpendicular to the center . Quarterback, halfback, fullback, quarterback and halfback line up perpendicular to center . This is the pattern where they line up straight lines .
 Members of American Gem Society can deplore all the backs in any direction and thus cause trouble in ganging up on any one side of the line .
 Coach Hatch, commenting on this year's spring drill, said, "It was the most successful one we have ever had" Coach Hatch said, ""It was a most successful spring drill"
 Coach Hatch indicated that his tentative starting lineup would probably be Pat Donovan and Jim Callahan at ends, Charlie Lockhart and Ted Davis or Carl Johanneson at tackles, John Schatz, Dave Stockwell and Willy Farrington at guards and Steve Ritter at the center .
 Tom Carr at fullback, Captain Paul Planchon and John Yuskis or John Williams at halfback spots . Bill MacNevin directing the attack at quarterback at quarterback . Bill Planchis and John Williams will be halfbackers .
 The Garnet eleven will sorely miss the presence of such seniors as Howie Vandersea, Bob Williams, Paul Castolene, Phil Tamis and Bill Davis . Bobcat mentor feels that next season's team has the potential to equal last season's performance .
 The sports staff of the STUDENT announces its Intramural All-Star Basketball Teams . After many hours of research, interviews, and voting, the sports staff announces its intramural all-Star basketball teams .
 Smith South and J B. Smith South placed five and four players respectively on the three teams selected . The senior class had seven players on the squads .
 Smith South, as expected, placed three men on the ALeague All-Star Team . South Tops Smith South placed three players on the team . Smith South is the defending champion of the Australian Football League .
 Both Wallach and Silverstein are two of the greatest shooters to ever live at Smith South . They have another year to play for the champs at the school .
 J.B.B.'s contributions are Ron Taylor, the flashy playmaker, and ""Ion"" Pravda, the fine all around front court performer .
 Even though J B. didn't win its league, these two kept their team in contention at all times . Even though they didn't finish their league, they kept their teams in contention .
 The final berth on our team goes to a glayer who overcame many obstacles in order to play for a losing team . The final spot goes to the player who played for the losing team.
 The B-League All-Pros are led by sophomores Bill MacNevin and Steve ""Tex"" Ritter, both of Smith Middle . Smith Middle is a junior at Smith Middle School .
 The South players held together in the championship game with South . Their game savvy was evident in the losing effort .
 East Parker had two claims to fame — Paul ""The Old Smoothee"" Holt and Pete Weatherbee . Holt and Weatherbee were on the honor squad . East Parker was a member of the East Parker Honor Squad .
 Al Marden was selected for the second time in his long, long long career at Bates . Marden has been selected twice in his career for the honor . He has won more than 1,000 awards for his work at Bates since his retirement .
 Unanimous choices in the CLeague are the ""Three Musketeers"" from Roger Bill — Al ""The Scrimer"" Cruickshank, Sandy Randy, ""Cotton"" Bales and David Dolwell .
 The three rookies led their team to the championship of the C-Conference and also to their defeat in the playoffs . The rookies were the first to lead their team into the championship .
 Rick was superb in his play throughout the year and played with a tremendous handicap — his body . Rick was 'brilliant' in his game throughout his career, according to the golfer's body .
 The J B. ""dorm rep"" finished the season with an average of thirteen swears a game . The J. B. finished the . season with a . average of 13 swears .
 A tribute is in order to Monty Woolson, the co-ordinator and administrator of our intramural program . Woolson was a member of the Intramural team .
 He has spent many lonely nights in the gym looking after his fellow school friends . He has also spent many nights looking after classmates at school .
 Monty is known for his humanitarian qualities and this year he has lived up to his reputation again . Monty's charity work has been a huge success in the past year .
 He has given his entire intramural paycheck to the athletic department with the specific purpose of buying new softballs for the spring . The softball player gave the entire paycheck to buy softballs .
 The Sports Staff of the STUDENT is presenting the ""Wheaton Whiz" with a monogrammed clipboard .
 Garnet Pastimers, defending state champions, inaugurate their 1963 baseball season this Sunday . Defending state champions will travel to Washington College in Chestertown, Maryland, for first southern spring trip in five years .
 The Leaheymen will play several practice games while in the ""warmer climes"" on their one week trip . In addition to the practice games they will also play some practice games .
 An experienced pitching staff headlined by Thorn Freeman should assure the Garnet squad of an equal of last year's 8-4 regular season record .
 The 'Cats were 9-5 overall as they split a pair of games in the NCAA Small College Tournament at Teaneck, N. J., where they were runnerups . The Cats were runner-up in the tournament .
 Freeman was a unanimous All-Maine choice last year as he posted a 7-1 record and struck out 67 opposing batters . Freeman finished with an outstanding 1.83r.a.a., striking out 67 opponents .
 The senior fireballer is backed by junior Ted Beale, sophomores Bob Lanz and Ted Krzynowek, and frosh Bill Beisswanger .
 Receivers Bill MacNevin and Dennis Feen along with sophomore Steve Egbert will handle the catching chores this season . Equal Lettermen Bill Macnevin and Denny Feen will handle catching chores .
 MacNiven recorded a .242 batting average in his freshman year as he saw considerable action as Freeman's battery mate . He saw most of Freeman's playing time as a junior .
 First base duties will again be performed by All-Maine selection Howie Vandersea . Vandersea is a first-choice outfielder for Maine .
 As a four year trackster, LaVallee provided Coach Slovenski's thinclads with a competitive spirit of highest quality and leadership in the truest sense .
 LaVallee established the Bates indoor record in a 7.2 second time in the 65 yard low hurdles . The Bates track record was set in a time of 7.3 seconds in the event of the same time .
 The power-hitting right-hander slugged four home runs during the 1962 season . He also hit four more home runs in that season .
 Freshman John Yuskis or senior Dick Dolan will get the starting nod at second base . Freshman Dick will play for the first time in the team's history .
 Dolan was a fielding standout with the junior varsity squad during his freshman and sophomore years . Yuskis has impressed in pre-season workouts with his hitting . Dolan has been a standout in the field for the past two seasons .
 Paul Holt, a junior, will be back at shortstop where he excelled as a freshman and sophomore . Holt is a junior at the University of Cambridge .
 Holt led the team in R.B.I.'s during state series play last year as he drove in six runs . Holt is a junior at the University of Washington .
 John Lanza will hold down the hot corner once again this year . Lanza is expected to be the team's No. 3 hitter in the league .
 Lanza led last year's squad with an impressive .344 batting average . Lanza was a rookie third-sacker last year . He is expected to be a key player in the 2015 Australian Open .
 Freshman Brad Akerman is expected to see action as a utility infielder . Freshman Akerman will play for the first time since joining the team .
 Captain Ron Taylor should start in left field, a position he has held for four years . Ron Taylor has held that position for four seasons .
 Taylor led the team in stolen bases last year with five thefts . Taylor was All-Maine in his freshman and sophomore years .
 Taylor is also an occasional pitcher called on mainly for relief chores . Taylor has been called up as a pitcher for the past two seasons .
 Monty Woolson, called by Leahey, ""the best defensive outfielder in Maine,"" Bill Davis and Bud Spector will share the outfielding chores with Taylor .
 Seven days a week I Hates Stucbnf 1*7 Vol. 1**7 . First floor open 5:30-lO; Sundays to 9:30 daily . First Floor open 5-30-LO .
 Bates finished two points behind Vermont in the compiled list . Losing in the final debate round to Vermont, by a two to one decision .
 Howard Blum '63 took fourth place in oratory and David Kramer '63 was fourth in oraf interpretation . David Kramer "63" took fourth in interpretation of interpretation . Howard "Blum" '63 won fourth place for oratory .
 Woodbury and Bowie will participate in the extemporaneous speaking and persuasive speaking events . Rouault and Boyd will enter the persuasive speaking event . Bowie and Rouault will also take part in extramarital speaking events and will participate .
 Ohio State chose to argue the affirmative, Morris Lelyveld '64 and Norman Bowie '64 will uphold the negative for Bates . Bates will be the first time Ohio State has won a lawsuit against Bates .
 The debate will be conducted by mail, and after a complete exchange of speeches, each school will have a tape of the entire debate . The tape will be used as demonstrations at debate clinics next fall . Each school will also have a video of the debate .
 The debate will also be published in a new edition of Professor Quimby's book for high school debaters, ""So You Want to Discuss and Debate,"" which is distributed in forty states . The debate is published in an edition of the book .
 The New Hampshire Secondary School Championship Debate Contest will be held in the Little Theater on Saturday, April 6th .
 Wilfred Martin '59, a former debater and president of the Student Council, will attend as the coach for Laconia High School's debate champion . Martin will coach the debate champion at the debate .
 Preliminaries will be held at 4:00 o'clock on the afternoon of April 9th, in room 300, Pettigrew Hall .
 Each entrant will be required to deliver an eight to ten minute persuasive speech . Entrants must deliver an 8 to 10-minute persuasive speech.
 A three-point foreign aid program is designed to provide military security for the Free World and encourage the economic growth of underdeveloped countries . The program was outlined by Dr. Phillips .
 U.S. government grants to other nations for military purposes, but with full reliance on private funds for economic development . He suggested to the Life Underwriters Association of Kansas City, United States government grants . Government loans to aid in carrying out the normal functions of government .
 "There seems to be general agreement among our citizens,"" said Dr. Dr. John Defterios . Military Aid Necessary is necessary .
 Phillips, "on the necessity of military aid to our friends throughout the world" Phillips, ""on the . necessity of . military aid" Phillips said . Phillips .
 Such aid is really an insurance policy to protect the entire Free World from the spread of Communism . Such aid really is really a very important insurance policy for the Free World, writes David Cameron .
 Phillips said we are willing to devote a limited amount of money to help underdeveloped nations improve their roads, build schools, and train their civil servants . Phillips said, we are quite willing to . help under developed nations improve roads and build schools . Phillips: "We are very willing to
 U.S. loans can be a factor in providing stable governments throughout the world . It is certainly to the advantage of the United States to encourage such stability .
 Government grants and loans to encourage economic development in the underdeveloped nations are wasted . Economic Aid Wasted in the United States .
 Too many governments have wasted a large part of our aid on uneconomic programs. Too many of these governments waste a lot of their aid on 'uneconomic' programs. The UK government has wasted a huge amount of its aid, it says .
 The president emphasized that the solution to these problems is to stop all government controls and loans for economic aid . The president said that the government should not be allowed to provide economic aid to the developing countries .
 This step will encourage the underdeveloped nations to take steps to attract private funds . It will also encourage them to check inflation, balancing their budgets, removing restrictions on trade .
 Bates Chapel Gets Grade A Snow Job From Men's Bucket Brigade . Bates Chapel gets grade A snow job from men's bucket brigade . '66 Spontaneity is hard to come by at Bates .
 Rumors spread throughout the day that the Chapel would be ""snowed in"" at 11:00am . One of those ideas smote the men two nights prior to the Spring recess .
 The appointed hour arrived and evildoers appeared from out of the chilly Maine night and converged on the Chapel as though it were a Yankee-style ""Bay of Pigs"" invasion . The appointed . hour arrived .
 The pair didn't waste time discussing the pros and cons of the venture . Nor did they waste a single minute discussing the merits and merits of the new venture .
 In less than an hour the four smaller doors had been piled high with the glorious white stuff . Ashcans were piled high in less than half an hour .
 Wastebaskets, smuggled in just for the occasion, swung in systematic rhythm and the piles grew with the hour . The piles of waste were piled up in a systematic rhythm, with the piles growing with each hour .
 The finale was an all out effort on the huge double door on the south end of the edifice . It was a huge effort to complete the project .
 Pail after pail of water was thrown on to freeze the soggy snow . Water arrived by the ashcanful aboard toboggans hastily rigged for the job .
 Two swarthy Lewiston policemen arrived to ""disperse the rabble"" and to restore order to the slushy premises . All appeared to be going well .
 The College Snow-Shovel Corps were left to cope with the real "mopping up"
 The incident was the biggest student act of spontaneous reaction since the now-forgotten cheese sandwich outbreaks of past years . Whether a protest against the ancient, mandatory, and much revered Chapel program or a Machiavellian move by the Bates Young Republicans to keep Mr Ted Silvey from speaking
 Marilyn Fuller, to succeed Harriet Schoenholtz '63 as editor of the Garnet; Linda Browning '64 replacing Eunice Jansen '64 as editor . Alan Pethick '64 who will succeed Ted Smith '63 is business manager for the Mirror . Marilyn Fuller
 In an interview with Marilyn Fuller, the editor of next year's Garnet commented upon her objectives . Marilyn Fuller: "I'm looking forward to a very exciting future in my life"
 With respect to the last issue, I would prefer personal rather than critical essays, says author .
 They are squeamish at the thought of having classmates read their personal thoughts . The students are too scared to have their thoughts read by classmates .
 We need good satire which would stress wit rather than debunking techniques common to contemporary humorists . For example, we need satire which stresses wit, not debunking, debunking .
 Linda Browning '64, President of the Publishing Association, was appointed by the Association as editor of the Mirror . She was appointed as editor by the association .
 Miss Browning expects no real conflict in her dual role in the Association . The presidency is a business position, whereas the position of the editor is of a creative nature .
 Connecticut, Connecticut, Pethick has been assistant business manager for the past two years . He has worked for the state of Connecticut for two years, including two years as business manager .
 During this past year he has been secretary-treasurer of the Economics Club and treasurer of the Outing Club . He will hold a position again next year .
 He hopes that he will be able to do a good job in both the O.C. and the Mirror despite the increased responsibility .
 Pethick plans to pursue a business career in the field of sales and marketing . He plans to focus on the future of his business .
 The yearbook is primarily for the senibrs but is also a record of campus life for all students . The book is primarily a yearbook for the seniors .
 Mirror staff encourages student support of staff in order that an excellent yearbook may be published . Our new business manager encourages students to support the Mirror .
 Joseph D'Alfonso, Professor of Philosophy, will be a panelist at the St. Louis University . He will be on a panel of philosophers from around the world .
 St. Francis College Symposium on ""The Christian in the Modern World" in Biddeford, Maine, will be held April 8 and 9 .
 The two-day symposium will consider papers, and question and comment on their major issues . The symposium is expected to take place in New York City .
 On Friday, April 5, Mr Robert L Adam from Baker and Adam will meet with men interested in onthe-job training .
 Also on April 5, Captain Barbara A Davis of the Army Medical Specialist Corps will meet with junior and senior women interested in summer and career training programs in physical therapy, occupational therapy and dietetics .
 On April 12, a team of Navy Officers will visit the campus to discuss with interested students . The opportunities are available to prospective graduates as commissioned officers in the Navy .
 There are also programs available to women college students in both junior and senior years . Women college students are encouraged to take part in programs .
 The Hyde Park YMCA has recently announced a position vacancy for a Boys' Secretary . The position vacancy is a boys' secretary at the YCA .
 The letter may be seen in the Placement Office, and the person to contact is Mr Arthur C King, Executive Secretary, Boston Young Men's Christian Association .
 Parke, Davis and Company has positions available in Ann Arbor for women graduates in chemistry . The company is looking to hire women in chemistry positions .
 There are also openings for women graduates in analytical chemistry for the Detroit analytical laboratory .
 The Harvard-Radcliffe Program in Business Administration has sent the Placement Office ""Job Profile Leaflets"" under such titles as retailing, marketing, advertising, journalism, and electronic data processing .
 TEACHERS COLLEGE, COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY offers a work-study program for financing graduate work . The program is available at the University of Columbia Columbia .
 This program lends itself well to the needs of students who are willing to pursue their studies more slowly and be self-sustaining while doing so . This program is well-suited to students who want to pursue studies slowly and self-sufficient .
 March 27, 1963 Time: 6:45 Attendance: All Present Guests: New Council Members . Committee Reports Extra-Curricular Committee . Committee reported that the New Senate Constitution has been passed by the Committee .
 Social Committee — Mawhinney reported that the Close Harmony Concert plans are going slowly with little reaction from invited groups . Social Committee said that the plans for the concert were going slowly . Social committee said the concert plans have been met with little response .
 A decision as to whether or not the proposed Concert will be held should be made by April 1-8 . A decision is expected to be made on April 1 to April 1 .
 Dobson reported that the Men's Proctor Council Constitution is to be submitted to the Extra-Curricular Committee . Dobson said that the constitution will be presented to the Committee of Extra- Curricular Committee. Dobson also reported that he has been contacted by the committee .
 The Senate Constitution as a whole will go to the Faculty for approval or rejection . If this article is accepted by the Committee, the Senate Constitution will be reviewed by the Faculty .
 President Stone welcomed the New Council and collectively swore them into office . President Stone then welcomed the new council members .
 President Ahern took the Chair, and opened the new meeting by making the committee assignments . The new meeting was held in Dublin, Ireland, at 4.30pm .
 Proctor applications must be returned to Dean of Men's office by 4 on the 8th of April . All interested men of '64 and '65 must return their applications by the next day .
 Council will start interviewing applicants on Wednesday, April 10th . The Council will be interviewing applicants for the job .
 The right honourable Phil Brooks took hold of tradition and moved to adjourn . Phil Brooks moved to the right side of the debate .
 Smith leads the Choral Society in rehearsal for this Saturday night's Pops Concert . Smith leads them in rehearsal .
 The Lewiston-Auburn Council of Churches will sponsor a festival service in the college chapel . April 7. April 7 will be the first time the festival has been held in the chapel .
 This Saturday night music and decorations will combine to set the mood of this year's performance of the Bates College Concert and Choral Society . Free registration is now available for September Vacancy Vacancy .
 Green, red, white, and yellow decorations for the Concert will also be unique . The green, red and white decorations will also feature .
 With the stage representing Spring, each of the other three sides of the gym will signify another season . The stage represents Spring, with the other four sides representing Spring .
 The canopy will be a spoke effect instead of the usual tent, and the artistry will also include mural designs and ""trees"" on the stage and at the opposite end .
 For those who do not wish to dance there are seats available in the balcony for 50c . The show is set to be held in front of the crowd at the end of the evening .
 Al Corey's band will provide dance music between the Band's performance at 9:20 and the Choral Society's presentation at 10:25 . Refreshments will be served during the intermission of the performance .
 Band and Choral Society have beep rehearsing since the beginning of the semester for this week's annual Pops Concert . Band and choral society have been rehearsing for the past two weeks .
 Ritz Theatre I Thurs.-Fri.-Sat — KING SOLOMON'S MINES 1 ""NAKED SPUR"" Sun.-Mon.-Tues. — ""WHATEVER HAPPENED TO BABY JANE"" ""MERRILL'S MAURA
 An open house will be held in The Women's Union from 11:45 to 12:45 . sandwiches and coffee will be served at the event .
 EMPIRE NOW PLAYING ""TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD"
 The annual Ivy Day exercises will be held Monday, May 6, 1963, in the chapel . Juniors Plan Ivy Program .
 On April 2, 1963, dorm representatives met to select nominations for speaking parts . The dorm representatives selected nominees for speaking roles in the film .
 Nominations for class marshal have already been made . Final selection will be made by Professors Buschmann and Smith . The final selection is due to be announced on Friday .
 Richard Saylor, John Strassburger, and Robert Peek submitted for consideration . Submitted for consideration were Richard and John Saylor . The panelists also considered Richard and Robert Saylor for consideration of the panel .
 A prize of an Ivy Dance ticket will be given to the person from the class submitting the best design for the program cover, the best inscription, and the best Ivy Day Ode . The prize is an Ivy dance ticket for the winner of the class .
 Designs and odes should be submitted on or before April 15 to Norman Bowie, Paul Goodwin, Marion Day or Eunice Janson .
 Paul Bockwalter from the Japan International Christian Universities Foundation Wednesday. April 8 . April 8 Mr Paul Bockswalter spoke at the J.I.U.S. Christian University Foundation .
 The Welherill Company, a crew placement intermediary with yacht listings on the East coast, has yacht listings in the U.S. Yachts are looking for a summer hire .
 College students and graduates are being offered jobs as crew on motor cruisers and sailboats . College students are being asked to join the crew of yachtsmen . The company is accepting applications from college students .
 Each application will be sent to over 3000 large yacht owners in April . Each application is expected to be sent out to more than 3000 yacht owners .
 Crewing affords an opportunity to acquire or sharpen boating skills, visit new places here and abroad while earning a good salary in pleasant outdoor surroundings . Crewing is a great opportunity to learn new boaters skills .
 To apply, send us a short resume using the following form along with a $5.00 processing fee .
 Mozart deals with people as expressions of his themes . Three Aaaoftlfoer Mam's Ponsonn is Mozart's third opera . Mozart dealt with three themes in the play .
 His string quartets explore the outward personality — the shyness, sadness, or gaiety . The composer is known for his performances of the classical quartets .
 "In his symphonies he takes the dreams and internal working of his quartet personalities and gives them harmony," says the composer .
 His creations run up hills and lie down in the grasses and look over the world . His creations are his creations, and they can be found in the mountains or hills .
 Mozart catches the essential strain in a man in his quartets and sings it to all men in his symphonies . Mozart's symphony symphony is one of the world's most famous works .
 It is not unusual to find reminiscenses of Johann Christian Bach flitting here and there in this quartet .
 Kierkegaard would undoubtedly fumble about with a dissertation on the ""erotic"" and its immediate stages and tie Mozart together around this theme . But since I tend to a more psychological or sociological perspective, I hold by my thesis that Mozart was profoundly concerned with people and the
 All of Einstein's symphonies were individually dedicated, according to Einstein, — and not only to his patrons . Einstein: "All of his symphony works are individually dedicated to him and his patrons"
 It's satisfying to think that one has found the essence behind a composer's ideals . Make Peck's your thrifty shopping habit .
 Wilhelm Reich, in his famous Character Analysis, third edition, states, "Every musical individual knows the stale of emotion created by greai music; yet it is impossible to put this emotion into words"
 It is an expression of movement and creates in the listener the impression of being moved . Nevertheless, it is a form of movement, says the author .
 The wordlessness of music is generally considered either a sign of mystical spirituality or of deepest emotion incapable of being expressed in words . The wordlessness of music generally considered to be either sign of mystic spirituality or profound emotion .
 The naturalscientiiic interpretation is that musical expression comes from the very depths of the living . The naturescientiiiic interpretation of music is that it comes from depths of living .
 Music is the creation of an internal pressure thrust outward in a wordless whisper of love . Music is created by internal pressure, thrust outward by love, says singer .
 Music expresses the true soul in the only way that a soul can be understood . Music expresses true soul, says the author .
 Music is a vapor of essential meaning, whether it is condensed to the simplicity of the quartet form, or magnified into the complex phrasings of a symphony . Music is "a vapor of important meaning," whether it's condensed to a quartet or complex phrasing,
 Wright Speaks Of Life, Love And The Outing Club are coming to Lewislon on April 28 . They will hold a Sunday Afternoon Concert .
 All seats are reserved and will be sold on a first come first served basis . All seats will be reserved .
 Tickets may be purchased at dinner and supper at both Rand and Commons, and may be bought at any other time from Al Francoeur . Tickets may also be purchased for dinner at both Commons and Rand and Rand .
 A heavy advance sale is extremely important as this is necessary to insure the performance of the product . The sale of a large amount of stock and equipment is essential to ensure the performance .
 Superb quality by the makers of the world famous NIKON camera and accessories . The camera was made by the company that makes the world's best camera .
 Nikon Medical Student Miscroscope brochure and special discount offer for students entering medical school . Call or write for special Nikon medical Student Miscroscroscroscopic brochure . Nikon medical student Miscroscopic is available to students in medical schools .
 This is the third in a series of extensive interviews with members of the Bates faculty . Phone KI 7-8600 .
 A little bird told me that you are in a publishing race with Prof. Wright R. A. Wright . Professor Wright R says he is 'in the publishing race' with Prof Wright .
 You had spoken to me about the problems you were having getting your book published . Prior to this, you had spoken with me concerning the issues you had .
 W I should say it's a race — cither I quit right now, or I want a handicap. I should have quit, he says . I should quit. I quit. Or I want to want to handicap, he adds .
 W I am in the process of trying to get my doctoral dissertation published . I am trying to write a doctoral dissertation. I am also trying to publish my dissertation .
 The problems I'm having stem from the fact that dissertations are not very saleable, he says . "I'm having problems that are very difficult to sell," he said .
 "I don't have a wife who wants me to do odd jobs over the weekend," he says . Therefore, he says. Therefore, I don't want to work odd jobs at weekends .
 "I know what your informants have in mind. But as to the philosophy of chaperonage, I know what you have to think," he says .
 "I don't want to create problems for the Extracurricular Activities Committee by stating this publicly," says the school's director .
 This brings me around to my favorite topic — the professor's opinion of Bales College social life . R This brings us around to our favorite topic - the Professor's opinion .
 Mr Nelson's answer was that the students should make their own social life .
 This is a typical answer of the upperclassman who has a girl at home or up here or has his social life worked out . This is the typical answer for upperclassmen who have girls at home .
 I have found students who have sat through one of my classes a whole year who don't know the person of the opposite sex sitting next to them . I have also found students in my classes don't even know their opposite sex .
 O.C. makes an effort to sponsor hikes, ski trips etc., and doesn't get a good at tendance . This may indicate that there is a lack of initiative or a . lack of informal places where students can meet, know that there are a lot of complaining .
 In the long run, think we badly need a student union, and more lounges in dormitories . Think we need student union and more lounge loungs in dorms .
 I gather that the men's dorms don't have any. think other parts of this problem are the fault, of the students themselves or this whole generation . think other . part of the problem is the fault of this generation or this . generation .
 Going steady came on the American scene shortly after I got out of college. Here I would like to put a particular complaint in against the institution of going steady, a vicious institution .
 "In my day we played the field — met a lot of girls and had dates," he said . "Let me play old man for the moment, say that in my day ... we played field," he added .
 With going steady, you get stuck with one girl and don't see other possibilities . You're stuck in one girl, you don't think of other possibilities, he says .
 This might actually lead to divorce if, after marriage, a man meets someone who really interests him . This might even lead to a divorce if he meets someone he really interests .
 "Anything the college can do to break up this evil institution would be good for the social life," says LZ Granderson .
 In World War II, I was scheduled to land on the main island of Japan . I was due to land in Japan .
 When the Abombs were dropped and the war halted, I was practicing landings at Lido Beach on Long Island, Long Island . When the war was over, he was preparing for landings .
 Skiing at Aspen is rugged — the long trails and all — and I thought it would be good to hit the sack early . W Well, skiing . Aspen .
 "I went out to the various picturesque nightclubs and nurse a beer for an evening. But my comrades insisted that I go out for the evening," he says .
 At the clubs, these fantastic bunnies would show up in their stretch pants and do the twist all evening . The twist in stretch pants is quite provocative .
 W I have noticed a trend over several years for extracurricular activities such as O C. to be curtailed by excessive academic work . O C is a term of honor for students who have been involved in O.C. W .
 At least this is the chief excuse students give for not participating in outside activities . Students say they don't want to participate in activities .
 Students keep telling me that standards have been raised at Bates . Students tell me they have much longer reading lists, more exams, etc. etc. Students keep saying they are happy with the increased standards .
 I think the college should consider dropping course requirements to four . I think it's time to consider dropping the course requirements .
 You can't do justice to all five, and it tends to kill off extracurricular activities . The college is small, friendly, coeducational college . It's supposed to be one of the benefits of a small college .
 Robinson Players are flourishing like never before . Perhaps there are other activities such as Robinson Players which are flourishing . Robinson Players will continue to play in the future .
 "I do think that the student's workload has affected all activities," she said . But she added that she did not think that all activities were affected by the workload .
 "I like to see them every weekend while skiing, hiking, or working on the trail," says author . "It's a great adventure for me," she says .
 I would argue that the kind of things the O.C. does can be continued when the student is out of college with his spouse and later with his children . I would particularly argue that such things can't be continued in the future .
 SNEAKERS HOOD's RUBBERS For The Entire Family Shoe Repairing While You Wait at JEAN'S MODERN SHOE REPAIR Corner of Park and Main College Pharmacy .
 A brief analysis of the Bates electoral process appeared in the previous issue of the STUDENT . STate 2 3771 FOUR BATES STUDENT, APRIL 3, 1963 Editorials .
 It leads to an informed electorate and subsequently to the increased effectiveness of a campus organization . Also, it leads to a better understanding of the electorate and the effectiveness of the campus organization.
 Students would like to know what the organization's function is, and who its members are, would be better known by students .
 The electoral process should be structured to allow, in every instance, for an informed electorate, and where possible, for active campaign. The electoral system should be designed to allow the electorate to be informed and engaged in an active campaign, says David Cameron .
 Dan Ustick '63, this year's past chairman of the Student Council's elections committee, points out that during the special freshman election in the fall, interest and enthusiasm was noteworthy . Ustick: "Interest and enthusiasm" was noteworthy during the election .
 With more time, ""parties"" or groups of candidates and supporters would have gotten together and campaigned for office . Indeed, with more time,. parties would have been able to get together and campaign for office.
 In this initial election, male and female members of a class vote not only for their officers, but also for their representatives to the Student Council and Government, respectively . In this election, students will be able to elect representatives to their Student Council, Government .
 It is this electoral system that should be maintained for subsequent elections . The electoral system should be kept in place for future elections . It is a good example of the electoral system being maintained .
 Instead of all the men electing the Student Council, the representatives from each class should be elected by only the men of each class . The Student Council should only be made up of men in each class, not all of the men .
 All that the Student Senate Constitution provides, in effect, is that the present Student Council and Student Government, can meet together . All that is required is that they meet together, the Constitution provides .
 In the selection of officers, all the men would continue to elect the male members, and all the women, the female members of the Senate . The Senate would also elect the men and women who would be selected as officers .
 Without increased campaigning, the present extent of uninformed voting or non-voting, among the men at least, would continue . And without increased campaigning it would continue to be a problem .
 To have the system used in freshman elections continued for all four years would result in better elections . The system should be continued for the next four years, according to the author .
 Senate office-seeker must consider 90^125 students . Each of these voters would become significant .
 If an office-seeker is not known by some of his constituents, he would have to make himself known . If he was not known, he'd have to .
 With a relatively small constituency, the task would be neither difficult nor avoidable . The task would not be difficult or avoidable, but it would be both avoidable.
 With only one hundred or so votes cast in his particular race, every vote is that much more decisive . With only 100 votes to cast in a race, there are only a few hundred votes to be cast .
 Perhaps this structural change cannot overcome the ""passivity"", or whatever you wish to call it, that characterizes Bates College . Bates College has a reputation for being 'passivity'
 If some remnant of the enthusiasm that characterizes freshman, and their elections, does survive, it should be maintained rather than consumed by the electoral process . But if some of it survives, the enthusiasm should be kept alive .
 David A Nelson Faculty Advisor published weekly at Ghsuse Hall, Bates College, during college year .
 Entered aa second-class matter; at the Lewiston Post Office Jan., 1913, under the act of Mar., 1879 . Entered a second-grade matter; . at the . Lewiston post office Jan. 1913 . under the . act of . 1879.
 Inherent in any three semester plan is a danger which challenges the basis of higher education, says Dr. John Defterios . He says it is a 'danger' that challenges the 'basement' of education .
 The danger is not necessarily overwhelming by itself by itself, it must be considered . Although the danger of this type of weapon is not always overwhelming, it can be considered as a factor in consideration .
 Paul Goodman's new book The Community of Scholars is published by Paul Goodman . Goodman's thesis is that the community of scholars is at risk of over-academic error .
 The original function of a college was to bring students and men of learning together in a community where the students wanted to learn and the scholars wanted to teach, says Goodman .
 The American colleges and universities have become adjuncts of the larger world . They are not run by their faculties and students, but by their administrations under pressure from trustees and legislators, says Julian Zelizer .
 The students waste time 1 and the role of the faculty is compromised by Administration and its own academism . The role of faculty should be compromised by the Administration and the faculty, says the author .
 Finally, colleges lose their function; which is ideally to refresh the larger community by insisting on higher' purposes and rediscovering new meanings within human experience .
 Logie's letter in your March 13th issue has just been brought to my attention . Miss Logie wrote a letter to the editor of this issue .
 If it is not too late to be of interest I will attempt to answer her questions . I will try to explain her questions.
 In his phrase ""things are all different,"" the word ""things"" should be understood to include all those entities we usually call objects . The word "things" should be used to include interactions between objects we call events .
 When I say an Atheist must do certain things to be a ""member in good standing"" I simply mean there are criteria a person must meet before I would classify him as an Atheism .
 I should not be allowed the easy out, of riding the coat-tails of Christian morality. I shouldn't be allowed to ride the coat of morality, he says .
 It appears that any student of contemporary life would agree that this is what is needed . It appears to be a good idea for the future of the world .
 In his rescue of Freud from the insubstantial neo-Freudians, Brown the iconoclast and enfant terrible builds his ideas like the construction of an inverted Gothic cathedral in a courageously brilliant diagnosis of the universal modern sickness . Brown's defence of Freud's ideas is
 "I profess an empathy for fellow humans. Although I may not always express it in my acts, I profess it in his acts," he says . "Although I may always express . it in . acts, it's not always expressed it in an act," he writes .
 It is on this basis ultimately that I feel we must decide what is best in a situation . I feel it is important that we must choose what we want to do in this case .
 "I am supported in my reliance upon this basis, not only by my own feelings, but by what I can surmise of the feeling of others, by the empathy of art, and by the Observation that moral dicta, from whatever source, tend to minimize individual and
 The justification for Atheist's adopting the Christian moral code would be found in his conviction that its predictions seemed sound and have been ""validated"" over a long period of time . Atheist believes that the predictions of the moral code have been "validated"
 A study of the results of the application of this code could convince him it was a reasonable guide to' behavior . Even if he expressed total disbelief in its supposed origins, he could be persuaded to use it .
 I would disagree with Miss Logie's implied equating of the theist and atheist . I would also disagree with her equating responsibility of the atheist and theist .
 There is a difference between being responsible for something and being responsible to something or someone . There is also a difference in responsibility for someone or someone, he says .
 Mill's Utilitarianism is a background for this article . The following is a list of readings from Mill's work .
 Science and Human Values by J Bronowski . The Philosophy of Science by Stephen Toulmin . Bertrand Russell . The philosophy of Science and Ethics by BertrandRussell .
 Robert M Chute: "We are saying very sweeping generalizations without giving the steps beforehand" Robert M. Chute says we are saying 'sweeping generalizations' without giving details beforehand . Robert Chute writes: "It is very important to know what you need to do to
 Brown, even if he is mistaken, is a vigorous thinker and an intellectually honest writer . That's why the book must be read, for Brown, who is mistaken . The book must also be read .
 Brown wrote Life Against Death as a reaction after a deep study of Freud and psychoanalytical theory . Reacts To Freud .
 Freud did not see any dancing butterflies coming gaily out of the unconscious mind . As we all know, Freud saw no dancing butterflies in the unconscious .
 "He doesn't know what he's doing, and he's heading towards ultimate selfdestruction," he said . He said: "I'm not sure what I'm doing, I'm going to do it. He's going to self-destruction"
 This characteristic is the result of the reality-principle infringing on the pleasureprincipal (erotic enjoyment of living) with the death instinct predominating over the life instinct .
 Instead of affirming life, we affirm death, and have rejected any weak eschatology we may have heretofore accepted . Instead of affirmating life, they affirm the death of Jesus Christ .
 Civilization Represses Civilization, with its institutions and other-worldly realitymorality, represses free expresions of the Eros . Civilization imposes rules and external laws and glorifies material inorganic and dead objects . Civilization represses civilization with other-worlder reality .
 Everything in the world is ruled by the Devil, even (especially) capitalism . Everything is death instinct orientated .
 All this mess (Brown consistently refers to it, as excrement) is the result of sublimation of the anal-sadistic phase of infancy, he says . Brown: "All this mess" is the end of an anal phase of childhood .
 The essence of sublimation is the transference of energy-orientation from the lower processes to the higher ones . Sublimation can be achieved by sublimating energy from a lower process to a higher process .
 Death-instinct is closely related to anal fantasies, says Brown . Brown demonstrates that the death instinct is closely associated with anal fantasies .
 He thus brings together death, anality, excrement, money, and societal repression under one heading . Freedom Necessary is necessary for freedom .
 Brown comments that Utopian thinking is just what is needed . By the way, Brown says it's needed for a better society .
 One of the important ramifications bound to repression, sublimation, and neurosis, is the pervading feeling of guilt, says the author of the book .
 The newly elected executive board of WRJR assumed their duties as the directors of Bates College Radio this week . Stating the problem brilliantly, Brown, like Freud, has only li BATES STUDENT, APRIL 3, 1963 .
 John David '64, the station manager, has served as disc jockey and commentator on the weekly Jaxx U.S.A. and as station worker during his three years at Bates . He has served three years as a station worker .
 Program Director Richard Dow has a variety of station experiences ranging from news director to assistant program director . Dow has been a news director, program director and news director for several stations .
 Dan Clarke '65 who is now Business Manager, has served for two months as news director and news broadcaster, as well as emceeeing an Especially for You show on Thursdays . Dan Clarke is the Business Manager of the College of Charleston .
 Doug Wakefield, news public relations director, is featured on the Folk Hour on Wednesday . Wakefield is the news director of the Washington Post .
 The only returning board member is Technical Director Bruce Cooper Cooper '65 . Cooper is a returning member of the board .
 His work has been instrumental in keeping the broadcasting equipment in working order .
 Martha Ryan has broadcast the On Campus show this year in addition to her duties as a staff secretary . Executive secretary Martha Ryan and Carol Stone have broadcast the show .
 Stu-C and Stu G are installing convertor systems to enable campus AM radios to receive WRJR with increased power and quality . The past few weeks have seen $100 each for improvements and construction of convertors .
 The last segment, ""A Way Out,"" shows you where the door is but leaves you to figure out where the key is hidden . The last part of the book ends up revealing the key .
 Instead of being sublimations of, say, infantile play with feces, they would be the result of an awareness of and regulation to the most enjoyable manifestations of Eros . The higher mental processes would be more enjoyable if they were aware of and regulated to Eros' most enjoyable
 Nothing could be nuttier than a world that prides itself on its rationality and down-to-earthness, its humaneness, equality, faith in God, idealism, happiness — and all the rest — and then behaves the way it does . Nothing more nuttier is than
 David Harrison '64 and Kevin Gallagher '64 played with college musicians from the New England area . The New England Intercollegiate Band Festival was held at Colby College on March 23 .
 Paul Lavalle, the guest conductor, worked with students from Colby, Bates, Bowdoin, Tufts, MIT, and several other colleges in the northeast . Lavalle's guest conductor was students from the Northeast .
 The highlights of the evening were Darius Milhaud's ""West Point Suite,"" composed for the Sesquicentennial celebration of the United States Military Academy; and ""Symphonic Fantasy on Folk Themes"" by Dr. Darius . The evening's highlights were the ""West
 This composition is based on several folk songs which Comparetti heard while on sabattical in Italy . Comparetti's composition was based on folk songs he heard in Italy during his trip .
 Originally written for orchestra, the Fantasy was transcribed for band for the Festival . Originally written to orchestra, it was originally written for band .
 This writer was very favorably impressed by the quality of musicianship which Lavalle was able to get from the group . Lavalle's band is currently in the midst of a worldwide tour of sorts .
 Wright or ski-wear, students blabbed away, thinking I was a fellow undergraduate . Wright says he could find out many interesting opinions from students who thought he was a student . Wright: "I'm glad to be able to talk to people who think I'm not a student
 "I found for the outside world this is not such an advantage at conventions and so forth. But , I found for . the outside . world this was not such a . advantage," she said . "But for the . outside world, this is such a huge advantage," the author
 The purpose of the moustache was to make him look a little nearer his chronological age . So the purpose of this was to be to make me look witty, persistent, creative, and penetrating, he said .
 Ned Brooks, Bill Hiss, Bradley Butler, Al Beemis, Steve Barron, Kevin Gallagher Palace Guards Woody Trask, Steve Edwards, Paul Goodwin Lords Peter Hyle, Lou Lelyveld, David Dodwell, Peter d'Erricco, Allen Skogsberg Ladies
 Prompters — Jarey Adams, Chris Carter, Carol Cooper, Mary Ellen Keenan, Nancy Marshall, Anne Rodgers, Jane Sauer, Jan Soltis, Diane Van Nordstrand, Nancy Wetherell .
 Coach Walt Slovenski's garnet and whiteclad track forces opening the season on the confines of Garcelon April 20th . Chick Leahy's defending state champion baseballers following two days later .
 The 'Cats will field a fine, veteran club in the southern swing of the Bobcat baseball squad . Reflections are optimistic and expected, as well as expected .
 Front line pitching depth behind ace Thorn Freeman received an added boost with the fine performances of sophomore hurlers Bob Lanz and Ted Kryznowek . Front line pitchers behind ace Freeman received a boost with a fine performance .
 Cats resume their 16-game schedule against Tufts in Medford on the 11th of April .
 John Yuskis' sharp second base play and threatening bat . Pitching Promises Top As Cats SdIU Southern Season Games iron . Yuski is a former football star .
 i have given him top billing at second base for Chick Leahy s state champs . X UB&1S anai crv.v .
 As usually proves the rule, the Pitchers have the early edge on the batters . The potential for a solid hitting club is present and improvement along this line is expected .
 Several members of Vera UUom's hoop squad joined forces with a strong local contingent . Lewiston High hoop coach Fern Massey and Edward Little mentor, former Maine great, Wayne Champeon .
 As a team they journey to the State Amateur Basketball Championships held m Portland . The team will compete in the state amateur basketball championships .
 Seniors John Lawlor, Paul Castolene, and Pete Glanz backboned the rugged local aggregation that progressed as far T£e semi-finals beforelSsing to New England Teachers College champs Gorham State .
 The locals playing without Champeon and using only five men led most of the way before losing to the deeper Gorham team . Gorham went on to win the tourney .
 Williams, judging from his performances in our own weight room, must be made a contender for the state laurels . Williams' performances in the weight room must be enough for him to be a contender .
 He was no longer the kid who had come pounding out of the streets of Harlem, a whirling, jabbing, tireless master with the kick of Carolina corn whiskey in his dusky fists . But he still bore the title of Sugar and awe of greatness still flashed in his forty
 Ray Robinson is in the ebb of a career that saw him win the welterweight title, five times become middleweight champ and almost gain the light-heavyweight crown . Sugar Roy Robinson belongs to the mythology of fistdom that reverts to the image of the ideal champion .
 The editors salute the promoter and backers of the Sonny-Cassius battle . In a final glance at the Garnet sporting scene the editors salute Sonny Cassius and Cassius .
 Cassius' lightning moves proved too much for the game Sonny . Cassius was the star of the game, but his lightning moves were too much .
 The Las Vegas board has it a 6-5 pick 'em affair . The College championship is at stake . Las Vegas will be a pick-em affair.
 Fred Woolson, Garnet center fielder, quickly moves back to first base in game with Rider . Woolson was Garnet's first baseman for Garnet . He is now a junior in the junior league .
 Garnet baseball team returned last week from a successful swing into the South where they officially opened their season with a record of 1-1 .
 The Bobcat Pastimers beat Washington College by the score of 9-1 . They also dropped a 10th inning clash to highly-rated Rider 2-1 in the final game .
 This trip, the first such excursion in four years, evidenced the presence of some prime quality pitching in both the Garnet and opposing teams . This trip was the first of four years .
 The weather was much colder than expected, proving to hamper somewhat the potential of Bates hitters . The weather hamper some of their potential .
 The teams got some fine work in and the trip in general was regarded as a success . Despite this obstacle, however, the teams were able to enjoy the trip .
 The 'Cats beat Washington College 1-0 in their opening game . The game was played at the home of Washington College in Maryland .
 Ted Krzynowek started for the Bobcats, pitched four innings of no-hit ball, struck out 9 opponents, and received credit for the win . The Bobcats won the game 4-2 .
 Ted Beal in the 5th inning and Bob Lanz in the 8th inning struck out the side of the side . He was followed by Ted Beal and Ted Lanz in 5th and 8th innings .
 The 'Cats were held to one hit, a triple from the bat of Archy Lanza by Washington's ace, Chuck Meding . They teed off on the next two pitchers, with the next three being hit .
 John Yuskis, playing his first varsity baseball game, got 2 hits, and along with Bill Davis played a very important part in Bates' big first inning . Bill Davis also played an important part .
 Davis went on to get on base four times and score four times . Davis scored four times in the first inning . Davis also scored four runs in the game .
 The Bates bats gradually demolished the efforts of both the second and third pitchers . Red Vandersea hit a two-run homer to put the game beyond reach in the 5th .
 Also of importance was the fine base running displayed by Bill Davis, Ron Taylor and John Lanza . Bill Davis and Ron Taylor ran the base running .
 Thorn Freeman can expect some good support from Ted Krzynowek and Bob Lanzell . Now Thorn Freeman will be able to speak to the public for the first time .
 Bates received fine pitching from Thorn Freeman, but couldn't get a rally going against Delaware . Delaware pitchers were strong enough to keep the game going .
 Delaware was one of the better teams Bates has played in the past few years and they certainly proved it through their talent displayed . Delaware was the better team Bates has seen in recent years .
 Bates' only run came in the 2nd when Ronnie Taylor walked, stole second, and scored on Fred Woolson's sharp line drive to right . The game ended in a 1-1 victory for the Bates team .
 The Blue Hens scored two more runs in the first inning . After that, the 'Cats' hitting turned as cold as the weather .
 On the final day of the trip, the team traveled to Trenton, New Jersey, to play Rider College . The team lost in the 10th place on the trip .
 In the last of the 10th inning the score was tied 1 to 1 with Rider at bat . Rider was at the top of the score in the game .
 The bases were loaded, two men were out and the count on the batter was 3 balls, 2 strikes . The count was three balls, two strikes and two balls were 3 balls . The game ended in a 1-1 victory over the Mets .
 Garnet ace Thorn Freeman straddled the mound prior to blazing his fast ball close in on the batter's wrists . Freeman's fast ball came in at the end of the inning . Freeman was the first Garnet pitcher to hit the batter with a strikeout .
 The batter's jammed swing sent a slow, dribbling, ground ball to the right of the mound that was just too slow to enable the charging shortstop Paul Holt, to force the runner at home .
 Ted Krzynowek had started for Bates and had given up one run in four innings before giving way to Freeman . The left-hander was replaced by Freeman .
 Freeman held Rider hitters scoreless until the game-winning infield hit in the tenth . Freeman held the Rider hitters to no score until the winning infield hit .
 The Garnet team looked great defensively — making only two errors in three games . Garnet made only two mistakes in their first three games in the NBA season .
 The hitting must be improved and with the material present it promises to be . The hitting will be improved, with the new material present, it will be .
 Seven Bates Graduate heads Baseball . William J Leahey, better known to the Bates students as ""Chick"", has been an omnipresent figure on the Maine sports scene .
 He was captain and quarterback of the 1942 Maine Championship football team . He also played quarterback for the Maine Championship Football team .
 Leahey entered the Marine Air Corps in 1943 and served 43 months — 15 of which were spent overseas . He served in the Air Force for 43 months .
 He batted .310 and made a fine double-play combination with Jerry Snyder . Snyder played for the Washington Senators .
 The next year he was a teammate of the Yankee great Whitey Ford at Norfolk (Class B) where he batted .275 . The next season he was teammates of the Yankees legend Whitey . Ford .
 Leahey decided to forsake pro-ball, returned to Lewiston and entered Bates . He has never regretted his decision to enter Bates College in Maine .
 Because he had played pro-* baseball he was ineligible for college sports but still coached freshman baseball and basketball his last three years . Because of that, he is ineligible to participate in college sports .
 He continued playing baseball with the Auburn Aces, a local semi-pro team for several seasons .
 Leahey earned a master's degree from Columbia a year later . Holds a Masters degree .
 Leahey returned to his alma-mater as the baseball coach and v. basketball mentor . One and a half years later he returned to the school as a baseball coach .
 Coach Leahey considers Bob Dunn the best allaround player he's ever had . Dunn is considered one of the best players he has ever played with . Dunn was a star player in the 1980s .
 College's Proving Ground Coach Leahey feels that the colleges are becoming more and more the proving ground for major league ball players . Coach says colleges are proving or testing grounds for big league players . College's proving ground coach says colleges have become more popular with players .
 Minor league baseball has suffered a decline in recent years due to television . Minor league teams have been unable to compete in major league baseball because of TV .
 Small college baseball has been weakened because of the cutting down of summer baseball leagues which gave college stars necessary experience . Summer leagues gave college players necessary experience.
 All-star list includes all-stars from Bob Dunn, Bob Atwater, Joe Murphy, Norm Clarke, Ralph Davis, Albert DeSantis, Bob Martin, Wayne Cain, Bob Reny, Norm Clark and Jerry Feld .
 Tennis, Golf Teams ready for Upcoming Schedules . Bates varsity tennis and golf teams will take to the road and begin their 1963 seasons .
 Veteran Tennis Squad begins the season with a two-day jaunt to Lowell Tech and St. St. Mary's .
 Coach Ullom has several experienced players on this year's squad . A promising group of freshmen to fill the ranks to fill out the ranks .
 Captain Jim Corey and Jim Wallach are sure to be two of the outstanding players in state series . Captain Corey and Wallach will give anyone they face a strong battle .
 Backing them up will be George Beebe, Todd Lloyd, Perry Hayden and Jim Dodds, all veterans from last season's play . Backing the line-up is Todd Lloyd and Perry Hayden .
 The Garnet squad will also be bolstered by the return of John Wilson after a year's absence . Freshman Bob Thompson has looked very impressive in practice for the team .
 This year's team looks very strong at the top and has adequate depth in the fifth and sixth singles matches where the day is often won or lost . The team has a strong depth of strength in the last two singles matches .
 Garnet squad could give Bowdoin a strong challenge in this year's state tournament . Garnet should be able to take the measure of both Colby and Maine .
 The golf squad will retain a solid nucleus from last year's squad, headed by Captain Thorn Brown . Thorn Brown is the captain of the 2014-15 England team .
 Lloyd Bunten, John Schatz, Andy Witt, Phil King and Phil King are the stars of the show . Chuck Lasher and Wally Lasher are also on the team . The show was held in New York City, New York, New Jersey City .
 With the addition of freshmen Lynn Simpson and Joe Matzkin, the Bobcats will field a very strong team . The Bobcats should have little trouble improving on last year's record .
 Coach Hatch will be preparing the team for May 21 when it will invade Augusta for the state tournament . The state tournament will be held in Augusta, Georgia .
 The Garnet squad has to be given a good chance to dethrone Colby this year . All the other Maine teams have incurred substantially heavier losses through graduation than has Bates .
 Home Links Golf is the only sport at Bates that does not take place on campus . Golf is only sport that doesn't take place at Bates .
 The result is that spectator interest is usually lacking and it becomes the forgotten sport at Bates . The result of the lack of interest in the sport is that it becomes a forgotten sport .
 Some fine golf is played at this time, considering the soggy conditions of the courses . Nonetheless, some fine golf can be played, especially in the wet conditions .
 Anyone wishing to follow the Bates squad in their home encounters can do so at the Martindale Country Club in Auburn, Auburn .
 Tennis, golf, baseball and track all look to be strong this year . Bates rooters may really have something to yell about if the tennis and golf teams enjoy successful seasons .
 Jim Corey, Ron Taylor, Pete Graves, Bill LaVallee, Tom Brown, Pete Brown, Tom . Brown, Jim Corey and Ron Taylor are the best tennis players in the sport .
 A at New England's Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS ~4 BEDARD'S MAINE'S ONLY DRIVE-IN PHARMACY Phone 4-7521 Lewiston, Maine, is Maine's only
 A Sportslight by MarCIA FLYNN '65 . Three sports were in pre-vacation activity . Three of the sports teams took part in the activity .
 Linda Mitchell, freshman from Greenlawn, N. Y., went to Brandeis for the Eastern Intercollegiate Fencing Tourney . Linda Mitchell is a freshman from the freshman class of freshman from New York City .
 Linda has fenced for two years under Oscar Kolembaforrch, the fencing coach for West Point and the Metropolitan Opera Company . Linda has been fencing coach at West Point, the Met Opera and West Point .
 She was placed in an advanced group at the competition and won two out of five matches . She won two of her five matches in her advanced group .
 Chase House girl is one of the first Bates women to fence in competition . Chase House girls were the first to compete in competition at the age of 16 .
 Our fine volleyball team defeated Maine and Colby on March 9th . Congratulations are also in the offering for our fine volleyball .
 All the girls competing were given U of Maine ash trays or mugs and free rollerskating instruction in the afternoon . The girls were given rollers skating instruction .
 Two teams were sent from each school and they played one team from each of the other three Maine schools . Two teams of each school were sent to each other school .
 Louise Carrey, Jean Dawson, Jane Potter, Judy Warren, Genie Wise, Elaine Woodford are seniors and juniors . Marian Day, Nancy Day, Linda Jarnett, Nora Jenson, Lynn Parker; and freshman Pris Clark are seniors .
 Sophomore Bette Davis and senior Joan Spruitt were chosen as alternates for the award-winning seniors . The two women will be alternates in the musicals .
 A very pleasant day was had by all and everyone was very happy at our final victory over the Physical Education majors at Colby and Maine .
 Mitchell Mitchell is technically the victor but a few games remain to be played to vie for the final standings . Milliken Mitchell is the only player to win the league title .
 Most Bates students are unaware that at least one entirely new extra-curricular activity has been added to the Bates College program . Cat Ping Pong Player is the first cat-pong player to join the college program .
 Last year a table tennis team, appropriately called the ""Collegians"" was formed by Bill Graham .
 The Collegians won more than 50% of their games but still finished a disappointing third in the tournament . The team won the most games of the season, winning more than half their games .
 League Champs: Bill Graham, Pete Glanz, Gene Safir. Bill Graham. Pete Glan, Pete . Glan . Pete . Safir . Bill Graham . Pete. Glan. Pete . Graham. Safir: "This year a determined five of Bill Graham."
 Every Tuesday night singles matches of three games each and one doubles match chosen by lady luck were played . Each match was played in a singles match and a doubles match each .
 Junior Al Williams complied the best mark 42-6 to finish second in the league despite losing 4 out of his last 6 games . Al Williams was the best player to win the league in 42 games .
 Captain Bill Graham, hobbled by a bad shoulder compiled a 41-7 record and trounced the Lewiston-Auburn Twin City champion five out of six times . Captain Graham compiled a record of 41.7 .
 Sophomore Gene Safir was fifth in the standings with thirty-eight out of forty-eight wins . Safir is the only player to win more than 40 out of 40 wins .
 Bob Fisk joined New England Telephone in Boston during 1957 . In less than three years he was promoted to the position of Accounting Manager . Fisk was the Accounting Manager of the company .
 Newcomers Jon Olsen filled in well for Lee Sweezy, one of the original five who had more ability with a ping pong paddle than Dante .
 Jon, playing for the first time, compiled a .600 record and won severaley doubles matches . Jon compiled a record of .600 in singles matches .
 Freshman Bob Thompson shocked a former Lewiston-Auburn champion by beating him decisively . Freshman Thompson only played in two matches .
 Ray Sirois, better known to the Bates students for his bridge playing, was the individual champion for the second year in a row with a 43-5 record . He was the winner of the tournament with a record of 43 wins .
 The Naval Air Station in Brunswick has already extended an invitation to the Bates team to play . Bates has already been invited to play at the Naval Air Force Station .
 John Yuskis is a freshman second baseman from New Britain, Conn., who has been selected by the sports staff for this week's honor . He is the first freshman to be named the Bobcat of the week .
 Yuskis was the starting second baseman in all three 'Cat games . Journeying south with the Garnet baseballers with the team .
 Yuskis displayed extraordinary poise as a defensive infielder . His heavy hitting bat paced all Garnet swingers . He was one of the best players in the sport .
 John Yuskis rates high praise for his desire and performance in the Batesmen's southern swing . The Batesmen are a junior in the college baseball ranks .
 Each dorm will have a place to leave books, with Page Hall serving as the central parking place . This drive will help provide the educational materials needed in those areas where voter registration projects are taking place .
 The conditions which the book drive is designed — hopefully — to alleviate are desperate . The conditions are desperate, but the conditions which are desperate are desperate.
 The Negro colleges to whom these books will be going have virtually non-existent libraries, and it's almost impossible for the students to get good books . The books are going to be going to Negro colleges where they are going .
 In the places where voter registration projects are taking place, the books will be used to teach the people to read .
 The voter registration exams are usually quite difficult, and an attempt to prepare the prospective voter is a vital part of the program . The exams are often quite difficult and difficult to prepare .
 Churches in the LewistonAuburn area are taking part in this drive . The churches in the area are supporting the drive .
 Other church groups, as a result of students speaking to their ministers during spring vacation, will also run drives .
 In addition, this project is and has been taking place on college campuses throughout the country .
 This project, as well as the speakers on campus concerning civil rights, is an effort to involve more students in this is sue. This project is a project to involve students in the civil rights movement. The project is part of a larger effort at the University of Columbia .
 Further activities planned, foremost of which are discussion groups which will form an educational function . Further activities are planned, including discussion groups .
 Anyone who is interested should see either Carline Harris '66 or Kelly House '66 . Anyone who wants to see them should see Carline .
 Dean Boyce Outlines Off-Campus Policy to maintain the Bates tradition of being a centralized residential college . President and Trustees have decided to eliminate off-campus residence .
 Off-campus living began only recently in 1956 with the closing of naval ""quantum" houses, which created a large surplus of students without quarters . The closing of the naval ""Quantum"" houses in 1956 created a huge surplus of quarters .
 The college hopes to include all men within campus houses . The proposed men's dorm near Smith, and new rooms in Roger Williams Hall with a smaller men's enrollment .
 Married or commuting students, or those living with faculty will not be included in the list .
 By the senior year of the \ Class of '65, this goal will be nearly realized . The goal is to be realized by the seniors of the Class '65 .
 The size of the incoming class will, at that time, have been reduced for two years in a row .
 Sophomores who would like to room off-campus during their senior year, will be allowed to do so only if they are successful in obtaining off campus residence for their junior year, too . Students will be able to stay in residence off campus for their senior years if successful .
 The STUDENT is looking for reporters on either the News or Feature Staff . Independents or supporters of either faction are invited to the dance which will begin 8:30 at 8:00am .
 John Schatz will be master of ceremonies for the Ivy Day chapel assembly on May 6 . The Ivy Day Chapel assembly will be held at 4 p.m. Thursday at 4m. ET .
 The Ivy Day Oration will be delivered by John Strassburger, Bob Sherman'who will toast the coeds and Lee Drury who will reciprocate .
 Bob Ahern toasts the seniors, Steve Talbot doing the honors for the faculty and Nancy Day toasting the athletes will complete the program . Nancy Day will toast the athletes at the end of the ceremony .
 St. Holy Cross, Lisbon St. Mary Mary, celebrates Masses 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 . High Masses, 11m., 11m.
 Faculty committees and the administration are planning, with the community, to make the Centennial Year a noteworthy one . lectures, dedications, conferences, and colloquims will be among the events to mark Bates' 100th Anniversary beginning in September, 1963 .
 Carnegie Science Building, and The Maintenance Center will be dedicated at this ceremony . The maintenance center will also be dedicated . Carnegie Science building, and the maintenance building, will be dedicated .
 Students invited to take part in two day academic colloquium and convocation . They will be taking part in a two-day convocation and two-week colloquia .
 Bates College will celebrate the 100th anniversary of the granting of the Bates College Charter . A joint community-college function will be held January 18 . Bates College is a community college and community college .
 This will be a Community Testimonial Dinner, sponsored by the Chamber of Commerce . This is the first time this has been held in the United States .
 Another dinner meeting, for all of the Twin City service clubs, will be held in the Spring .
 Commencement, with its emphasis on music, art, and drama, will be the third big occasion of the year . The University of Alabama will hold its third major commencement ceremony of 2014 .
 Robinson Players and the Music Department will perform . There will also be visiting speakers, and probably a wellknown professional performer .
 On this weekend as well as two or three other times in the year, the plans call for a major art exhibit . The exhibit is expected to be held in New York City .
 This would be in addition to the annual Bates Art Exhibit, and would be rented from a gallery or a museum . The Bates Art exhibit would also be a part of the Bates Museum of Art exhibit .
 Throughout the year, there will be a series of small on-campus conferences . The events will include guest speakers .
 They will take place between faculty and alumni who have related interests . They will deal with new developments in a particular field related to the academic program .
 One of these alumni will be selected, each week in which an assembly program is scheduled, to address the student body . Some of the visitors from each group will be available to students who may be interested in the careers they represent .
 Professor Brooks Quimby '18, plans to give recognition to the 1913 founding of the Bates-conducted High School Debate League . The Bates Debate League was founded in 1913 .
 This will take place on November 8 in connection with a High School Debate League Clinic . This will be held in conjunction with a debate league Clinic .
 Science Fair will be a 45th anniversary celebration of the first such fair in 1918 . Science departments will hold a Science Fair as a 45-year anniversary .
 Several contests are available to Bates students which provide opportunities to earn money and recognition . Bates students are encouraged to participate in these contests .
 The winner of this competition will receive not only a salary of one, hundred dollars a week, but his board and traveling expenses will also be provided . The winner will also receive board and travel expenses .
 The summer position involves sitting in on sessions with authors, agents, artists, and book production specialists . The position includes attending conferences with editors and authors .
 A book review of not more than five-hundred words based on a selection from the book list provided by the' company is all that is necessary for entry . The book review is limited to five hundred words .
 This list includes books by Herman Melville and William Butler Yeats . The list also includes works by Walter Lippman and Harold Laski .
 For all radical scholars, there is a manuscript competition sponsored by the quarterly magazine, Studies of the Left .
 The magazine is offering two prizes of three hundred dollars each for an essay on the social and natural sciences . The magazine also offers two prizes for essays on literature and the arts .
 The Philosophy room bulletin board will provide further information concerning this contest .
 The Critical Essay contest is sponsored by Connecticut Mutual Life Insurance Co. The contest is being sponsored by the insurance company . The contest will run through the week .
 The essay must not exceed 3,000 words and must be sent to Human Relations Program . It must be submitted to the program's Human Relations program .
 An art contest sponsored by Madamoiselle magazine was to encourage students of the fine arts . A poster design contest was sponsored by the Yivo Institute for Jewish Research . There have been others — an art contest .
 The Christian Association Council organizes and coordinates many varied activities which are performed by and for Bates students . The organization is a campus-wide organization .
 By announcing new commission heads, with a brief explanation of what their jobs entail, we can point out specific areas in which the C.A. is active . We can also point out that the new commission members will focus on specific areas of their jobs .
 Campus Service — Natalie JFischer '65 . Natalie's job is to coordinate plans for IMUR, Stanton Ride and freshman chapel . Campus Service is Natalie's Campus Service .
 Much work goes into finding jobs for C.A. work projects and organizing their execution . Beth Bassett '66 is a member of the community service community service team .
 Such volunteer programs as Pineland, CMG and Sarah C Frye visiting are all ways you can contribute to others while benefiting yourself . Beth's area of emphasis is volunteer programs .
 Faith Commission — Peter J Gomes '65 Peter has done a ""splendid"" job this year . Peter has been a great ambassador to the community .
 "It is only through your criticizing constructively to Carol in planning for the conference '64, that it can be better," she said .
 Nancy Vail '66 is the head of the Tutorial Project which has had such outstanding success, and is a new Council member . She is a member of the new Council .
 As last year's president, he's the man to ask if you have any questions or requests . CNN.com will feature a Q&A exclusive interview with the president of the country .
 The Delta Sigma Rho tournament at Dartmouth was cancelled . The tournament was scheduled for April fifth and sixth . The Dartmouth debate coach says the tournament is cancelled .
 The fiftieth anniversary of the Maine division of the Bates debate clinic will be held in the Little Theatre on April thirteenth . The Maine division will hold a debate clinic .
 The New Hampshire division of the Bates debate clinic was held in the Little Theatre on Saturday, April sixth .
 St. Thomas Aquinas, Stevens, Holderness and Holderness, Portsmouth, Winnacunneet, Keen, and Dover are all included .
 The Bales Oratorical Contest will be held tomorrow night at 7:00 in the Little Theatre . The contest will take place in the little Theatre .
 D. C. is a member of The Board of Lectureship of the Mother Church, Boston . D C. has been married to a woman who died of a heart attack .
 The lecture is sponsored by the Christian Science Organization at Bales . The lecture will be held at the Bales Center .
 This consists of on-the-job training in several of the departments of the Comptroller's Division . Training could include such areas as financial accounting, electronic data processing, credit administration and internal auditing .
 This division is responsible for the continued development of new and the improvement of existing products, processes.and equipment.
 Further career opportunities' with the Eastman Kodak Conu pany are listed under the headings of engineering, science, business, and liberal arts .
 Camp Vega and Camp Vega Senior Girls' Camps in Maine have openings for tennis counselors and for someone to head the tennis program . Camp Vega is located in Readfield, Maine, and has openings for counselors .
 Baker Brook Resort in Littleton, New Hampshire, is looking for five girls who would like employment as chambermaids and also a girl for the office . The resort is looking to hire five girls for the job .
 Those eligible should have a bacheler's degree, qualifications for a college provisional certificate in the State of Pennsylvania, and evidence of successful student teaching .
 Minutes were taken at last week's Student Council meeting . April 15 Henry Walter Oakes Oratorical Contest will be held at Henry Oakes' home .
 These meetings are held every Wednesday evening at 6:45 in the basement of Roger Bill . The meetings are open to everyone .
 April 3, 1963 Time; 6:45 Attendance: Steinheimer absent Guests: None . Committee Reports Extra-Curricricric.
 The Men's Council Constitution of the new Senate was passed with few changes . Comm. Comm. Aikman reported that the men's council Constitution was passed .
 The constitution will now go before the Faculty at its next meeting . If passed, it will go into effect in October of 1963 .
 Dobson reported that the comCALENDAR Thursday, , April1& Speech Dept. had been canceled . Dobson was the speaker of the Lecture Comm. lecture series .
 On Easter morning; a* 5:25 the C.A. will sponsor a sunrise service, on ML David* Following the service., breakfast will be served at the Federated Church in Lewision .
 Drive In -Restaurant — * — mittee is working on the program for next year . WALT DISNEY ^fk Stallions TECHHICOLOR .
 It should be noted that all organizations wishing to have dates set aside for specific -events on the 1963-1964 school calendar should consult Dean Boyce as to the proper method of procedure .
 Council warns that strict action will be taken against violators . Their use is an ""immediate dismissal"" offense, according to Council .
 Council will entertain retiring members with, dinner and much ■ enlivened conversation . So, on May 8th, the council will entertain the retiring members .
 A recent editorial in The Bridgeport Post said of ""home"" ""That home is ... 'a heap of liv ing' beyond price. That home is a heap of living ing" beyond price .
 The home represents a loyalty among those who dwell therein, that goes deep reaches far, and outlasts the years . The home is a loyalty that goes beyond the years, and outlasting the years.
 "To brace it against every strain, guard it from every dan ger — particularly the danger o:' uncaring — that it our task. To brace it ... that it's our task," he says .
 Shopping with mother on Fri day nights — or those fritters and dumplin's that dad cooked on the barbecue — these are the memories we must harbor close to our bosom and never lose . Shopping with mom on Fri-day nights or dad cooking on the BBQ .
 Think of those problems which melted before a structure of nails, mortar, beams, and a heap of love . Think of the problems that melted before the structure of this beautiful structure .
 Your home is the for giveness that is big enough to forget, and the understanding that laughs at mistakes anc makes allowance for human frailty . Your home will be the for . giveness . that is . big enough for forget, says author .
 A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family . Lewiston Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 A gift to your college can result in a larger income for your family .
 Edgar A Guest is published by Edgar A. Guest, published in 18th Century, Maine . Edgar's humble verses include "Edgar A Guest" and "Edgman a Guest"
 Now we are at an age when we consider ourselves (falsely consider ourselves) superior to our parents. Now we're at a time when we think we're superior to parents. We are at a point where we're more likely to feel superior to ourselves.
 Think of the many tears that mom wiped away from our eyes with her cotton apron . Think of her many tears as she wiped them away with her apron. Think of how many tears she had to wipe away from her eyes .
 "When we first came to college we wrote home often — sort of wantin' to tell ""mom and pop"" about how lonely we were and how unhappy we felt . But we were scared of being babies. We were scared to be babies. When we were young, we wrote
 Mom and pop sat around the dinner table — alone — musing about their son or daughter . Quickly college became more important to us and letters dwindled .
 "We had him for eighteen happy years, but now he has found his own life."" ""1 know, Warren ... oh how how 1 know. Only wish 1 could hear from him now and then — find out what he is doing," says Warren .
 The father shuffles slowly out to help the hands with the harvest while mother starts to read her prayer book . And then the father shuffs slowly out . Father shuffles out to . help the . hands . with the . harvest .
 Bates students who are tutoring at Lewiston H S. S. meet to discuss possible approaches to problems encountered . Bates students meet to decide how to approach problems encountered by students .
 Tutors Meet To Discuss Problems And Approaches . Members American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET JfWELfft .
 At a recent tutorial meeting, reflections and problems encountered during tutoring were discussed . Lewiston By PAM YOUNG '65 .
 Lewiston High teachers have been reassuring at the start of the school year . Some tutors were discouraged, but the warm friendliness of the teachers has been reassuring .
 This tutorial meeting brought out a discussion and exchange of approaches used by the tutors . The tutorial meeting took place last Thursday, which brought out discussion .
 Many tutors were impressed with the gravity of the situation, and the difficulty which many of us encounter when we try to understand why a senior in high school doesn't know the difference .
 Many students find the biggest problem they have to cope with is that of very poorly motivated students . Interest High is interest high for students .
 Many tutors have found themselves trying to project their own attitudes and ambitions on the Lewiston students . Lewiston is a small town in Washington state .
 When a student is not personally ambitious, some tutors find that they feel disappointed . Some tutors feel disappointed with the student's lack of personal ambition .
 It has been hard to realize that most of the students we work with are just interested in getting through a course . It's hard to think that most students are interested in just getting through the course .
 The interest on both the part of the tutor and the tutee is very high . Nevertheless, the interest is still high, says the tutor .
 One tutor brought an issue of the Garnet to a session and had her students grapple with some of the poems . The Garnet is a collection of poetry from the 18th century .
 Others have tried to provide interest by referring as often as possible to sports . Others have used to refer to sports as a matter of interest .
 Some tutors have found themselves reading the Lewiston paper so as not to be behind on what's happening in Lewiston High basketball .
 Because this program is still very new, there are a great many problems which will have to be straightened out, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 To help the tutors, a list of books to which they can refer is in the process of being compiled .
 In addition to discussions with the high school guidance department, an attempt is being made to provide more homogeneous grouping for the tutors .
 Slowly, the tutorial is evolving into a smoothly-working and definitely satisfying program . The tutorial is now a smoothly working program .
 The committee for the Dedicatory Convocation, a group working on the ""alumnus-of-the-Week"" program and career conferences, and a committee planning a two day Campus colloquium . The committee is also working on a two-day Campus Colloquium
 Further plan* for the Centennial have not been formulated, but it is expected that they will progress quickly now that the end of the academic year is so near . Further plans have not yet been formulated .
 The Bates Concert Lecture Series Committee is now planning a series of entertaining distractions for Bates students and the Lewiston-Auburn community in the coming year . The committee is planning an informative and entertaining distractions .
 Committee searches out people who will draw the habitual dorm dweller out for an evening well spent . Committee aims for programs which are both entertaining and educational .
 Norman Cousins, Ashley Montagu, Carey McWilliams, Martin Luther King, and Vance Packard have been considered for next year's speakers . Only until their availability is found out can solidified plans for 2015 .
 The noted lack of musical entertainment, which appears to be implied in the committee's title, is felt to be handled by the Community Concert Series .
 The high cost of importing musicians is a ""major factor" in this decision . High cost of imported musicians is also a major factor in the decision to move the venue .
 It was expressed that it would be feasible for both concerts and lectures to be on campus if there were an unlimited budget . Concerts and lectures could be held on campus .
 This, however, does not mean that music will not be considered in future years as a part of these programs . Music will not always be considered as part of the programs .
 Interest Low Committee members are scratching their heads trying to find events which will put an end to the marked lag in student attendance at these programs . Committee members say they are looking to find ways to end the marked lags in attendance of students .
 Committee Concerned The type of program offered has not changed over the years, seeming to indicate a lack of interest . Committee concerned that the type of programs offered have not changed . Committee also concerned that there is not enough interest in the program .
 There has been mention of the heavier work load, yet this does not seem to have lightened the turnout at basketball games . The heavy work load has been mentioned as a reason for the heavy workload .
 The professors are aware of the problems envolved in taking a night off from studies for a lecture . They are expressing the possibility of making work loads for the following day somewhat lighter .
 "Mr. Dillon, Professor Berkleman, Mr. Annett, Norm Bowie '64, Newt Clarke '65, Doug Dobson '64," or Marge Zimmerman '64 . "Mr Annett" is the author of the book, "Marge Zimmerman"
 Previous editorials have stressed the importance of the individual, and the decisions that he makes regarding Bates College . FREE REGISTRATION NOW for SEPTEMBER VACANCIES FOUR BATES STUDENT, APRIL 10, 1963 .
 Al Francoeur's efforts to have the Limeliters come to Lewiston are commendable . Norm Bowie's chicanery for Ivy Weekend is commendable, says Norm Bowie . The Limeliteers will be in town for the weekend, says Francoeur .
 Both individuals decided that ""social life"" could be improved and sought to do so . Both individuals sought to improve their social life and seek to improve it .
 The total situation must be understood, and decisions should not be based solely on the wish to remedy one aspect of a situation . Decision should be taken on the basis of the total situation, not just one aspect .
 If the action is, however, fighting a situation, it will probably reap only frustration as a result . The action is likely to be futile, but it will be a good thing for the fans .
 Such factors combine combine to make the possibilities of ""big name"" entertainment impossible .
 Joan Baez, Cisco Huston, and the New Lost City Ramblers, performed in Chase Hall on the same afternoon . In January 1961, Baez and Huston performed in the same day .
 This Spring, the Tradewinds, a good, but not ""big name"" singing group, will perform in Chase Hall . This Spring the group will perform .
 Chase Hall Dance Committee will continue to meet with success . The Outing Club, the Deansmen, and the Chase Hall dance committee will continue their efforts .
 We're sorry that Ivy Week-end will not feature a ""big name"" band, but we realize that the Extra-Curricular Committee's decision was the only feasible one .
 For this year, students should support ""social life"" both by attending the available activities and by making known their ideas and comments . Students should support "social life" by attending activities and making known what they think .
 If you enjoy a performance or have some suggestions for next year, let someone know it . Above all, consider the context within which an idea must be formalized . Consider the context of an idea within which it needs to formalize .
 If you work within, instead of against the college framework, success, not frustration, is that much more likely . Seek to improve not to conquer a situation, but instead of conquer it, seek to improve .
 Dean Boyce's Doodles last week . "The right to stay in college is perhaps not to be governed solely by mathematical computations," he wrote .
 A man's general attitude and behavior may become as important as his minimum academic requirements . A man may become more important as he meets the minimum requirements .
 The Dean must clarify what he has in mind . Before this is possible, however, he must clarify his intentions .
 Dean Boyce is correct. College should be more than meeting academic requirements, he says . College should include more than just academic requirements for students .
 What this more is, and how it is to be determined who is and not worthy of an invitational return, is far from clear . Yet, what this is, is not clear .
 He does not explain what methods are to be used for evaluating student activity . Yet, he does not give details of how to evaluate student activity.
 He stressed the importance of the Youth Employment Act of 1963, introduced in the Senate by Sen. Sen. Richard Hatch .
 This bill would establish a Youth Conservation Corps (patterned after the successful New Deal agency, the Civilian Conservation Corps) and a local employment program . It would involve activity of young people in state and local government and private, non-profit organizations .
 The proposals are a follow-up to the youth employment provisions for occupational training, passed in the Manpower Development and Training Act of last year .
 The Youth Conservation Corps is also expected to reduce the eight billion dollar backlog for conservation projects in national and state parks and forests . The Corps will also reduce the backlog of conservation projects .
 The Local Area Youth Employment Program should provide service for public and private local agencies whose funds are limited . The program should be used by agencies that have limited funds to employ youth .
 This Act, it is hoped, will reduce delinquency when young people with no satisfactory prospects are able to find work . It is hoped that this will reduce delinquent behaviour .
 At present, unemployed youths between 16 and 21 comprise only 7% of the potential labor force, but 18% of total unemployed . Unemployed youths between the ages of 16-21 comprise only seven% of potential workforce .
 By 1965, the labor force will have to absorb 3. million young people, a nearly 50% increase over the 1960 figure of 2. million . Service in the YCC is limited to men .
 The pay ranges from $60 per month for the first six-month enrollment to $65 per month . Total service may not exceed two years . The pay is between $60 and $65 a month .
 In addition to the above benefits, the enrollee re ceives tax-free room, board, transportation, and health and recreational facilities .
 The Local Area Youth Educa tion Program is open to men and women who would be employed by state and local agencies . The program is available in the local area for men and woman working in the program .
 They would work in schools, hospi tals, settlement houses, parks, parks and libraries . Visiting Nurses Associa tions, orphanages, and the like .
 Major condition for their employment is that no regular worker be displaced . Naturally, a major condition for them is that they are not displaced by regular workers .
 Each service is to be headed by its own Director under the authority of the Secretary of Labor . Each service will have its own director under authority from the secretary of labor .
 Appropriations would be determined by Congress according to annual necessity . Appro priations would then be determined according to Congress .
 Youngs Dems Urge Support The Young Democratic Clubs of America are enthusiastically endorsing this proposed bill . The bill would be the first time a bill has been passed in the Senate .
 As Medicare concerns the aged, so does the Youth Employment Act concern us, our contemporaries, and our communities . The act is important for the future of the country and its communities .
 A Congressman cannot judge public opinion if no opinion is ex-pressed . Mere rec ognition of the problem as one of direct concern and passive, is not enough .
 As from this hour You use your power, The world must follow you! — Charlotte Perkins Gilman ""To Labor"" Labor led and we followed .
 "We followed victory after victory as she made the laboring man part of the general public," she said . "She made it easier for the laborer to become a member of the public"
 The labor movement is showing a different face. But now the battles have been won and the labor movement has shown a new face. The battles have now been won, says CNN's John Sutter .
 We must assume that labor will consolidate her gains, realize her responsibilities and develop a very realistic approach toward co-operative solution of the nation's expansive problems .
 The vital brain power is missing and gone with it is the direction toward progress, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The brain power has been missing in the last few years"
 "I have always attached great importance to the American labor movement," says George W. Bush . Bush: "I'm proud to be a proud American citizen"
 "It has been especially disheartening for me to watch this degrading transformation," she said . "I have been especially sad to watch the degrading transformation of my country," she added .
 Every institution becomes oligarchical after its membership becomes disinterested, leaving the ruling power in the hands of a very few . Hope In New Blood: The U.S. needs hope in the future of America .
 The existence of a totalitarian power structure cannot be tolerated . However, the existence of totalitarian power structures can't be tolerated, he says .
 The labyrinth of strength maintained by the old men who came up through labor's ranks, swinging fists and making their demands will change with the infusion of new blood, or so I thought . The old men came up with the new blood .
 As recently as March 4, 1963, I could write to the editor of the Lewiston Evening Journal confident that, "The introduction and development of the young labor leader will find an awakening to the challenge," he wrote .
 "They are going to provide the sophistication and awareness of the public sector of the economy in their decisions," he said . "They're going to ... provide the ... sophistication and ... awareness of [the] public sector," he added .
 Reform Needed Now: Reform needed now . "I find that the younger leaders are a sterile group as well," says President Obama . Reform needed for the future of the U.S.
 Chicago Labor Lawyer Lester Asher says one of the real tragedies of the labor movement is the lack of young intellectuals . Asher: "The real tragedy" of the movement is that it lacks young intellectuals."
 "In the New Deal days, when I said I represented labor unions I was someone. In the New . Deal days," he says. "I was someone."
 Aaron Levenstein wrote a book entitled Labor Today and Tomorrow . In 1945, Aaron wrote about labor in America .
 This country and responsible union members are fed up with the abuses of power and are out to curb union excesses . Union members are tired of union abuses and want to curb them .
 Senator Everett M Dirksen introduced a bill calling for compulsory arbitration in the maritime industry and injunctions against walkouts in the industry for up to one year . The bill would also be introduced to prevent walkouts from the industry .
 Senator Barry Goldwater calls for a government conducted secret vote among the workers involved before the union leaders could call a strike . The vote would be held before union leaders called a strike, Goldwater says .
 Senator John L McClellan would ban strikes in defense industries and missile sites . He would apply the antitrust laws to unions in the transportation field .
 Representative Robert P Griffin urges secret ballot elections before strikes . Representative Griffin also urges secret ballots before strikes.
 Representative Bob Casey said any new law probably would call for compulsory arbitration . Rep. Bob Casey: Any new law would probably call for mandatory arbitration .
 'He finds it much healthier to drag his heels in the face of our biggest internal threat,' he says . 'He will continue to drag the heels of his heels,' he adds .
 FIVE Tracksters prepare For Outdoors SP ORT,NG S .
 The battle, unique in itself, was enhanced by the most decorous display of ingenuity that I have yet to witness as a reporter . The battle was "extraordinary" and "decorous," says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Rho Beta Phi, home of former champ Cassius, had prepared a setting that left little to be desired . Cassius is a member of the Phi Phi Phi house of origin .
 The handlers of the green demon were clad for the occasion, as each loyalist proudly displayed a Cassius T-shirt . The handlers were clad in black and white T-shirts .
 Panda U. performed at the end of the show . Panda U were the 'untouchables' of the band .
 Dapper-clad ""untouchables" cheered their hero Attila to a split-decision victory . Amid a cloud of cigar smoke, and peering through the transparency of dark glasses, the dapper-clothed crowd cheered .
 To one who failed to see this exhibition this would perhaps seem like a silly fuss and too much bother to exert over the viewing of two fish in the exercise of their instinctive behavior . To one . failed to . see this . exhibition .
 Of paramount importance was the evidence of a revived spirit which has suddenly taken hold at Bates . Bates is the latest in a long line of success in the footballing world .
 "This enthusiasm, which was kindled in the fall and raged through the winter, has proved that it's still alive in the spring," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "The enthusiasm is still alive, and it's a good sign for spring."
 To this combination of enthusiasm and loyal support which our teams have enjoyed, we salute, and hope for its continued existence .
 Three athletes from Bates competed in Maine weightlifting championship . Bates weightlifting team won state championship in Maine .
 Paul Williams, Bill LaValle, and Harry Mossman represented the Garnet cause and finished commendably . The Garnet team finished in the top three places .
 If Williams had competed in the next heavier class he'd have won, as the winning total there was 595 . It's interesting to note that Williams' total of 595 is higher than the 595 he would have won .
 Reports from the sunny south express woe over the efforts of the other Maine colleges . Reports of woe in the state of Maine .
 Ft. Colby, considered by many to be the top Maine opponent, seems to be unable to find the winning caption since their opening and only victory against the Maine team .
 Maine, on the other hand, beat Columbia for its second victory in six matches . Maine, meanwhile, won its second win in six games .
 Though these results are encouraging for Bobcat loyalists, the fact that they are merely outside at the present time is an advantage .
 With the weather following its present course however, Bates should be on Garcelon shortly . The weather should be good enough for him to be able to make it to the airport .
 Coach Styrna of Maine reports that his track squad mav be the best one he has fielded yet . Maine track coach says his team is the best he's fielding yet .
 Not hurting in any department, he feels his squad is ready for the outdoors . He feels his side are ready to play in the first game of the summer .
 Maine has won the Yankee conference two years in a row and is defending state titlest . With such a note of confidence, it lends an ominous foreboding to all opponents of Maine .
 "It was indeed an honor and a pleasure to have been selected as a judge for the already-mentioned aquatic encounter," he says .
 Garnet track tigers can be seen carefully training in the Cage for a rugged spring schedule . The remnants of winter linger on to keep the outdoor track well irrigated with puddles of water .
 Opening on April 20, the thinclads will entertain the red and black of Northeastern on what we hope will be a hard-packed track . Northeastern will be the first to play on the track .
 The Huskies beat the Bobcats soundly in indoor competition last year . Huskies will be displaying their customary strength and it should be a tough battle for Bobcats .
 Slovenskimen will engage Brandeis, Norwich, and Colby, Norwich . Slovens will travel to Colby on April 27th .
 Coach Slovenski is fairly confident about this tri-meet, as neither Colby nor Brandeis have posed a serious threat in 'the past' Coach Slovenskis is confident about the Tri-meet .
 Brandeis, however, 1 while not possessing outstanding strength, may give the thinclads some trouble . The thin-clads may give them some trouble, but they have some strength .
 A recent addition to the spring lineup is a very powerful U of Mass. team . The team is ranked No. 1 in the American college baseball rankings .
 The Garnet will have to contend with Tufts, Tufts and once again Northeastern in this same encounter . U of Mass. and Tufts will also face each other in the next round .
 The Garnet has already trounced Tufts this winter . Many 'of the Jumbos' potential pointgetters should be beaten by Northeastern and U of Mass. and Northeastern .
 On May 11th, the thinclads will be found at Colby in the State Meet convention against U of Maine, Bowdoin, and Colby . The thin clads will compete at the University of Maine State Meet .
 Byron Hicken of Maine will run the hurdles against Garnet captain Bill LaValle and sophomore Allen Harvie of Maine . Hicken will compete in the hurdles at the Garnet High School .
 Coach Slovenski says the man who wins will be the one in the best con dition . Co-capt. Co-Capt. Slovenski: "These three are almost co-equals in ability in ability"
 Bowdoin and U of Maine possess strong halfmilnows .
 Liberal Arts graduate can qualify as a specialist teacher of science or mathematics in the elementary sctiool . In one year, you can get a Master of Arts degree .
 Coach Slovenski estimates this year's team as possessing as much potential as last year's . Slovenski says strong events again held down by distance and middle distance men .
 Finn Wilhelmsen and Eric Silverberg will be seen grinding out the mile and two mile positions . The prancing Norwegian will compete in the men's 100m and 200m events .
 Jon Ford and Gerrit Binneweg will be competing in the quarter milers . Jon Ford will be the first quarter-murders to compete in a major race .
 Pete Peterson has shown a great amount of potential in indoor competition . Pete Peterson is one of the three middle distance men in the squad .
 In the pole vault, Bob Kramer will again be the One to watch . Kramer in the vault vault will be the one to watch. Kramer in vault .
 Bob, however, has recently undergone an operation which may set him back in conditioning . Bob recently underwent an operation and may be back in action .
 The frosh letterman, Bill Davis, will be seen in the discus and hammer circle . Dave Harrison and Wayne Pangburn will also be in the hammer circle for the team .
 If they are not stricken with the host of injuries that plagued them this winter, they will be able to boast another winning season . If the lingering cold weather does not hinder their training, the cindermen will not be hampered by it .
 The Bobcats will travel to Central Connecticut to defend their championship title in the Eastern I.A. meet . And if final exams do not interfere, the Bobcats can defend their title .
 Attila New Bates Champ By Way Of Split Decision . Attila and Cassius go at it behind the enthusiastic cheers of their respective supporters . Cassius was Attila's first Bates Champ by way of split decision .
 Attila the Hun, representing East Parker, dethroned the favored Cassius Marcellus of Roger Bill . Attila won the big bout, sending the title to Panda U. A standing room crowd witnessed Friday night's fight .
 An official paid attendance of one hundred and nine broke the previous mark of thirty-nine set last week . Cassius Cocky beat Cassius to a well-matched contest . An official attendance of over 100 and nine is breaking the old mark of 30-nine .
 The Rho Beta Phi Corp. followed shortly and introduced their champion Cassius, dressed in turquoise . Cassius is a member of the Phi Phi Kappa Kappa Kappa Phi .
 Attila Fearsome was defeated by Attila at 11:15 on Saturday night . The two teams went into their usual stalking tactics in the first half of the match . Attila and Attila took on each other for the first few minutes .
 Cassius finally threw the first punch, stunning the East Parker hopeful with a blow to the side . Cassius then threw a punch at the side of his opponent . The fight was the first of its kind for the first time .
 Cassius failed to land a punch in the first ten minutes as Attila failed to hit a punch . Cassius was all Cassius for the first 10 minutes of the match . Attila was the first to try and get Cassius back on his feet .
 Varsity Golf April 17 at Clark . April 18 at Tufts w/Bowdoin . April 19 at Lowell . April 23* at Colby . April 25 Babson April 26* Bowdoin April 29* Maine Mav 2* Colby 6 St. St. 6
 Thomas Brown '63 Coach: Robert W Hatch Varsity Tennis April 19 at Lowell . April 20 at St. Mary's College, Lowell .
 Verne Ullom proved to be waiting for the opportune moment, finally hitting Cassius with as vicious a blow as ever seen by this observer . James Corey '63 Manager: James E Steward '65 Coach: Verne E . Steward .
 The champ dove to the bottom of the ""bowl"" as Attila proudly ""swam"" away to a neutral corner . Attila swam away from Attila in the middle of the fight .
 The fight resumed after the unexpected delay and the fight resumed . The Hun controlled the action for the remaining forty minutes of the fight .
 Split Decision Judges Nick and Willy voted for Attila while Judge Ron saw Cassius the victor, thus account ing for the close split decision victory for the Hun .
 Student Salutes Cheerleaders; Jones, Milius Lead Retiring Six . Bates cheerleaders are retiring .
 Instilling school spirit is a hard job when your team is not winning consistently . School spirit is hard to instill when a team does not win consistently, coach says .
 The girls who have attempted to inject this spirit into the student body deserve a lot of credit . Although this is not always the situation at Bates, it has been at times at times, and the girls deserve credit .
 The ability to jump and yell are, prime requisites for a cheerleader, but the Bates cheerleader needs more than this to survive . Bates cheerleaders need to be able to jump, yell and yell .
 They are often subjected to tests more severe than those we face in the classroom . Students are often subject to more severe tests than those they face in classroom .
 A course in swimming might have been helpful to the gallant girls who waded through a treacherously wet football season .
 All of those who attended athletic contests this year are aware that our girls did a fine job under these trying conditions . Maintaining self composure while the ""Bowdies"" fire fire across Alumni Gym requires a special type of girL .
 The four women leaving Bates via the graduate route are led by this year's co-captains, Les Jones and Holly Milius . This year's team will be the first to graduate from the university . The women's team is ranked No. 1 in the world .
 "These girls deserve a lot of credit for their organization of practices and rallies," coach says . The girls are doing well in the U.S.
 Spring, along with its welbasis of the number of men in a dorm and would work on a percentage basis, would eliminate the large edge John Bertram Hall has over the rest of the men's abodes . Spring would eliminate that large edge the men have over the other dorm
 Recent intramural tourney action was centered in the handball courts of Alumni Gym . Handball is a part of the Alumni handball tournament .
 Happy Ed reached the finals after a violent semi-final match with Bates' own Golden Greek, Phil Tamis . Happy Ed beat Tamis in the semi-finals to reach the finals of the tournament .
 The Student Council spring series of Chase Hall tournaments is underway, featuring pool, billiards, cribbage, chess, bridge and ping pong . The Stu-C Tourneys is underway .
 Slick Dave Kramer is expected to give last year's pool finalists Tom Brown and Norm Gillespie a frantic encounter in the race for the college crown . Kramer will be the only person to beat Brown and Gillespie in the pool .
 Norm ""Perry White"" Gillespie and his pool opponent, Tom Brown, are the leading contenders again . Gillespie and Brown are playing pool opponents again in the Chess World Chess Championship .
 Corned weather has added its zest to our Bates College intramural activities . Al Williams looks real tough in the pingpong action .
 Intramural program offers a wide variety of diversion from study in our six remaining weeks . Competitive action featured by our intramural programs offers a variety of diversions .
 Dorm softball proweress is a topic of campus chatter as the athletic fields get ready for action . The dorms have a reputation for dorm softball .
 This year's softball league will be able to return to a regular league basis as opposed to last year's single elimination tournament . Last year's tournament was held in a single elimination game .
 Interdorm competition is down to neck to neck, down to the wire race this year . John Bertram Hall is leading the way in the competition this year and as usual campus monster .
 The boys from Dixie fight to take the intramural crown back to the ""Home of Champions"" after a year's absence . Decisive points will be hotly contested as Dixie take the title back .
 A pleasing innovation in intramural point awarding would certainly be a welcomed feature for Batesmen returning next fall . The Batesmen will return to campus next year for the first time .
 Seven new faces will appear as graduation and retirement thin cheerleaders . The squad's success I stands, cast and all, giving her the cast would not have been so great .
 Lesie Jones, a psychology major from Roesmont, Pa., enjoyed three years of cheering for the 'Cats . Lesie says she was a fan of the team, as did all of the seniors .
 She was pleased with this year's squad and especially enjoyed the challenge of cheering in the rain and snow this fall .
 Les hopes to find a job in social work in California . Les will trek across the country this summer with two cronies . Les says he hopes to be a social worker in California in the summer .
 Holly Milius, from Cranford, N. J., used her cheerleading activity as a lab for her major, speech . She is a major in speech studies .
 Holly will go to dancing school this summer and after completion of those studies hopes to work in Boston . Holly plans to go to dance school and after completing those studies she hopes to live in Boston.
 Holly also hopes that next year's squad will add a few cheers with a little more zip . Holly says she wants to see the team add a bit more zip to their cheerleading kit .
 She feels that the induction of acrobatics into the routines would help ""liven up" the performance and possibly promote better spirit . She feels the induction will help ""diven up"" the performance .
 Marjorie Lord, a psychology major from Bedford, Mass., was a valuable asset to this year's squad . She was a major major in psychology at the University of Massachusetts .
 The fourth senior is Judy Wendell, who comes from Fairfield, Conn., and is an English major . Wendell is a fourth senior at the University of Connecticut . She is a junior at UConn.
 Judy unfortunately missed much of the basketball campaign due to a broken leg . Judy missed much due to the broken leg during the campaign . Judy is a member of Team USA Basketball Hall of Fame .
 Paul Planchon '64 , Manager: Stephen Talbot '64 . Coach: Robert W Hatch at Norwich at Northeastern . At Middlebury Maine at Bowdoin at Colby DeWITT HOTEL Nearest the College 1 support to the other squad members .
 Two other members of this year's squad will be leaving Bates to face a challenge greater than cheerleading, namely marriage . The other two members of the squad will also be leaving the school .
 These girls did a fine job as cheerleaders and will be missed next year . They will be remembered for their cheerleading skills . The cheerleaders will also be missed for next year.
 Six girls deserve a cheer from the students for their fine efforts this year as well as those in the past .
 Wayne Corson, a history major, won the campus championship this past week . Corson's handball prowess on the handball court won him the school championship this week. Corson is the Bobcat of the week .
 A native of Lynn, Mass., Wayne proved himself too formidable for his opponents to handle . Wayne is an avid hunting and sailing enthusiast .
 Competing in an elimination tourney, Ed Rucci and Corson meet for the championship . The finals saw the pair meet in a championship match .
 Wayne Corson took the three games, 21-4, in three games . Rucci, himself an established player, was unable to cope with Corson .
 Peter Graves '63 Co-Captain: William LaVallee '63 Manager: Jonathan Peabody '64 Coach: Walter Slovenski '64 Hates Student fat Vol. Vol. Peter Graves “Co-Captain’s Co-captain’: Peter Graves
 Dr. Loomer Outlines Relation Of Religion To Colleges . Dr. Bates College, LEWISTON, MAINE, was a major college in Maine .
 Loomer, a Bates graduate, is a member of the American Theological Society, an Honorary Fellow in the National Council of Religion in Higher Education, and a . member of . the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People . People of African American descent .
 In 1954, he was elected an honorary member of Phi Beta Kappa in the Bates College Chapter . He was elected to be honorary member in 1954 .
 Loomer played football for four years and received his letter in the fall of 1933 . He played for four seasons and received a letter of honor .
 He was also on the wrestling team, hockey team, the Athletic Council, the YMCA board, and was an active debator . He also was also a member of the wrestling and hockey teams .
 Loomer was selected for the Sports Illustrated Silver Anniversary All-American football team . He played for the University of Washington in Washington State in 1964 .
 The original plan for a trimester system at Bates has been temporarily tabled . Dr. Healymester served as a member of the faculty of the Chicago Divinity School .
 Garold W Thumm is head of the Social Sciences Department and member of the special committee to consider accelered education . He is also a member of a special committee that considers accelebrated education .
 No action is being taken on the plan at the present time . While this plan has not been totally rejected, no action has been taken on it .
 Donovan Cites Age Of Paradox That Divides American Economy . Bernard M Loomer tution. Now being considered by Donovan . Donovan Cite Age of Paradox that Divides America .
 In 1954, he resigned his administrative positions to devote full time to teaching . In 1954 he became a teacher .
 Loomer's books are entitled Integrity, Community and Education and The Structure of the Christian Faith . Loomers' books include integrity, community and education .
 He is presently doing a great deal of lecturing in colleges and universities throughout the country .
 The Bates Oratorical Contest was held in the Little Theatre on the evening of April eleventh . Robert Ahern '64, who spoke on Capital Punishment, won .
 The judges were Dean Emeritus Rowe, Professor Whitbeck, and Professor Quimby . The judges included Professor Rowe and Professor Rowe .
 Prizes awarded were $40, $25, and $15 for first, second, and third places respectively . Prizes were awarded for first to second to third place .
 Mrs. Singh, visiting lecturer on India culture, will show and comment on her visit to India . She will be a guest lecturer at the University of Delhi .
 India's foremost land reformist, Vinoba Bhabe. practice tourney held at Colby on April twelfth .
 The negative team was composed of George Strait and Richard Rosenblatt . George Strait was the negative team .
 As this was a practice tourney, critical evaluations were substituted for total scores . Critical evaluations were substitued for total .
 Both of these teams will, compete in a debate tourney at Dartmouth on April twenty-seventh .
 Henry W Oakes Contest held in assembly on Monday . Thomas Brown '63 and Howard Blum '63 spoke on the role of the Supreme Court in the Henry W. Oakes contest .
 Professor Warye and two local attorneys of the Anddoscoggin Bar Association, Fernand Despins and Roscoe Fales, were the judges . The judges were also judges .
 John C Donovan, Special Assistant to the U.S. Secretary of Labor and a Bates graduate, spoke in chapel last Friday . Donovan is a graduate of the Bates College of Education .
 Donovan says the paradox of the U.S. economy is a hidden contradiction . Donovan: The paradox is that the United States economy is an economic paradox . Donovan says it is a paradox that the economy is not a perfect fit for a nation .
 One of the few indications of its presence can be found in military service statistics . The U.S. military has not been able to find out how many of its soldiers served in the military .
 Eight per cent of those who apply for participation in military service are rejected because they are illiterate . Almost half of those rejected because of their illiterate application are rejected .
 These men will experience great difficulty in finding employment of any kind; and they are not alone in their plight . These men are struggling to find employment .
 One America is composed of the comfortable families from which most Bates students come . Bates students came from comfortable families . The school is based in Washington, D.C.
 Leland P Bechtel awarded a grant by the National Science Foundation to attend a summer institute in Contemporary Scientific Psychology at Beloit College, Beloit, Wisconsin . The ""other"" America is a country of America .
 The six week institute is intended to acquaint the participants with the latest developments in their fields of special interest . The institute will feature speakers, reports on research projects, and discussions of mutual problems relating to the teaching of psychology on the college level .
 Mr Bechetel will be one of thirty participants selected from colleges and universities in the U.S. He will be part of a group of 30 selected participants .
 Mr Bechtel was graduated from Eastern Baptist College and holds a bachelor of divinity degree . He is a native of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and is a graduate of Eastern Baptist Theological Seminary .
 This mass poverty is invisible to most of us, since we have had little contact with the urban slums where this population lives, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Thirteen percent of those within the 14 to 19-year-old age group are its citizens . Thirteen per cent of those in the 14- to-19-year group are citizens . The city is the largest city in the country .
 The unemployment rate among colored people of the same age is even higher — twenty-one per cent . Unemployment rates for colored people are also high .
 Each year several hundred thousand youths join the ranks of the permently unemployed — to face life-long unemployment . Each year hundreds of thousands of youths join ranks of unemployed .
 To solve the unemployment problem, U.S. citizens must become indignant . United States citizens must be indignant, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This newest challenge to Americans is within our own country, the challenge of finding more jobs, of resolving, as Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. says .
 The bill as it stands contains no amendments concerning racial discrimination . The bill will not be amended to address the issue .
 Incoming freshmen would report to Bates approximately at the beginning of August for freshman orientation . Incoming students would report at Bates for orientation .
 The return of upperclassmen around Labor Day would mark the beginning of the first term . Upperclassmen would return to campus in September .
 The term would end in the middle of December and would be followed by a vacation ending approximately the second week in January . The second term would begin in January when the second term begins .
 A third term, or ""Healymester,"" would run from the beginning of May to June 25 .
 Among the points of the plan being discussed is whether attendance during the third term would be optional or required . The plan is being discussed whether or not attendance during a third term is optional .
 Students could take a regular course load of five courses for two terms or a reduced course load for three terms . If it were to be optional, students could take regular course loads of five or reduced course loads for three times .
 A student could attend all three terms with a full schedule of courses and graduate early . Conceivably a student could graduate early from the university .
 Also being discussed is whether this third term would be optional or compulsory for both students and professors . Students and professors would be required to take part in the third term .
 This is a major point of the plan and one of many which has the committee divided . The committee is divided on how the plan will be implemented .
 There is some question as to whether any changes to be made should be minimal or substantial . There is also some question about whether changes to the law should be substantial .
 The committee is faced with the question of the teaching load of the faculty under such a new plan .
 At present, Bates faculty members are required to teach 12 hours of courses per semester . The school requires faculty members to teach at least 12 hours a semester . At present it is required for 12 hours per semester.
 May-June ierm would mean six additional hours of courses per year for faculty members . The May-May-June increase would be a 25% increase for faculty .
 If the term is made required, then faculty members will have to be compenstated with salary increases . The term could be extended to the next five years .
 Honors Program Available In Major For Senior Year . There are many problems to TWO BATES STUDENT, APRIL 17, 1963 .
 Requirements are at least a 3.000 and a major average of 3.333 (freshman grades not counted), the recornmendation of the head of the department, and the approval of the committee on Honors Study .
 Joseph D'Alfonso, chairman of the honors department, answers questions about honors study . Joseph D’Alfondo: "Honors study is an important part of our curriculum"
 Persons should have competence in their studies and basic evidence is grades . Persons should be competent in studies and should be able to produce grades .
 It is conceivable that a person could be doing well only in one specialized area and do research in that area . It's conceivable that someone could do research only in that particular area .
 We have tried to bear in mind a total average in all subjects as desirable . During the last few years we have tried . to bear . mind . The average is desirable. During the past few years, the average was not as high as possible .
 There is a possibility for creative writing and for limited projects as well as extensive reading . However, there is a possible for creative work and limited projects . For more information, visit http://www.mailonline.co.uk .
 If as at other schools the honors program were a separate entity •replacing regular classroom work this, might be true . The honors program may be different from other schools .
 There is not evidence that honor students are penalized . However, the theme itself may be graded harder by the department head .
 The bulk of the students who qualify usually participate usually participate and usually follow through . "The bulk of those who qualify will usually participate," the principal says .
 It is advisable for a student to study during the summer before the senior year . It is also advisable for students to study in the summer .
 Professor has to guide one or more students in addition to his regular work . Actually it also entails more work for the department because of the department .
 You would probably have to separate an honors program from the regular study program . You would have to be separated from the honors program, says Drexler .
 You would either have to enlarge the faculty or have special student help . You would have to have to do it yourself .
 It would be a tremendous burden on professors under the present structure . The university would have to provide more funding for students to study .
 The grade average for qualifying has been lowered to compromise with those who desire more participation . Actually the grade average was lowered to accommodate those who want more participation, the coach says .
 There is a movement in this direction with year courses instead of one semester courses . There is also a movement for year-round courses in the U.S.
 Individual professors can hold students responsible for previous semester work if they desire . Individual professors may hold students accountable for previous work if necessary .
 Bates College awarded a grant by the National Science Foundation to conduct an In-Service Institute for secondary school teachers during the* academic year 1963-64 . Science Course Taught Here In '64
 The program will include work in Earth Sciences and Mathematics for science teachers . The program is under the direction of Dr. Dr. John Sutter, a former teacher at the University of Cambridge .
 Robert M Chute is chairman of the College's department of biology, geology and mathematics . Chute was chairman of biology and geology at the College .
 No college credit will be given for the program, but arrangements may be made for teacher certification credits with the State Department of Education .
 Applicants enrolled in the program will receive financial assistance through the terms of the grant . Applicants will be able to apply for the program .
 These meetings are held every Wednesday evening at 6:45m. in the basement of Roger Bill . The meetings are open to everyone .
 Committee Reports: Extra-Curricric Comm. (as to the term of office of the Business Manager of the STUDENT) was passed by this committee . Committee: Ritter, Strassburger, Rouault, Davis, Sherman, Gardiner, Campbell, Campbell .
 A continuation of the Publishing Association discussion will be carried on at a later date .
 Ahern and Dobson report that a program to explain the new Senate Constitution will take place in the near future . The program will answer questions about the new Constitution .
 Comm. Comm. Planchon reported that a meeting of the Freshman Orientation Week Committee yielded many worthy suggestions which will be passed on to proper administration authorities .
 Chapel Comm. — Brooks reported that he had been in to see Dean Healy in conjunction with the Chapel Program . Brooks said Healy is a good friend of the University of Virginia .
 The remainder of the meeting was taken up with proctor applicants for 1963-1964 . The meeting was held to discuss proctor applications .
 Finals are just far enough off to be forgotten without straining the mind . Finals are the time to forget about the season . Finals should be forgotten, but it's not too soon to be remembered .
 The Art Association will provide not only an exhibit, but what promises to be the best exhibit of student art in the history of Ivy Weekends . This year the small-but-growing Art Association is offering an exhibit of students' art .
 It is hoped that perhaps in the future this ""festival of art"" will be expanded to include all of New England .
 This is perhaps another way of saying that any bashful artists-in-hiding on this campus and on other campuses are invited to give the public a chance to see their work . The public is invited to see any of the artists' work .
 Those who have work which they would like to exhibit, or who have any questions regarding plans for this event might best see Linnell, or Bonnie Logie .
 Camp will interview men interested in summer positions as Counselors-in-Training Director, Village Director or General Counselors . Camp will also interview men who want to be part of the camp's staff . Camp is open to men as counselors and village directors .
 All interested students should sign up at the Guidance and Placement Office immediately . Students are encouraged to sign up for the program .
 Camp Speers (Dingman's Ferry, Pa., in the Pocono Mts.) has openings for men as Rifle Director, Nature Director, and General Counselors . Campspeers is located in Dingman Ferry, Pennsylvania .
 Women are needed as Crafts Director in Boys' Camp and General Counselors in Girls' Camp . Also, women are needed to be Crafts Directors in Boys and Girls' camps .
 Numerous other camp counseling vacancies, requiring that candidates take initiative and make written application, are also available .
 Further details and information about application procedures are available in the Placement Office .
 The birds are singing in the stately maples and elms, whose leafy boughs are swaying, swaying from mother nature . Mother nature is swaying in a big hello to us .
 Young couples line the walks of the campus, whispering sweet everythings to one another, hugging and hugging each other . Young couples often give one another a friendly kiss on the cheek on campus .
 "I could name countless people who have found life very beautiful — but that would be useless," says Oprah Winfrey . Winfrey: "Oh, I could name . countless people ... but that's useless"
 Every day I look in the paper and see where a new baby has been born — and each time I do this my hope and faith are renewed . Each time I look at the paper, I look to see where new babies have been born, she says .
 We often try to escape to the past or to the future — trying to forget . But so often we try to remember the past and the future, we can't forget it .
 I didn't say that — a wellknown poet did — but it is still just as true. "I didn't mean that, but it's still true. It's true," a well-known poet said, and it's true .
 Some wonderful friends have asked me to recommend some books which have influenced me in my philosophy . I hope you friends and neighbors won't mind if I do it right here . Some of these books have influenced my philosophy and I hope they will be published here .
 First off, I suggest Adam Bede by George Eliot to be followed up by some of Robert Frost's folksier poems .
 For those who like philosophy, I suggest some Jane Addams, or Ralph Emerson . Then, for those folks who like it, perhaps some Jane Adams, maybe some Ralph Emerson.
 Pride of the North Rob Players Supplement Local Movie Productions Support Rob Players . To laugh, perchance to dream awhile or to laugh, Rob Players will play .
 Members American Gem Society members American Gem society . CASH CHARGE B1 JET 73 Lisbon St. is available for purchase .
 The Ritz, Empire and Priscilla are the cultural standouts of Lewiston . Reptillicus, Creatures / r o m Outer Spqce, White Slave Ship are some of the fine films offered us during the year .
 The Christian Association was first to bring films to the Bates campus to help supplement our townie productions . Christian Association brought films to campus to supplement townie production .
 Robinson Players present fulllength feature films on campus . After construction of the Little Theatre, the Robinson Players took the job of presenting feature films .
 Films Well Received with only an occasional slip, the films presented have been very well received, espcially this year .
 There are several outstanding problems involved in trying to present a film series here on campus . The film series is being presented at the University of Columbia University .
 Rob Players have sold season tickets for the first time . The Rob Players are hoping to secure their place at the top of the league .
 Lewiston Orders to Take Out — Phone 2-3522 THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE of ALL TYPES widely, this year ranging as high as $125 a film . Lewiston orders to take out — Phone .
 Sometimes the most popular films are the least expensive films . The most expensive films are often the ones with the lowest budget .
 Rob Players are trying to find dates to show their films . Finding dates for the Rob Players is another problem they face .
 They must plan their programs only for nights on which there is no competition from other activities on campus . Students must also plan their activities for nights when there are no competition for other activities .
 The film committee does not ex pect to expand its eleven film schedule due to this difficulty in finding dates . The committee is unable to expand the eleven film schedules .
 Selection Process is difficult for the film committee to decide on the films to present . Selection process is also difficult, as well as the selection process .
 They receive a wide variety of catalogues each year listing hundrds of possibilities and describing each in glowing terms . Each catalogues lists a variety of possibilities each year .
 The committee added recommendations from the faculty to its own ideas . The committee also considered the faculty's recommendations .
 The film committee welcomes suggestions from the student body . The committee is attempting to please an audience with a variety of preferences .
 The object of the series is to present films on a somewhat higher plane than most of the movies shown in town, to be enjoyed by students and faculty alike .
 April first was a day of change for WRJR, as the new board members took office . April 1 was the first time WRJR had been in office .
 Of course, with new officers, you get a landslide of fresh ideas and hopes, says police chief . "Of course, new officers ... you get new ideas," he says .
 The new board will not be able to carry out all of its ideas, but a few are certainly going to be given a try, and will be of interest to campus .
 Station manager John David is very much in favor of more discussions held on the air to allow anyone who has anything to say be given a chance to speak . John David: "I'm very happy to hear what people have said about me. I'm glad to hear that people have a
 John also hopes to have an overall trend in programming which fits the description of the station, that is, a non-commercial educational station . John also wants to have a trend of programming which fit the description . John says he hopes to see more educational programming .
 Dick Dow, program director, has got his work cut out of him in filling vacant spots in programming, left by seniors . Dick Dow says he's got a lot of work to do to fill the vacant spots .
 Dick hopes to keep up the quality of music played on WRJR . He hopes to make various improvements in programming as a whole .
 Bruce Cooper is going to be busy keeping us on the air, along with Dan Clarke keeping us in the black . Bruce Cooper and Dan Clarke will be keeping us out of the black for the next week .
 Marty Ryan is now and always will be looking for any girls interested in secretarial work for the station . Marty Ryan has been looking for a secretarial job for years .
 A few major changes have been and will be occurring in the public relations department . A few of the major changes are expected to occur in the department .
 We are hopeful that the various organizations on campus will use our facilities to publicize upcoming events . We are also hopeful that we will be able to use the facilities to promote events .
 All major organizations have already been notified of the possibilities we offer, says public relations manager . "All major organizations are already aware of what we offer," she says .
 As for the rest of the year, a look at up-coming shows seems worthwhile . The rest of 2014 seems to be a good start to the year .
 Insight, with Sieve Adams, is going to be concerned for a couple of weeks with senior theses . Insight will be concerned with a number of theses in the next two weeks . Insight is concerned for the safety of the students and their safety .
 Steve is hoping to get some of the government and history majors to discuss their topics on the air, Tuesday at ten at ten . Steve hopes to get them to talk about their various topics .
 The On Campus show will be featuring its usual interesting guests on Monday nights at 10 p.m. ET .
 WRJR is a weekly radio station from WRJR . To find out about other shows on WRJR, I recommend that you watch the bulletin boards and also stay tuned .
 The result was that Alabama inflicted an earth-shaking defeat on Georgia, 35-0, whereas, according to the betting, Alabama should have won by only 14 to 17 points . The result of the result on September 22, 1962, was that .
 The article was embellished by photographs of the great educators involved, including one showing Wally leading the Georgia squad in a locker-room prayer . Wally led the Georgia team to a locker room prayer .
 Investigation by Attorney General Eugene Cook of Georgia uncovered amazing facts . Investigation was conducted by the Attorney General of Georgia . Governor Carl E Sanders of Georgia was also involved .
 Wally indignantly denied that these calls had anything to do with the topic in which these persons were allegedly interested . Wally denied that the calls had any of the topics in which they allegedly interested were those allegedly interested in . Wally says the calls were not related to the topic of the calls .
 In Detroit, Chicago and other points on the professional football circuit, there are ugly rumors concerning associations between players and gamblers . In Detroit and Chicago, players are accused of being involved in illegal gambling .
 But in the Southland, the magnolias are blooming, and spring should not be defiled by sordid thoughts .
 Sports lovers will continue to believe that all is for the best in the best of all possible worlds, especially in Georgia .
 Peter d'Errico '65, Editor; John Holt '64, Robert Borland '66, Dennis Hill '66 . Granville Bowie '66' Richard Derby '66; Richard Derby' '66: Richard Derby, Richard Derby .
 David A Nelson Faculty Advisor published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, during the college year . He is a faculty member at Bates College .
 "To grow in self-mastery and personal depth, to develop wider and deeper appreciation, to acquire an enthusiasm for hard work," says CLIFF GOODALL '65 .
 It seems apparent that the administration and faculty of Bates are concerned about the future of the college and its continuing function as an institution of learning . It seems obvious that the college is concerned about its future .
 This writer regretfully thinks that Bates is definitely standing still, with no immediate progress in sight . This writer regrets that Bates has not been able to make progress in his career .
 Evidence of this can be found in the decrease of applications which cannot be explained by birthrates alone, decreasing interest in cultural events and lectures, decreasing participation in academic work outside of the classroom .
 It will only serve to aggravate the present problems and send Bates further down its path to mediocrity . Bates will not be able to compete in the top flight again .
 The financial burden of parents will be greatly exaggerated with the decline of student earnings . Parents will have to deal with the burden of having to pay for their children's education .
 With accelerated academia Bates would become even more of a sterotyped middle class factory of middle class thinkers, who could afford it . Bates would be even more popular with middle-class thinkers .
 Even the oft-cited advantage of early graduate school entrance must be seriously criticised . Grad School Entrance is criticised for being too early .
 The product of a three year college (and he is simply a ""product"") will be at a disadvantage in any graduate school and later in life . "Product" is simply "product" of a college student .
 "He will be a less mature, less experienced processor of unassimulated knowledge," he said . He will be less mature and less experienced .
 He will be just another regretable example of our materialistic culture, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It is obvious that these criticisms are based on the assumption that any three year program would be compulsory . It's obvious that some of the criticisms are not based on a three-year program . The U.N. program is not compulsory, it is a free education program .
 My last criticism concerns the ideal nature of a college such as Bates is ideal . Bates College is a college with a purpose of purpose .
 This ideal function is to bring students and men of learning together in a community where the students wish to learn and the scholars want to teach . The ideal function of the school is to be a community of learning, not just students .
 It should always exist for the sake of knowledge and never for the production of marketable skills . It should never be for profit, it should be for knowledge, not for marketability skills .
 The administration should always be subservient to the faculty and students in realizing this ideal . The university should always strive to achieve the ideal of subservience to students .
 President Obama has proposed changes to the White House's immigration policy . He says the changes could be dangerous to the public . The White House has been criticized for the proposals .
 The need for changes at Bates is obvious, but the needed change is not acceleration which gives too much, too soon, too fast . As expressed in the introduction of the introduction, the need for change is obvious . The need to be changed is obvious but not too soon too fast,
 "Personal depth, wider and deeper appreciation, and intellectual curiosity" will need not be enhanced, but subsumed, by accelerated education at Bates . Personal depth and wider appreciation will not need to be enhanced by accelerated learning .
 No more will one endure the runny-nose nuzzle and the foursweaters-and-a-topcoat hug . The four-sweaters and a topcoat hug is no longer acceptable .
 Somehow tender words lack the spirit of the occasion when gasped out through furiously chattering teeth . The film is set to be released on Blu-Ray at the end of October .
 Gone will be the once familiar sight of couples marching arm in arm around Prexy's Puddle trying to keep warm .
 Finally the little townie kids can cease their tireless vigil from behind the rocks on Mt. Olympus . Finally, they can finally be released from behind rocks on the mountain .
 Committee iron out before any definite plan is submitted to the President and Trustees . Committee will iron out final details before submitting to President, Trustees' approval . Committee is working on a plan to submit to the president and trustees .
 If a plan can be submitted before commencement of this year and action taken on it, then it would be put into effect as -of August 1964 .
 If action is not taken before commencement, the plan would be put off another year . The plan would have to be completed by the end of the year .
 Four Quadrangle Thoughts by TAM NEVILLE '66 . "Winter follow me From the wind swoop of snow Made to go In a hollow Without sound Around The bottom of a tree"
 "Straight and proud They reach Without a scarf of green To wave In gold and free" " Straight and proud"
 Spring I have a secret with the top of a tree, It tells itself Just for me. Spring I'm not sure what it tells itself just for me, but I'm sure it's a secret .
 Night The trees Spun a spider web Around the moon And held it Like a cacoon In cris-crosses of wood, Held it To a tiny Wood ticking tune .
 The award is part of the Company's continuing program of aid to selected leading liberal arts institutions .
 Phillips, ""is a major factor in stimulating educational growth and development," says Phillips . Phillips. Phillips: "Education stimulation stimulating educational growth growth and development"
 Here's to our great God baseball, And the sound of the crashing Ash; The wing of the horsehide spheroid, And our players .
 A toast to our Garnet team fans, Is what I propose to you; The Leaheymen of Pious U. Have got the guts of few. A toast is to Garnet fans . A toast .
 To the nebbish Holt And his stops at short, For the Woolen man, Our centerfield cop. Holt .
 The song of Long Thorns' fast ball As it hits our Mackys' mitt . And to rookie Johnny Yuskis, A star that heaven lit. The song .
 For our hustling Billy And his playmate Arch, Arch; And to our Buddy Munroe We offer our glass. We offer ourselves a glass of honor .
 A drink for Tiger Ronny, The leader of the blast; And to you, Red, The shots that only Ruth could cast. Red . Red .
 A salute to our Polish pitcher, Possessor of an amazing curve, And our tough little catcher Stevie, With his cool and iron nerve . Stevie .
 Here's luck to you, Bobcat baseball, The spawn of an Irish mind . A bed of thorns for your statey foes, And roses in the springtime for the Garnet hose .
 Come out and see the ballgames this spring, if just to see this year's baseball season .
 Monty Woolson's game-ending grab in Medford proves he is one of the best around . Woolson is a defensive baseball player who has a reputation for his defensive play .
 The Bates Bobcats made a rousing start last week to the northern part of their 1963 baseball schedule with two impressive victories over Massachusetts teams .
 On Thursday at Medford, Bates clipped Tufts 3-0, and followed up this win with an 11-5 pounding of American International on Friday at Springfield . Bates also beat American International 11-4 on Friday .
 Pitching, hitting, and fielding were more than adequate in both games, and occasionally bordered on the spectacular .
 The outlook continues to be very bright, and less than a week remains before the home season opens next Monday with Lowell Tech at Garcelon Field . M.I.T. will play in Cambridge on Saturday .
 Thorn Freeman stopped the Jumbos cold with a four-hit shutout against Tufts .
 The game started off as a pitchers' duel between Freeman and Jumbo hurler Wally Wadman . Bates sent only seven batters up in the first two innings of the game .
 Paul Holt opened the third with a walk, and Freeman's drag bunt single put two men on . Freeman also scored a run of two runs for Holt .
 John Yuskis I slugged a triple to drive both Freeman and Woolson across the plate . After a strikeout, and a grounder by Monty Woolson forced Holt at third for the second out . The freshman second baseman hit a triple .
 Freeman scored two runs in the first half of the game . He was also helped out by two double plays started by Holt at shortstop .
 Ron Taylor socked one of Wadman's offerings for a tremendous home run to left in the seventh inning to ice the Bobcat victory .
 Bates had beaten Tufts for the first time in several years . Lewiston tiful catch of a fly ball to center field to give Bates a victory .
 Freeman had another single to go with his bunt . Other hits were made by Bill Davis, Bud Spector, and Bud Holt .
 Bates bats boomed their loudest of the young season, as they pounded out twelve hits, including four triples . Teddy Krzynowek made it easy for the A.I.C. team to win the game . The Bates bats were the loudest in the season
 The little Mosquito had a five-run lead before he even took the mound in the first inning . He had a 5-0 lead before the game started .
 Davis opened the game with a single, and Woolson duplicated, moving Davis to second . Woolson doubled the lead in the second inning .
 Yuskis' grounder hit Woolson on the baseline for the first out . Woolson got credit for a single for the out . The game was tied 1-1 at the start of the game .
 Howie Vandersea hit a roller which was thrown away by the second baseman, scoring Davis with the first Bates run . Bates won the game 3-2 in the first innings .
 Taylor and catcher Steve Egbert followed with back-to-back triples, and the score was 4-0 . Taylor and Egbert were both on the way to the top of the game .
 Liberal Arts graduate can get a Master of Arts degree in one year . In one year you can qualify as a teacher of science or mathematics in the elementary school .
 Bates scored what proved to be the winning run in the second frame . Woolson tripled and scored on a fly ball by Yuskis . The Aces had scored one run in their half of the first .
 Krzynowek was hit solidly for eleven safemarkers by A.I.C. but had the necessary stuff in the clutch . Krznowek had the ability to get back to the top of the pile .
 Bates' continued strong hitting kept the Aces from getting back into the game after the first inning . Bates continued to hit well for the team . The Aces were unable to get back to the game .
 Yuskis had a perfect day with three for three, and Davis, Woolson, Egbert, and Holt had two hits each . Davis and Woolson got two hits .
 Coach Chick Leahey was very pleased with his team's showing . Coach Chick was also pleased with the performance .
 All phases of its play were more than adequate, he said, mentioning two factors which stood out in his mind .
 The first was the perfect defensive execution of the Bobcats . Defense will again be a big strongpoint for Bates, as it was last season .
 The second thing pointed out by Leahey was the depth shown on the trip . The depth of the trip was also shown by the team, he said .
 Archie Lanza, regular third baseman, was left home with a sprained ankle . Davis, normally an outfielder, did a fine job in his place . Spector, Woolson, and Taylor handled outfield duties very capably .
 Steve Egbert, replacing Bill MacNevin behind the plate in the second game, had two hits in the game . The game was the first of two in two days .
 Leahey said, was all the more impressive in that he was pitching into a thirty-five mile an hour wind, which ordinarily is tough on a pitcher's control . The pitcher pitched into a 30-mile-an-hour wind .
 Bates must be rated a definite favorite to win the State Series, and nothing has been shown on the two-game trip to change this belief .
 The Bobcats bid for the State Series title in 1963 . The team should have a solid team and eight home games at Garcelon Field .
 I know the substitute columnists that made a vain attempt at writing were not of my superior ability . They did as best they could with the mental equipment they possessed . I know it was not of any superior ability but they did as well as best possible .
 Smith North leads the ""Bluecoats"" of Smith North leading the ""A"" league contingent . The boys that came out of the John (Bertram) that is in the driver's seat in ""B"" league competition .
 There were three contests held in the ""A"" league last week .
 Jack Williams put down his beercans for a couple of hours and led his squad to their crashing defeat . Jack Williams led his side to a crushing defeat in the Premier League clash .
 They either were so stupid as to forget they had a match or, to use Freudian terminology, they are fixated at the anal stage of their personality development .
 The Smith South defeated Roger Williams Hall by a 3-0 margin of victory . The ""B"" league action saw the Smith South defeat the ""Dixie Cups"" of Roger Williams South .
 John Curtis interrupted his bridge game to lead the boys from S.S. to victory . Curtis led the boys to victory in the boys' first game of the season .
 It is interesting to note that this is the third straight time the "pandas" have failed to show up . This is the 3rd straight time they have not shown up .
 If there were more 'dimey nights' at the very lovely Larger A.C., the ""Teddy Boys"" would have enough money to play the sport .
 Soloman's Soloman II squad led by ""Stuppy"" Soloman defeated the West Parker team 3 to zip. II squad . Soloman won 3 zip matches .
 Win, lose, or draw, though, each contender will receive a trophy for his efforts . The winner of the game will be awarded a trophy after the game .
 From Smith Middle emerge two contenders, a heavyweight and a welterweight . Heavyweight and lightweight contenders, respectively, face off in the middle of the ring .
 In the heavyweight division is one of Bob Hatch's burly gridsters who also proved effective in the clutch for Vern Ullom's basketball squad . The heavyweight gridster is also a member of the team's basketball team .
 The second half of the Middle contingent from the headwaters of the Androscoggin, Rumford, is Jim ""Hawk"" Stewart .
 A Sportslight highlights the women's annual ping pong tournament . The tournament was held at the University of Maryland's women's basketball team .
 The tourney was organized through the efforts of Miss Judy Bradshaw . The event is being held in honor of the former Miss Judy .
 A field of twenty hopefuls opened action this week with the tourney's first round play scheduled for completion by April twelfth . First round play is due to be completed by April tenth .
 Several coeds emerged as serious title contendrs .
 A fact also significant in one respect is that the contenders are all senior girls . All senior girls are in the running for the title .
 This may be due to the fact that the facilities for ping-pong are readily available in the Union, home of many seniors .
 Further results are expected next week when the girls head for the cellars of the Union and Chase Hall . Bob Hatch's football squad are also members of the team .
 Grant ""Gaylord"" Farquhar shows promise of being a fast puncher and a real mixer . He is, of course, a young man who has a lot of promise .
 The ""four"" may currently be seen in their daily drills in the men's athletic building, and if you happen to be up at 6:00 , you might catch a glimpse of their road work .
 These men are very enthusiastic regarding their efforts against local contenders . I'm sure they would appreciate some support from the Bates campus .
 Junior Paul Holt is the slick-fielding, hardhitting shortstop for Coach Chick Leahey's Garnet baseballers . Holt was selected as this week's Bobcat of the Week .
 Paul was a unanimous selection by the STUDENT sports staff and his fellow players . Paul was the unanimous selection . Paul is a senior at the University of Wisconsin .
 Tufts and A.I.C. won over the past week's games . The Tufts wins were fanastic . Tufts has a reputation for being the best in college football .
 Holt handled twenty-two chances at his shortstop position, all in the errorless grace that so typifies Holt's performance . Holt handled 22 chances at shortstop position .
 Silent Paul ignited two Garnet double play combinations . Silent Paul lit up the Garnet triple play combinations. Silent Paul was the star of Silent Paul's silent music video .
 Holt poked three hits through opposing fielders, one a solid smash that went for three bases . Holt is one of the Bobcats' top three players in the field .
 UNIV. of Combine summer study and recreation in the stimulating climate of one of our country's finest vacation regions . FREE REGISTRATION NOW for SEPTEMBER VACANCIES ATTEND SUMMER SESSIONS .
 Excellent opportunity for teachers and undergraduates to earr college credits during summer vacation . College credits can be earned during summer vacations .
 Three-WEEK SESSION SESSION, June 17 — July 5 - July 5, July 5 . Six-week summer session, July 8 — Aug. 8, August 8 . Summer session is the first summer session in 1963 .
 Salisbury will deal with the need for recasting America's foreign policy to meet the threat of rising Communist aggression in Asia, the Cuban challenge, and weakening bonds in the Western security alliances .
 Salisbury believes that the United States will be able to meet the Communist offensive only by bold, realistic formulation of dynamic new programs under appealing leadership . Salisbury: U.S. must meet the . Communist . offensive only .
 Salisbury won the Pulitzer Prize for excellence in foreign reporting . Salisbury has written several books about his experiences, the most recent being A New Russia?
 In the same year, he published his first novel, The Northern Palmyra Affair . He has also published a number of other novels, including a novel about Palmyra in Palmyra .
 Salisbury, thought ""overzealous"" for the college paper, began work for the United Press in Chicago upon graduating . Salisbury was thought to be overzealous for his paper, but began working for the paper in Chicago .
 He covered the end of the gang wars of the Prohibition era, Capone's trial for tax evasion, and the assassination of Senator Huey Long . He also covered end of end of gang wars, trial of Al Capone, and assassination of Sen. Huey .
 Judge Donald A Webber of the Maine Supreme Court spoke on the ""Role and Function of the Courts"" before Citizenship Lab last Thursday . During World War II, Webber became London Mana during WWII . Webber was a POW in London during the war .
 The purpose of the Court is to preserve the personal rights granted to individuals by the Constitution . Judge Webber is an honorary graduate of the class of '62 .
 These rights, based as they are on written codes, must be continually interpreted by the courts . These rights must be constantly interpreted by courts, says the author of the law .
 The District Court will replace the less inclusive Municipal Court, which currently concerns itself with minor violations of law . The Municipal Court is currently concerned about minor violations .
 The Probate Court handles such matters as adoptions and wills, and the Supreme Court, which has no jury or witnesses, will continue their duties . The Supreme Court has six judges who make the decisions and is the highest state court .
 Director of European Coverage, reported the Big Four meeting in Teheran, Iran, Iran .
 In 1944, the journalist made his first trip to Russia, and since then he has made many extensive trips through the Soviet Union .
 Communists are building in ""forbidden"" Central Asia — the most extensive trip ever made by any foreigner to this area . Even in Czarist days, the area was sealed off from the outside world . Communists building in 'forbidden' Central Asia .
 Rob Players Produce Shakespeare's Play by Barbara H.H. '63 . Rob Players produce Shakespeare's play .
 Bates Little Theater opens Hamlet's opening performance at the Bates Little Theatre . Hamlet is a play from Shakespeare's classic, Hamlet . The audience grows still as Hamlet opens .
 The report proved false, but as it did not specify which building was aflame, the fire trucks were required to cruise the campus in search of the alleged conflagration . Fire trucks were needed to search the campus .
 The contestants drew three topics apiece from current events in the past two months . They selected one of the three topics each for a speech . The contestants chose one topic from each other and selected one for the speech .
 Each participant had a holf hour to compose a speech of five to seven minutes . Each participant was given an hour to write a speech .
 President Charles F Phillips outlined some of the more prominent problems facing the Bates administration and the student body in general . Phillips discussed the state of the college in Chapel last Friday . Phillips: "I'm not going to give up on what I think the future of college is."
 Phillips explained the forthcoming policy regarding a decrease in admissions for the 1963-1964 academic year . Phillips explains the forthcoming admissions policy . Phillips also explained the new admissions policy for the next year's freshman class .
 Phillips, "have caused us to look with concern at our admissions policy," says Phillips . Phillips . The admissions policy has caused "concerns" at the school, including concerns about the school's admissions policy .
 Phillips went on to cite the work done by the faculty and the student committees regarding a year round schedule of academic attendance . Phillips said the work was done by faculty and student committees . Phillips cited the work of the faculty .
 Phillips feels that there will be a change in the current schedule within the foreseeable future . Phillips says that there is a change to the current system within the future .
 Phillips encouraged student participation in requesting suggestions on the subject from the student body . Phillips encouraged students to request suggestions from the school body in general .
 Noteworthy also in the president's talk was a tribute to the late George W Lane, for fifty years a friend and benefactor of Bates College . The late Lane was a friend of the college for 50 years .
 Lane served both as secretary of the board of trustees and treasurer of the college . Lane was a vital segment in the financial picture of the institution . Lane served as treasurer and secretary of trustees .
 All of the problems inherent in producing this play, one of Shakespeare's most difficult, have been met and overcome . The play is one of the most difficult to produce, with a cast cast and crew .
 Many students have heard Tod sing, and it is the musical quality of his voice which adds immeasurably to his performance . Tod's voice is the voice of a student at the University of Cambridge .
 Due to Tod's sensitivity for the character he is creating, the audience can expect a noteworthy performance . Due to the sensitivity of the character, Tod is expected to perform well .
 Supporting Tod are Abby Palmer as his mother, the Queen of Denmark, and Skip Butler as his uncle, the new king . Abby Palmer also plays his mother as the new queen of Denmark .
 Judith Mosman, David Kramer and John Holt portray the family of Ophelia, Laertes and Polonius . The play is set in New York City, New York .
 John's rendition of the bumbling busybody adds comedy to the play . Judy's stirring enactment of the well-known mad scenes adds tragic depth to the production .
 Tod and David have spent many hours working out this realistic and exciting duel under the tutelage of George Orestes of Auburn . Tod, David and David will be able to compete at the end of the year .
 Loomer is a Bates graduate, a member of the American Theological Society, an Honorary Fellow in the National Council of Religion in Higher Education . He is also a National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and a National ACLU member .
 Tradewinds folk music will be heard in the Chase Hall Ballroom May 4 . The band will be playing folk music .
 Tickets are $1.25 apiece and on sale beginning tonight in the dinner lines at Rand and Commons . Tickets are available at Rand & Commons in New York .
 An advance sale is imperative to the success of this program, the first of its kind to be sponsored by the Chase Hall Dance Committee . Chase Hall dance committee sponsors the event .
 None of the Tradewinds was discovered hiding under a rock in Peru; none has ever been a truck-driver; and none has sideburns . None has been in a truck or a truck; none is a truck driver .
 They also appeared at the Williamsport Jazz Festival where they won top honors competing against many Eastern colleges .
 The Tradewinds don't regard themselves as folk-singers in the accepted sense of the word . They don't think they're folk-singer in any accepted sense .
 "They don't disappear into the hills with a tape recorder and then emerge a couple of weeks later with a complete repertoire," says Bob Greene . Greene .
 They take a song, either old or new, and adapt it to their style, usually in a contemporary motif . Rather they take an old song or new and adapts it to a modern style .
 The following minutes were taken at last week's Student Council meeting . Between the four of them they Hp Two Bates STUDENT, April 24, 1963 .
 Further discussion of Outing Club recommendations will continue next week .
 Orientation Committee Report was submitted by Susan Smith, and discussed . Susan Smith also discussed .
 Chase Hall Comm. — Dobson reported that the Chase Hall Tournaments and Smoker will occur on May 14th . Dobson also reported that Chase Hall . Tournaments will be held at Chase Hall in May .
 Aikman moved that pin-boys be made available by the Council for the bowling contests . If interested in a pin-boy, for monetary gain, see Councilman Dobson .
 Extra-Curric Comm. requested the Friday night after Thanksgiving for a Council night . Campus-at-Large wanted to provide some sort of entertaining enjoyment for Campus-At-Large .
 The rebuilding of the roof of Smith Hall will be undertaken during the coming summer . Dr. Aikman '65, Secretary -Treasurer Smith To Be Renovated This Summer .
 The current flat roof will be replaced with a pitched roof similar to that on the other college buildings . As part of the rebuilding project the parapet surrounding the present roof will also be removed .
 It is expected that the new roof will permit improved drainage and snow removal as well as minimize maintenance problems . The new roof is expected to be used to reduce maintenance problems in the city .
 Design of the structure has been the work of the college architect, Alonzo J Harriman and Associates of Auburn . The contract has been awarded to the Paul B McClellan Co., Inc., of Portland .
 History Of Bates Provides Understanding Of College JUNIORS . Don't forget the meeting in Skelton Lounge tonight from 7-9. Don't get ready for tonight's meeting .
 Come and chat with the veterans of this year's business and grad school interviews here at Bates College .
 Bates College is celebrating its one hundredth birthday in the 1963-1964 college year . The doors of Hathorn Hall opened for the first class of Maine State Seminary on September 1, 1857 . Bates College has existed continuously as an educational institution since 1857.
 The Seminary, ""a school of high order or grade somewhere between a College and an Academy,"" had been conceived by a Free-Will Baptist minister and one-time teacher .
 Its material resources when classes started consisted of the newly completed Hathorn Hall, an unfinished dormitory, Parker Hall, and twenty acres of land donated by the Franklin Company of Boston .
 Citizens of Lewiston and Auburn had given $15,000 to start the school . State legislature had granted $5,000 in cash and $10,000 for script to start school .
 Whether President Cheney had originally intended that Maine State Seminary should become a college no one really knows . Cheney's original intent was to create a college, but no one knows why .
 There is evidence that this was his goal, but that he decided to promote the new venture as a seminary . There would have been a great deal of opposition to a new college, since Bowdoin and Colby already existed . Many of the Free Will Baptists felt that higher
 The college was named for Benjamin E Bates, a Boston businessman who had a substantial interest in the local textile mills . The college is named for the businessman who owned a large stake in local textile milles .
 Maria Wheelwright Mitchell was the first woman to receive a diploma from the college in 1869 . The college was co-educational from the beginning .
 Charter Day will be celebrated with a community testimonial dinner on January 18 next year . In view of the assistance that local people gave to get the college started, it is appropriate that Charter Day should be celebrated .
 Tradewinds play a variety of instruments, including guitars, banjoes, mandolins, conga and bonga drums . They also play conga drums, banjo, mandolin, guitars and banjo drums .
 There are 4,000 Peace Corps opportunities in forty-four countries . The Peace Corps is based in the United States and Canada . There are more than 4,500 opportunities in the Peace Corps .
 Children's Cancer Research Foundation in Boston has two positions open for full-time, permanent chemical research assistants . Chemical research assistants are needed for children's cancer research .
 The research program is mainly involved with the synthesis of new organic substances as potential anti-cancer agents . The program is based on synthesis of organic substances that could be used to develop new cancer treatments .
 The laboratories are located in the Jimmy Fund Building adjoining Children's Hospital and the Harvard Medical School . The Jimmy Fund building is located adjacent to Children's hospital and Harvard Medical school .
 The Colby-Bates-Bowdoin Educational Telecasting Corporation owns and operates WCBB Channel 10 . Sabattus St Coles Succeeds Phillips As President of WCBB .
 James S Coles, President of Bowdoin College, named President of the ETV group, to succeed President Charles F Phillips . Coles will succeed President Phillips, who will succeed him .
 The WCBB president's presidency shall rotate among the three college presidents . The remaining two college presidents shall serve as vice presidents .
 Other officers elected at WCBB's annual Board of Trustees Meeting in Augusta were Ralph Williams, Administrative Vice President of Colby, to serve as Secretary and Glenn R Mclntire, Bowdoin's Assistant Treasurer, to act as treasurer for the ETV corporation .
 Channel 10's assistant treasurer will be Thomas M Libby, Bursar of Bowdoin College . Channel 10 will be the first Channel 10 to have a full budget .
 The business offices of WCBB will continue to be located in Chase Hall on the Bates College campus . WCBB's business offices will be located on the campus of Bates College in Batesville .
 Channel 10's unique joint ownership by three independent liberal arts institutions is serving as an example to colleges and universities everywhere of the advantages of close academic cooperation . Channel 10 is serving to be an example of how it can be a model for colleges everywhere, says the author .
 Outing Club invites guests to its annual Spring Spruce Up to be held at Thorncrag and Sabattus cabins .
 Anyone interested should be in back of West Parker at one o'clock . If he has a means of transportation available, it would be appreciated . Anyone interested can be in the back of the West Parker .
 Three Passion And Intensity Prevent Hamlet From Taking Action . Hamlet is being shipped off to England by the king whom he wants to kill in revenge .
 Hamlet's inability to consummate his revenge appears to be the concern of the play . The response to this question is the question Hamlet is to answer .
 The most elucidating approach to the play, therefore, seems to lie in an understanding of Hamlet's problem . Hamlet is not the only problem Hamlet faces, but it is a problem .
 In the course of the play we are given those elements of Hamlet's personality and temperament most important in explaining his actions . Attempt To Understand Hamlet: Hamlet is Hamlet .
 He has the passion and intensity of students and youth, though they are directed more to a student's idealism than to the action of, say, a Claudius . He has a passion for idealism, but it's more to the idealism of a student than to a Claud
 This is illustrated in his attempt to understand and do the right thing, to act in the light of truth . This was illustrated by his attempts to understand the truth and act in light of it .
 The death of his father shocked him, but his state was intensified with the almost immediate remarriage of his mother . His mother remarried him almost immediately after the death .
 A distraught son's mind could easily construe something rotten in this state of affairs . The son's father is a father of a son of a woman who has been married for more than 20 years .
 With the entrance of the ghost, therefore, suspicions of foul play are validated . The so-far dormant suspicions have been validated by the ghost .
 He thereby gives his vengeance the second thought which changes the emotion into a more intellectual consideration, retribution, retribution . The author of the novel "Revengevenge" is not satisfied with the idea of retribution .
 The author's concern with the problem before him reaches philosophic proportions . The novel is about an idealistic student who is concerned with the problems before him .
 The spirit I have seen T' assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps Out of my weakness and my melancholy, As he is very potent with such spirits, Abuses me to damn me. As he was very potent .
 If his occulted guilt Do not itself unkennel in one speech It is a damned ghost that we have seen And my imaginations are foul As Vulcan's stithy. And my imagination is foul. If he is guilty, he is not guilty of murder, he's
 The development of the vengeance motif from emotion to intellect causes Hamlet's initial doubt that the king is guilty . Hamlet begins Hamlet in the playwright's version of the play .
 The problem that accompanies this is his inability to act in the face of his belief in the truth of the king's guilt . The problem is that he is not able to act because he believes in his belief .
 Peter Gomes '65 officiated at the Second Annual Close Harmony Concert in the Alumni Gymnasium . Not So Close Harmony Results From Generally Good Concert .
 Last year, there were six different groups which provided a full evening . But trying to stretch last Saturday evening's program to two hours plus, made the concert somewhat lacking in variety of material and treatment .
 Dirigos: The World is vals and excellent phrasing . Colcongervative but beautifu] byettes: He's Gone Away, You off Qf L m Sun which Go to My Head, Garden in the Rain, Garden In the Rain . Dirigo:
 The Wheatones' rendition of Danny Boy did manage to escape the average, overromantic treatment this song usually gets . I would also single out for individual acclaim the Wheatones .
 The double quartet from Waterville managed, among other notorious achievements such as When Sunny Gets Blue, to make Lullaby of Birdland sound completely new and refreshing .
 The Dean's Men, also, sounded better than usual on Lonely Nights in Paris . Waiting for the Sunrise, Stormy Weather, Love is the Sweetest Thing lacked sparkle .
 The Colbyettes' treatment t of Black is the Color was quite impressive, employing wide inter inter interiors .
 Tad Lloyd's solo was "made" by Tad Lloyd . Maine's dollar was well spent .
 A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family . Our Experienced Trust Department will work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind .
 American Gem Society members American Gem society . Members are members of the American Gem Club .
 Lewiston and enterprises of great pitch and moment lose the name of action . Lewiston: "With this regard their currents turn awry"
 Hamlet speaks to the Norwegian captain and learns that men are going to fight even against ridiculous odds . Hamlet's inability to act foiled yet more painfully in the instance of the players, their concern for the fate of persons not even connected with them .
 He sails for England and one cannot forsee that he'll ever take his revenge, except when pushed to a point at which he can only act impulsively . One can't predict that he will ever take revenge, only when pushed for it .
 In the final scene this happens to him. and it seems almost an accident that the king dies . It certainly doesn't seem the result of a wellplanned scheme .
 Six people were killed in the death of the one murderer, instead of one, in the shooting . The suspect was found guilty of shooting six people in the head, police say .
 Throughout the play Hamlet is restrained from action by his own contemplative mind . Tragedy throughout the play is Hamlet's attempt to save his life .
 As a student he is more dominated by the intellectual considerations of his action than by the simple impetuous fulfillment of revenge, as Laertes is, in contrast . The writer is dominated by intellectual considerations as a student .
 Hamlet, by virtue of his temperament, is unable to act, and thus the tragedy, not only of Hamlet . Hamlet's temperament is the reason for the tragedy of the state of Denmark .
 Each night brings with it A cool east breeze To heap the darkness Around my house, In my field And on my trees .
 Day is done When day is done And shadows come Telling me That night's begun. But I like that time When day's done, shadows tell me that night is begun.
 The amendments were framed and sent to the Extra-Curricular Committee, which was to decide on the merit of the proposed change . After two meetings and considerable discussion, the amendments have been framed .
 Board, elected in March, discussed the proposals with special attention to the questions raised by the ExtraCurricric Committee . Board members of the board were elected to the new board in March .
 Board voted unanimously in support of these amendments and recommended that ExtraCurric follow suit . Board voted in favor of the amendments, recommending that the school board follow suit. Board also voted unanimously for the amendment .
 If the business and editorial aspects are to be kept separate, it makes little difference that their terms of office are the same . If the matter is to be separated, it will not be a big difference in terms of terms .
 That these amendments are essential to the efficient functioning of the STUDENT is obvious to those involved with this newspaper . The amendments are important to the efficiency of this newspaper.
 Extra-Curric Committee vetoed the second and more important amendment . Committee also vetoed the other amendment to the bill .
 The business and editorial staffs are to be separate entities, and in instances of conflict or decision, the P A. will act .
 The P A. thirteen member Board cannot function in this manner . It is a weekly newspaper, and therefore demands that instances which involve both business and editorial decisions be resolved quickly .
 Mirror, which is published but once a year, does not have this bifurcation of responsibility . The Mirror, published but published only once, has responsibility for publishing .
 The P A. wished to have the two publications on the same basis, was another reason for amending the constitution . The constitution was amended in 2007 to allow the publication of two publications .
 The notion that the Publishing Association can be ""ultimately responsible"" for this newspaper is fallacious on two counts . The Publishing Association is not responsible for the newspaper's success .
 It is the Editor who, in practice, must assume such responsibility, but is restrained by the absence of constitutional sanction . Secondly, it is the editor who, as a result, must take responsibility for such a decision .
 Feature Editor Russell Henderson '65, Sports Editor Nicholas Basbanes '65 Sports Editor Robert Lanz '65 Business Manager Steve Talbot '64 . Assistant; Linda Mitchell '66, Assistant; Nancy Lester '64, Kent Taylor '64; Ralph Bartholomew '64' Martha
 Peter d'Errico '65, Editor; John Holt '64, Robert Borland '66. '65' '66' '65 was Editor of the final feature of the Pulitzer Prize-winning documentary .
 Dennis Hill '66, Granville Bowie '66,' Richard Derby '66 . Jennifer Wingate '64, Carole Cooper '66' and Cariscilla Clark '66. Doug Wakefield '64 . Tarn Neville '66', Dennis Hill'66, Richard Derby'66
 As Alumni Secretary, I speak with numerous alumni groups around the country each year . I'm proud to represent my alma mater . I speak to alumni groups every year .
 In these talks, I usually include facts about the composition of the Bates student body . In this talk I also include facts that the Bates students are a minority .
 Mr Clifford Goodall '65, in his article in the Bates STUDENT of April 17, 1963 could have used some of these facts . Mr Clifford '65' '65 could have . used these facts in the article in his .
 Applications for admission to the Bates freshman class numbered 1610 for the current freshman class, while for the class which will enter in September of 1963 the number of applications is 1359 . The class will enter into September 1963 .
 All selective colleges have experienced fewer applications in recent years . Due to a temporary lag in the college age population growth, all selective colleges are experiencing fewer applications .
 Last year, while other selective colleges were experiencing a decline in their number of applications, the number of applicants for selective colleges has increased .
 Two Bates College Bowl teams scored seven victories on nation-wide television and aroused the interest of students all over the country . In no small measure, I think that this increase can be attributed to the fact that two Bates College bowl teams won seven victories .
 In recent years the College has published a profile showing the high quality of students admitted to Bates .
 This profile has discouraged substandard (for Bates) applications in that a student with low College Board scores naturally does not wish to apply to an institution where he has little chance of admission . This profile is discouraged by students with low college board scores .
 Guidance counselors also discourage weak candidates from applying to Bates . Bates is a top school in the United States .
 The quality of the freshman class entering in 1963 will be higher than that of the class which entered in 1962, even though chosen from fewer applicants . It will be the same quality as the ones entering in 1962 who were chosen from less applicants .
 I hope these figures will be of assistance to all who wish to discuss Mr Goodall's expressions of concern on a factual basis, says Dr Goodall .
 Mr Mills offers advice on how to avoid the blues in this week's STUDENT .
 "I cannot cease to express my gratitude for the wonderful philosophy he has deigned to impart on us poor dumb critters," he writes .
 Last week's sincerely sweet reminder to us of the old folks back home has stirred my heart all week . Last week, I was touched by a sweet reminder of our goodbyes .
 The spiritual guidance this week and especially the appended reading list and political advice has served to treble twice over my great admiration of dear Malcolm. Malcolm's political advice and spiritual guidance has .
 I am hardly able to contain my eagerness until next week when we shall receive edifying thoughts on the eternal truth . Next week will be a week of Edifying Thoughts on the Eternal Truth .
 I certainly hope that Malcolm will not keep his light under a bushel basket (he should use a trash can) Malcolm will continue to poison another man's mind while keeping the Bates studentry on the Right track .
 Malcolm Mills's column appears in the April 17 STUDENT . He closes with the supreme self confidence with which he closes .
 Perhaps there are those who will read his future observations, but I am not among them . Perhaps there will be those who have read him, but not many .
 I object not at all to personal outpourings, individual confessions, and self-psychoanalyses . I am firmly convinced that such things have no place in a student newspaper .
 Mills is blind to optimism, happiness, and satisfaction on campus and elsewhere . Mills refrains from helping or proposing changes, he says . Mills is blinded to optimism and happiness, but seeing only the bad, he writes .
 Margery Zimmerman '64 paper, all relevant comments are considered and welcome . All relevant comments about the paper are welcome .
 The subject of most of the derogatory conversation on this campus is the Monday and Friday Chapel Assembly Program . The program is a weekly chapel assembly program . The Chapel Assembly program is the subject of the most derogatory conversation .
 The purpose of the program is to inform students about various subjects and events which would not ordinarily be covered in their regular classes . The program is aimed at students who are interested in various subjects not covered in regular classes.
 This purpose is basically good, but it is not being accomplished under the present system . This purpose, however, is being achieved under the current system, he says .
 There are two problems which must be overcome in order for Chapel Assemblies to be worthwhile . Chapel assemblies must be held in order to make them worthwhile, says Bishop .
 Only about one in every three or four programs is effective, or says something worthwhile, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter .
 For one thing, students tend to react against anything that is compulsory . For another thing, they react against the idea of compulsory education .
 Students are forced to hear two or three poor programs for each good one . Students are not even able to get anything out of the one good program, says CNN.com .
 First, reduce the frequency of the assemblies to, for example, once every two weeks . Then reduce the number of assemblies to once a week .
 With fewer and better programs the students will come of their own accord . With fewer programs, fewer programs will help students come of own accord, he says . "With fewer programs," he says, "the students will be better off with fewer programs."
 The result of this change would be the accomplishment of the purpose of Chapel Assembly . Chapel Assembly would be a result of the change .
 An editorial in the March 6 issue of the STUDENT stated "the Bates STUDENT is a weekly paper that contains articles in various fields" Sincerely, Evelyn Breck '65 .
 Malcolm Mills, in his column, and Misses Berman, Zimmerman, and Breck in their letters, express their opinions .
 In determining the policy of this SPRING RAIN, this spring's policy is to have rain . My feet With only the stream for shoes Wade. Wade .
 Who knows What secrets they keep Of wet green grass And wet white grass Of white clean snows. Who knows? "I don't know what secrets I've seen."
 Early in the morning We must wake with the friendly rain Our canoe will drift Like a tiny patch of fog Across the lake Going nowhere, saying nothing We can be Two old turtles Drifting in the fog — Humming funny tunes On an old rotten log .
 Each spring rain Brings with her Small laughing children And little grey cats To play upon my roof . Each spring, each spring rain brings with her small laughing children and little grey Cats .
 Day always arrives to sweep away With her bright broom These small laughing children And little gray cats That play upon my roof . But day always arrives To sweep away The bright broom will sweep away .
 WCBB, a non-profit organization, was founded in the fall of 1961 . WCBB is designed to serve the educational institutions and the general viewing public .
 Educational television is a painless way of doing certain assignments, research work, or just improving your mind . No page turning, card catalogues, or books to carry; no page turning or cards to carry . Educational TV is definitely painless .
 Economics students might be interested in the daily lectures on the American economy . Economics students will be able to listen to the daily economics lectures .
 Government students may also find help watching the STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS OF AMERICAN GOVERNMENT also telecast daily .
 French students can soothe their foreign tongues with FRENCH THROUGH TELEVISION twice a week . French students are able to speak French through the channel .
 Beginning a three-program series with discussion and performance by Dr. Dr. Alexander Schreiner . Wednesday nighl, April 24 7:30 .
 Maestro Dohnanyi and his guests discuss his days as a composer in Vienna . He and guests discuss the composer's days at the Vienna Opera House . Maestro and guests talk about his days at Vienna's opera house .
 Warwick and the Duke of Clarence change sides in the bloody War of the Roses . Again, intrigue and murder mark the scene, as Warwick changes sides in a bloody battle .
 Television is no longer serving as just a soap opera, gunslingling babysitter. It's a gunslinging babysitter, not just soap opera .
 The poten~ tialities and capabilities of WCBB are great, but they can only be aided and rewarded by continued interest . WCBB is the first team to win a major league championship .
 When things seem to have squeezed my head so much so that it is only an old lemon rind — too dry even to be bitter anymore — I wonder why the trees were planted in lines . I wonder if the trees had been planted in . lines. When things are squeezed so much
 The graduate fellowships are available under the Fulbright-Hays Act of 1961 . They are administered by the Institute of International Education as part of the educational exchange program of State .
 United States government full grants, joint U.S.-other government grants; and travel-only grants . United States grants include full grants and joint grants . The grants are part of the United States Government grants .
 Joint awards are available for study in Boliva, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Poland and Venezuela .
 Travel-only awards are available for study in Austria, Brazil, Denmark, France, Germany, Israel, Italy, Italy and the Netherlands . Travel-Only awards are also available in Austria and Brazil .
 Institute calls special attention to opportunities available in Ceylon, Iceland, Iran, Pakistan, Poland, Rumania, Turkey and the United Arab Republic . Institute calls for opportunities in Iceland, Pakistan and Poland .
 Special opportunities are also available to graduate students interested in teaching English as a foreign language at universities in India, India, Italy and Italy .
 United States citizenship (at the time of application), a bachelor's degree or its equivalent before the beginning date of the grant, language proficiency sufficient to carry out the proposed project and for general communication, and good health .
 A good academic record and demonstrated capacity for independent study are also necessary . A good Academic record is also necessary in order to qualify for the top job .
 Preference given to applicants under 35 years of age who have not previously lived or studied abroad . Preference is given to those under 35 who have previously lived and studied abroad. Applicants must be under 35 .
 '66 Miss Graymont has been on the Bates College campus as an instructor in history, filling in for Dr. Dr. Graymont . Students now enrolled in a PATRONIZE OUR ADVERTISERS Graymont Comments On Plans, Education, College, and more .
 In another of the STUDENT interviews with faculty members, she answered the following questions from faculty members . She also answered questions about the role of faculty members in the student interviews .
 Yes, I am very interested in linguistics and in the study of the American Indian, which is my major field of research . G Yes, yes, yes .
 G Well, of course Bates is a four year college and Packer was a unior college . Packer is a former Bates College of Technology .
 Bates has a high academic standard in what it requires of its students . Bates has been described as having a 'high academic standard' for students .
 A student who does well here can do well at any of the large universities in the country . A student doing well at the university will be able to do well anywhere else, says CNN.com .
 All requests for application forms must be postmarked by October 15, 1963 . The application forms are required to be submitted by the end of the month of that date .
 At-large applicants must submit their completed applications to HE by November 1, 1963 . Applications must be submitted by HE by Nov. 1,1963 .
 Students must submit applications to the campus Fulbright Adviser by the respective campus closing date . Enrolled students must submit their applications by the end of September .
 Since the academic year 194849, approximately 12,000 American graduate students have studied abroad under the programs which are now covered by the new Fulbright-Hays Act .
 Institute of International Education seeks to encourage international understanding and educational development through programs of international educational exchange . Institute seeks to promote international understanding, educational development .
 'When it will be finished will depend, of course, on how soon I can get the research completed,' he says .
 "I still have a number of libraries to consult and I have to go to Clinton College to refer to their manuscripts," says the author of the book . "I have a lot of libraries in order to consult," she says .
 As you know, there has been a lot of controversy concerning the social life at Bates . R .
 I don't think that most of the students come from large cities and would expect much more than is available to them here . I think most of them come from a large city, and they would expect a lot more than they do here .
 I think these students can find more at the college in the cultural areas than they could at home . I think they can . find more . at college than they can at home, she says .
 Bates is small and it's difficult to get well-known performers to come to Maine . Bates, Maine, is a small town and has a reputation for its small population .
 The type of entertainers the students want are too expensive for a school of this size . Students want to be able to afford to perform at a school like this .
 The lesser known entertainers don't attract much of an attendance and it is embarrassing for them, and for the college, to face a practically empty house . It is embarrassing to see a virtually empty house at the college .
 The faculty is rather upset that there isn't much of an attendance at the Lecture Series . Many students complain that there is too much work and they just can't find the time to attend these lectures .
 The attendance at basketball games doesn't suffer because of a heavy work load on the students . Yet, it seems that the attendance isn't suffering because of the heavy load on students .
 "I don't see much of it except between home and the office and between the office," she says . "I'm not sure what's going to happen next, but I'm glad to see it," she adds .
 The State Series, perhaps the state's greatest annual claim to athletic renown, has been dealt its dying death knell by this act . Maine's State Series was perhaps the . state of Maine's greatest . claim to . athletic renown .
 Bates and Colby have themselves done nothing official in this matter as of yet . The probable results will likely see such action taken by the two schools . The two schools have yet to make a decision .
 Lloyd Lux. commented that the decision of Bowdoin to drop Maine will not affect Bates' plans at present . Lux. said the decision will not . affect Bates plans .
 With schedules drawn up a few years in advance, it is difficult to predict and disclose an immediate change, he said .
 Bates, with a total male enrollment of about five hundred men, had previously been considered to make the initial break . Bates had previously considered to be the first to break the barrier .
 Maine's absence will remove the excitement and ardor of a long-standing four-way rivalry in Series play . Even though the three small colleges will continue to play each other, the dent will be left by the absence .
 The act, though unfortunate in breaking tradition, must be acknowledged as practical and well-taken . The act is not the first time it has broken tradition, but it is well-known and practical .
 Bates, Bowdoin, and Colby are rediculously outclassed as far as facilities and personnel depth are concerned . Bates is the most expensive college in the country .
 An objective observer would most certainly regard the match as a gross mis-match . The match was most certainly regarded as the match between England and Germany .
 It is remotely probable that schools of our relative size can consistently field a team capable of overwhelming the likes of Maine . It is also not remotely likely that schools like this are able to field teams like this .
 Last fall's Garnet eleven, conisdered to be the best team fielded by Bates in years, was unable to contain the mediocre Maine squad . Maine was winless outside of Series play and won't win outside of series play .
 The best possible move, therefore, is one toward relations with similar-sized schools . The best place to go for schools is to have a similar-size school .
 Coach Hatch has recommended that more games could be played between the three smaller schools . Perhaps more games should be played .
 Tradition must of necessity be sacrificed for reason and practicability . Tradition must be sacrificed to reason and practiseability, says author .
 Whether or not this is the best move, whether Bates and Colby will follow, can not be determined now . Whether or whether they will follow can't be decided now .
 These speculations, as well as the advent of new traditions and rivalries can only be vindicated by the course of time .
 The Huskies' indoor version of the same sport handily upended our Garnet challengers this past fall . There's little reason to feel that the Huskies would have repeated outdoors .
 The meet had an abbreviated finish, the Bobcats had a fine edge on points at the time of the unprecedented retreat . For though the meet had a short-delayed finish, it was a good start to the meet .
 The Huskies decided to forfeit the race because they were behind in places where they shouldn't have been . The idea of facing a confident and talented group of runners on their home track added to the decision .
 Jayvees and Waltham finished their meet on the same track . The Jayveses and the Walthams finished the match on the track .
 State Series baseball opens today at Colby with our Bobcats sending ace pitcher Thorn Freeman to the mound against the confident Mules . The Bobcats take on the Mules in the State Series .
 Today's results should be interesting as the emerging victor will have a good claim on ultimate state honors . The winner of today's results will be the winner of the state championship .
 Colby, though win-starved in the south, has been getting fat up north, so the game should be decently matched . Colby has been winning in the past but has been losing in recent weeks .
 The field was soggy and surface water stood in puddles on the track . The referees' decision to hold the meet as scheduled was made .
 Northeastern coach Jerry Tatton considered conditions unsafe to continue . The Huskies quit the field as an electric drainage pump whisked away surface water under sunny skies .
 Ref's OK is made by the referees and officials of the home team . Field conditions warrant the cancellation of an athletic contest . The decision to cancel a game is made jointly by the referee and officials .
 Never is the visiting team left with the decision of calling off competition . The match was called off in the first half of the day .
 Northeastern just picked up their starting blocks and went home . A team can not be forced to compete and Northeastern can't compete . Northeastern was forced to go home .
 The two assistant coaches were in disagreement as to what should be done and finally phoned ailing head coach Tatton in Boston for the forfeit decision . Coach Tatton is ailing from ailing in Boston and has been battling a long illness .
 Waltham High School coach Lee Gould had no qualms about finishing the JV meet . One wonders why the decision came not at the time of the downpour, but halfway through the meet with Bates in the lead .
 Bowditch led a Bates sweep in the event with Paul Williams and Dave Johnson tying for second place . The Bates team won the event .
 Northeastern swept the shot put, with Wallin breaking the field record with a 53' 5W throw . Wallin also broke the record in the event . Northeastern won the event in a sweep .
 Corsetti of Northeastern broke the meet hammer record with a 171' throw . Corsetti threw 171' in a throw at the Northeastern University meet .
 The final score of the meet including forfeited points was Bates 93 and Northeastern 24 . Bates 93 was defeated by Northeastern 93 in the final score .
 Paul Savello, Dave Harkness, and Harry Mossman combined in the broad jump for the single Bobcat sweep . The Bobcat swept the event for the first time .
 Harkness added a second in the high hurdles for a total of 16 points in the meet . The meet was held in front of a crowd of 16 people .
 Mossman also took a third in the high jump and a second in the shot put . Mossman won three gold medals in three events .
 Fulenwider took a second in the 440, while John Meyn took a third in the mile . Meyn placed second in mile, while Bill Davis was third in shot, and Dick Traiser a third .
 Dash Javelin Shot Put First Bowditch Corsetti Kramer Williams Curtiss Wallin Second Williams & Lidback Silva Planchon Loler O'Neil Third Johnson Curtiss Hiller Ullian Cohen Miller .
 Combine summer study and recreation in the stimulating climate of one of our country's finest vacation regions . Attend summer studies and recreation at the Combine .
 Three-WEEK SESSION SESSION, June 17 — July 5 - July 5, July 5 . Six-week summer session, July 8 — Aug. 8 — August 8, August 8 .
 The Bobcats continued their winning ways with an 8-7 victory over M.I.T. last Saturday and a 9-3 decision over Lowell Tech on Monday . The Bobcat continued their win streak with a win over the likes of M.C. last week .
 The record now stands at five wins and only one loss thus far with the future looking very bright for another State Series crown . The record stands at 5 wins and 1 losses so far .
 The 'Cats travel to Cambridge to play in what must have been the worst possible conditions . The weather conditions were so bad that the team were forced to play on Saturday .
 The wind was so strong that even Thorn Freeman, given the starting assignment, had difficulty breaking off his usually brilliant curve . Even Thorn Freeman struggled to break off his usual brilliant curve.
 The 'Cats added one in the fourth on a sacrifice by Bud Spector, scoring Ron Taylor from third .
 A pinch-hit double by Bill MacNevin in the seventh scored Freeman to give the Bobcats a 4-2 lead . The Bobcats won their first game of the season at the University of Albany .
 Freeman tightened up and despite the unfavorable weather conditions allowed M.I.T. only three hits from the third inning through the seventh . Freeman was the only pitcher to get out of the game .
 Red Vandersea led off the eighth inning by drilling a solid double to left center . Vandersea's double came off the top of the inning for the first time .
 Bud took second on the throw to the plate and advanced to third by virtue of an error . Bud took the lead on his way to third in the game .
 The highlight of the game came when Spector stole home, a feat very rarely seen, giving the 'Cats a 6-2 lead . The highlight was Spector stealing home, which is rare in baseball .
 M.I.T. Falls into a 6-6 tie in the eighth inning . Three bases on balls plus three singles accounted for four runs for the home team .
 The 'Cats added the two deciding runs in the top of the ninth, set up by Bill Davis, Al Cruickshank, and Vandersea all being hit by pitched balls . The Cats added two more in the ninth .
 The score stood at 8-6 with M.I.T. coming to bat in the last half of the ninth . The score was tied at the bottom of the innings .
 Freeman struck out his opposing pitcher, Bob Yanos, to end the game . They added a single run to close the margin to one but the game ended in a 1-1 victory .
 He struck out ten, gave up six walks, and only five of the seven runs were earned . He also struck out 10 and walked six walks .
 A surprisingly good crowd of baseball fanatics sat through a freezing wind to witness the excellent six hit pitching of Bob Lanz, and the slugging of slick fielding shortstop Paul Holt, as they led the 'Cats to a 9-3 victory over Lowell Tech .
 Lowell scored three unearned runs in the first inning . Lanz settled down and blanked the visitors for the remaining eight innings . Lowell scored only six hits .
 The 'Cats got to the Lowell starting pitcher, Barry Eldridge, in the bottom of the fourth by coming up with three runs to knot the score .
 A leadoff double by Ron Taylor followed by a long triple to left center by Holt gave Bates their first run of the afternoon . A long triple by Holt gives Bates the lead .
 A perfectly placed bunt by Bob Lanz scored Holt, with Lanz taking second on a throwing error by Lowell's catcher . Lanz took second on an error by the Lowell catcher .
 Holt Stars Stars Bates exploded for three more in the bottom of the fifth to grab a 6-3 lead . Bates exploded again in the last five minutes of the game to grab the lead .
 A single by Vandersea, a triple by Taylor, a single by Holt, and a double by Lanz were the big blows moving the 'Cats ahead . Vandersea's single was the big blow for the Cats .
 A long double by Archie Lanza in the sixth scored John Yuskis, and another Lanza double in the eighth scored the final two runs to give the Bobcats their 9-3 victory .
 Holt led the 'Cats with a single, double, and triple in four times at bat . Taylor and Lanza contributed two hits apiece for the Cats .
 Lanz pitched a beautiful game, scattering six hits and not giving up an earned run . Lanz won't give up any earned run in the game .
 Rambler prices start real low and you won't go barefoot to keep one running . You won't be barefoot when you buy a rambler, but you'll be happy to drive it .
 Only ten of those thirty-four could realize the position for which all were striving for . But only ten of them could .
 Picking those ten was a difficult job, for the talent displayed . The talent displayed was certainly outstanding, with some of the talent shown .
 The judges making the decisions were the retiring senior squad, Coach Hatch, Mrs. Hatch, and Coach Hatch . The judges are the retiring Senior squad .
 Stu-C and Stu G, Bob Ahem and Alice Winter, Alice Winter . Hinman, Hinman and Winter: "Stu-G" are the founders of the Stu C and G organizations .
 This group must be commended for such a fine job of picking what appears to be an excellent, attractive and peppy squad for next year . This year's World Cup squad looks set to be the best of the summer .
 The girls chosen had worked many hours practicing the cheers, perfecting jumps and strengthening vocal power . As stated by ""Texie"" Ritter in a recent article, ""cheerleading is no easy task""
 Andy Buck, Jerry Watson and Lynn Avery were kept on the squad . A group of sophomores tried out and the three of last year's squad were kept . The team is looking for a new coach .
 Freshmen also honored were Kathy Lysaght, Betty Bogdanski, Karen Hastie, Judy Lanning, Judy Gray, Chris Faulk and Nancy Muzio .
 Kathy Lysaght, an economics major from Pine Point, Maine, displayed much flexibility and enthusiasm . She displayed flexibility, enthusiasm and enthusiasm throughout the class .
 Betty Bogdanski of Meridan, Conn., showed one of the highest and ""best-arched"" jumps of all the competitors . Betty showed the highest jump of all of the competitors.
 A cheerleader in high school, it was difficult for her to change her old style of cheering to the Bates method, but finally managed to do so .
 She has an ex-j tremely powerful voice that so well stimulates those crowds in the grandstands . She has been a big success in recent years, but her voice is still powerful .
 Karen Hastie certainly demonstrated the poise and alluring smile necessary for a cheerleader . Hastie was the star of the show in New Jersey .
 Judy Laming, seen playing tennis with the ""greats"" of the men's teams, was very impressive in the tryouts . Laming is a member of the "greats" of the tennis team .
 Judy Gray, another young lady with a beautiful smile, exhibited grace, coordination, poise and talent . Judy Gray exhibited grace and coordination, coordination .
 She leaped and yelled with the best of them and is from Braintree, Mass. She said she's a great cheerleader and a great athlete .
 Nancy Muzio, a chemistry major from Stafford, Conn., says she feels the squad has unending potential . She says the squad will be initiating changes in the old cheers . Nancy says she is excited about the new squad .
 Chris Faulk, a substitute for the new squad, is from Wethersr field, Conn., and was a strong competitor for her high school squad . Faulk is very graceful in an extremely high jump, and very spirited in her movements .
 Congratulations and thanks are also in order for the other girls attending all practices, and the seniors for spending their time teaching the cheers .
 Lynn Avery, chosen captain of the squad, feels that great things are in store for the new year . Lynn Avery was chosen to lead the squad at the start of the new season .
 Ping-Pong tourney tourney is underway in New York City . Ping-pong tourneys have been held in recent weeks .
 Ability has been shown that no one could possibly have thought existed . Ability was shown to be able to find the ability to communicate with people who had no idea they were capable of it .
 Wendell, Potter, Tupper, Cary and Messenger came through to the 3rd and 4th rounds as victorious . Wendell and Tupper were victorious in the 4th and 5th rounds .
 In two matches the 'Cats compiled an awesome record of 17 wins and 1 loss . The Cats won 17 matches and lost 1 in two .
 The team opened up with the Lowell Tech squad on Shedd Park's city courts . The team opens up with Lowell Tech's Lowell Tech team .
 Lowell boys score a perfect 9 to 0 shutout in 9-0 win over Lowell boys . Lowell boys scored a 9-to-0 shutout .
 All of the Bates performers played well and had little trouble winning . The Bates performers were well-respected .
 Jim Dodd, George Bee be and Al Williams all win 6-0, 6-1,6-1 victories . Al Williams, Al Williams and George Beebe also win . Jim Dodd's 6-2, 6'0 victory over Al Williams was the most impressive .
 Freshman Bob Thompson was impressive in his debut and should prove to be an asset to this year's squad . Freshman Thompson should be a key player for England this summer .
 Captain Jim Corey teamed with George Beebe to win the second doubles match easily by a 6-0, 6-1 score . Captain Corey and Beebe won the doubles doubles match 6- 0-0 in doubles competition .
 The number one player, Jim Wallach paired with Bob Thompson to win 6-2, 6-1 . Jim Dodds and Dick ""Tiger"" Danosky were matching that score against their opponents .
 The 'Cats beat the Hawks by an 8 to 1 score . The Hawks were unable to continue their shutout record against the Cats . The Cats defeated the Hawks 8-1 .
 Captain Corey Corey showed the way for his teammates with a 6-0, 6-1 singles victory . Captain Corey won the singles crown . Corey's singles victory was a major success for the team .
 In doubles competition the 'Cats won all three matches easily to complete a successful trip . In doubles doubles the Cats won all the matches easily .
 Coach Ullom was pleased with the early season play of the swatters . Coach said he is looking forward to the next few weeks of the season .
 On both days, the weather was poor with excessively high winds, making it difficult to control the ball . The weather was bad enough to make it difficult for the players .
 He was unable to single out any one player due to the remarkable play of the entire squad . He said he would not be able to name one player out of the squad .
 The Bobcats easily disposed of Clark as Chuck and Wally Lasher, Captain Thorn Brown, Lynn Simpson, Willy Farrington, John Schatz and Lloyd Bunten posted victories for the Bobcats . The Bobcat defeated Clark 7-3 in the final game .
 At Colonial country club in Lynnfield, Mass., the Bobcats engaged Tufts and Bowdoin in a tri-meet . The Bobcats beat the two teams in a three-match tri-match .
 Tufts defeated Bates 5-2 in their first game of the season . Tufts was led by New England collegiate champion Barry Bruce . Bates was beaten by Tufts in the first game .
 Garnet defeated Bowdoin 4-3 in their first game of the season . The Garnet won the game 4-2 at home to the University of Maine .
 Brown, Farrington, Phil King and Lynn Simpson nailed Chuck Lashers' power . Golf leads Cats' sweep over Bates .
 Vesper course in Lowell, Lowell, was in fine condition for this time of the year . Lasher Tops the Vesper Course .
 The Bobcats defeated Bowdoin 5-2 in their first game of the week . The Polar Bears beat the Bobcats 5-1 in the second game .
 Dual FUter makes the difference . Lasher and frosh Lynn Simpson posted victories for Bates .
 Chuck Lasher, Brown, Simpson and Simpson, Simpson, Farrington, Schatz and King posted victories for Bates . Bates won their first two of their six-match games .
 Chuck Lasher playing in the number one position was consistently the low scorer for Bates . Individually for Bates, Lasher was consistently a low scorer .
 Brown and two freshmen, Lynn Simpson and Willy Farrington led Bates with four victories and only one defeat . Chuck Lasher had a three and two record in this department . Brown and Simpson led Bates to four victories .
 Bates has the potential to make their presence felt in both the state series and in the state tournament at Augusta on May 21 . Their performance has shown that Bates can be a force in Augusta .
 The STUDENT sports staff has turned to Coach Vern Ullom's netmen for this week's selection of the Bobcat of the Week . Senior Capt. Ullum was selected to be the most successful netman in the school's history .
 Jim led his teammates to victories over Lowell Tech and Saint Anselms . The 'Cats traveled to the home courts of each opponent in securing their wins .
 Corey Corey appeared in midsummer form as he lashed his Saint A's opponent 6-0, 6-1 in singles competition . Corey appeared to be in mid-summer form with a straight sets win over his opponent .
 The previous day he had combined with doubles partner George Beale to shut out a Lowell pair 6-0, 6-1 in a doubles match .
 Coach Vern Ullom was high on his Captain's consistent play and lauded Jim's flashy form plus his winning touch . Jim is in contention to be named as the best player in the Premier League .
 Federal aid to Bates College, manifested in the form of Student Loans, is due for a drastic revision by the present session of Congress . College Aid might Decrease next year .
 The present Federal aid program has been an accumulative one in that each year the funds available to colleges across the nation has reached a ceiling in the present school year . Each year, each year, the federal aid program reaches a ceiling .
 The funds made available by the ceiling mentioned above will merely be divided up among the applicants resulting in a decrease all around . Unless corrective measures are taken by the present Congress in the form of a bill now pending before the legislative body, the funds will be reduced .
 Release Indicates Cut by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce dated April 1, 1963 . The release is indicative of a trend in the thinking of some of Washington's pressure groups .
 We spent 6 per cent of our national income on schools, compared with 2 per cent in 1913 . But we spent 2.7 per cent on schools compared to 2.5 per cent a century ago .
 This was the largest single public bequest contained in his will, which disposed of an estate estimated at $1,500,000 . The largest single bequest was contained in the will . The estate is estimated to be worth $1.5 million .
 Lane was Treasurer of Bates and served on the Board of Trustees . Lane was a banker, financier and private philanthropist . He was a member of the Bates Foundation .
 Will suggested that it be used for the construction of an administration building . No restrictions were mentioned as to the use of the money .
 The National College Champions will perform in the Chase Hall Ballroom May 4 . They will perform at Chase Hall in New York .
 Tickets are $1.25 apiece and may be purchased in the dinner lines at Hand and Commons . Education say they will be needed to prepare for the event .
 70 per cent of our youths complete high school; half go to college, and most of these graduate . But most of them do not graduate from high school or college .
 If history of federal subsidies in other fields (agriculture for example) were repeated, the hand-out route would prove no route to perfection . Subsidies Frowned On ""But if the history of . subsidies in . other fields are repeated, he said .
 Westminster Choir will perform in Lewiston High School Auditorium this evening at 8:15m. The Westminster choir will give a concert at 8 a.m.
 The concert will include works ranging from Thirteenth Century France to Twentieth Century America . Composers such as Palestrina, Mozart, Debussy, Vaughn Williams, and Copland will perform .
 The coming of spring is annually heralded by the emergence of sandals, sunglasses, and Bermuda shorts at outdoor art shows . Two Indoor Art Shows Herald Spring's Arrival .
 Two local art displays now being featured are indoors . Perhaps it is because spring's arrival in Maine is so uncertain that the two displays are indoors.
 Six Ogunquit artists associated with Pinetree Designs Gallery . Ward's on Lisbon Street. Ward's is on the second floor of the store .
 Among the best of the artists represented there is Edward Hergelroth, who shows some rather ethereal watercolor scenes . The artist's watercolor works include some of the most beautiful scenes .
 One of these, appropriately titled ""Desolate Country", beautifully captures the sparse, flat greyness of early winter . One of the most striking images of the winter is titled "Desolate County"
 George Kunkel produces abstracts, variously with polymer and lacquer, that might better be used in cotton prints . Kunkel's "Weeds and Sea" is one of his most famous abstracts .
 Peggy Bacon's etchings are of distinctive style, her embroidered valentines are charming . Bacon's "old-fashtioned" embroidered Valentine's Day designs are charming.
 Selections from private collections in the Maine area are being displayed through May 9 at the Temple Beth El in Portland . Renoir Originals are from private .
 The exhibit is open to the public every day except Friday from 2-4:00 and from 5:00-7:00 . The exhibit will be on display until the end of the month .
 Contributions to the display include originals by Renoir, Cezanne, and Claudel and a number of sculptures .
 Dr. Loomer: "Education should help the individual move towards integrity" Integrity is central to individual's education, he said .
 Loomer defined integrity as a sense of wholeness and unity . Religious leaders are most concerned with four major goals of higher education; integrity, freedom, the academic community, and intellectual .
 "The person of integrity remains the same person, conscious of his unique identity, regardless of circumstances or location," says the author of the book .
 The movement towards integrity entails a constantly increasing ability to think systematically and relationally in awareness of the differences and similarities between areas of experience . The movement to integrity entails an increasing ability .
 Without a systematic coherence between experiences of his life, the thinker becomes fragmented, less than ""one self"" in a related universe . The thinker is less than "one self"
 Integrity also leads to selfconsciousness, knowledge of one's values and purposes, an awareness of intellectual strengths and weaknesses, and a greater trust in one's own reactions .
 In any society based on the democratic ideal, it is the duty of higher education to give rise to individuals who know their values and whose decisions rest on selfconfidence and self-respect .
 The studen^ must realize that every system economic, or political — is based on a small cluster of ideas which are self-supporting, he says .
 This foundation constitutes the individual's integrity and is his perspective on life . The foundation of this person's integrity constitutes his integrity, says CNN.com .
 The unique perspective which he has achieved is but one among many, he says . He must also recognize that there are other integrities, he writes .
 Unable to accept others may be measured by the inability to accept oneself . The inability of accepting others may also be measured in terms of acceptance .
 Education should develop intellectual creativity and should lead to a release from personal weaknesses through awareness of such weaknesses . Education should also lead to an awareness of those weaknesses, author says. Education should help students release themselves from their weaknesses .
 One must be willing to relate ideas and concepts to emotions, recognizing that the ""conceptual feeling"" and the ""emotional feeling"" are interdependent .
 The Westminster Choir of forty voices is the touring concert unit of Westminster College in Princeton, New Jersey . A third point of academic em em em hosts a touring concert .
 The Choir has performed since 1921 and is now one of the best known choral groups in the world . It is now the world's most famous choral group .
 For over 30 years it was conducted by John Finley Williamson . Williamson was the founder of the organisation, which now runs its own website .
 The Choir's present conductor, Warren Martin, is a graduate of the college and former member of the Choir .
 Warren Martin taught theory, composition and conducting . He was Director of Graduate Studies at the University of Cambridge in 1950 .
 He was appointed Musical Director of the college in 1958, and presently holds this position . He has been a member of the College since 1958 .
 As conductor of the Westminster Touring Choir, he has directed the group in numerous performances . He has directed numerous performances for the group .
 This performance is one in the series of Concerts presented by the LewistonAuburn Community Concert Association . The performance is the final program in the Bates College Concert and Lecture Series . This is the last program in Bates College’s Concerts .
 Bates students will be admitted upon presentation of I.D. cards at the entrance on the campus side of the chapel . phasis is the community in which the education occurs . Phasis is a community in the education .
 Each individual is socially related; his language, his experience, his identity, and his uniqueness depend on others . Each individual's language, experience, and identity, depend on other people .
 To accept oneself fully, one must acknowledge all of the elements within himself . To accept one's fully, he must acknowledge the elements of himself .
 Four freshman debaters participated in a novice tourney at Dartmouth this past weekend .
 Westport, Union and Union won from Westport and Union and lost from Dartmouth, LaSalle and Rhode Island . Dartmouth also won from Dartmouth and LaSala .
 Brandeis scored the second greatest number of wins in the history of the university . Brandes was awarded the trophy since they were host of the tournament .
 Bates finished with five wins and five losses . Although the team was defeated four times by one point, the team won by four points .
 W A A Plans Banquet For Monday Night Plans are now well underway for the annual Women's Athletic Association Awards Banquet . Banquet will be held next Monday at 5:30 .
 Those women who have earned at least twenty credit hours have been invited to the event . The event will be held in honor of those earning at least 20 credit hours .
 The main purpose of the Awards Banquet is to recognize those women who have shown active participation in various athletic and recreational events . The main goal is to honor those women with active participation .
 Basketball trophy will also be presented to the winner of the interdorm competition . At this dinner the basketball trophy will be presented .
 The climax of the 'evening' will be the annual awarding of the annual award of the senior trophy to an outstanding senior selected by the Board .
 Commencement exercises will feature a concert presented by the music department under the direction of Professor Smith . The music department will present a concert at commencement exercises .
 Underclassmen will have the opportunity to hear the performance Thursday, May 9, at 8:00 m.m. in the chapel .
 Other groups performing include a brass choir, cello duo and the Deansmen . Other groups will be performing .
 The concert involves a number of solos on the clarinet, the French horn and a piano solo played by Yoko Hirasawa '65 . The concert is held at the University of Tokyo's International Music Institute .
 There are openings for Counselor-in-Training Director, Village Director and Village Director . There are also openings for counselors and general counselors .
 The Maine State Personnel Department has announced that there are still vacancies for college graduates . College graduates are still needed in the state of Maine .
 More detailed information and a further listing of vacancies is available in the Placement Office . The Placing Office is in full capacity to recruit new staff members .
 The YWCA National Board has sent the Placement Office a list of vacancies which are either currently open or will be open in September, 1963 . The list includes positions that are currently vacant or open in 1963 .
 The vacancy list of job openings throughout the United States is available in the Placement Office . The vacancy lists are based on the job openings in the U.S.
 The Oak Grove Hotel in Boothbay Harbor, Maine, hopes to employ a bookkeeper office assistant from early June through Labor Day . The bookkeeping office assistant will be available from June to Labor Day.
 The probable compensation would be room and board plus $40.00 per week . Room and board would likely be room, board and $40 per week, according to reports .
 Anyone interested should write to Mr Walter Jacob, Oak Grove Hotel, Boothbay Harbor, Maine .
 The John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Company has an excellent opportunity for men interested in the life insurance business and desiring summer employment . The company is looking at men who are interested in life insurance .
 Summer Management Training Program is open to college undergraduates or graduate students . Summer Management training program is available for college students or grad students .
 The program provides a liberal starting salary — $60 for freshmen, $65 for sophomores, $70 for juniors and $80 for seniors entering graduate study . The program is available to students in college and beyond .
 Norris Hayden Laundry Modern Cleaners Campus Agents PAUL PLANCHON BILL DAVIS The Chapel last Sunday morning.
 From May 3 to May 5, the Bates student body will be increased by nineteen . Nineteen foreign students will visit Bates for the weekend . Bates students will be in attendance from May 3-5 .
 Foreign exchange students are sponsored by the American Field Service Exchange Student Program . During this time, foreign exchange students will attend classes, stay in dormitories, eat in dining halls .
 False love is a movement towards the other for the sake of oneself, regarding the other as a means of fulfillment of a personal end . False love can be seen as a movement to the other in a way to fulfill the end of the end .
 Respecting and behaving in accordance with the nature of the object, the latter is approached through discipline . The discipline of intellectual love is truth, he says .
 The student must try to love not only those ideas with which he agrees, but also those with . which he does not agree, by which he may become hurt and confused . Students must also love those with which they do not agree .
 Loomer concluded with a warning that an educational experience is worthwhile only when risk and the possibility of change are involved . Loomers: An educational experience should be worthwhile when risk is involved .
 High School students from Maine high schools visit Bates to see what an American college is like . Bates is the largest American college in the United States .
 A special attempt will be made to make these students feel at home in the college . The college will also make a special effort to make them feel welcome at home .
 A private buffet supper will be held in their honor at the Women's Union . On Sunday the students will be guests in the homes of professors .
 The American Field Service would like this type of visit to Bates to be a yearly event but this depends largely on their reception by the Bates student body . The American field service hopes to make the visit a yearly occurrence .
 If any Bates student is particularly interested in working with the service, he should contact members of this year's committee .
 Minutes were taken at last week's Student Council meeting . Notes from Underground are taken from the meeting's minutes .
 Inter-Gov. Dobson reported that the Freshman Orientation Committee report is being ooked over by Dean Lindholm . Lindholm is the chairman of the committee . Dobson said that the report will be reviewed by Lindholm on Monday .
 A Campus referendum will be held on May 6th, in Lower Chase Hall, to determine the acceptance of the Senate Constitution by the student body . Dobson reported that a Campus referendum is set to be held in May .
 Tradewinds, a folksinging group from UNH, will be in Chase Hall on Saturday, May 4th . UNH students will be able to hear them sing .
 Councilman Extraordinaire, moved that the Council adjourned, James M Aikman, Sec.-Treas. Councilman . Extraordineire, made the motion to adjourn .
 "Gleason has a gift of mimicrythat verges on j genius."" i -TIME Magazine j CHUCK WACOM 7 v Drive In-Restauront .
 "I suggest that you take notes because I am going to give a final exam on what I say" "I am planning to address you with great enthusiasm," says the author .
 With the score obtained from this exam I am going to calculate your qpr — your life qpr . I am using this to calculate the score of your life, your life Qpr . The score of this exam will be used to help you understand your life .
 I note that none of you are listening to me and that all the you are questioning my authority — perhaps because I am not yet listed in an encyclopedia . Perhaps because of the fact that he is not listed in the encyclopedia, perhaps because of his lack of authority .
 "Because I am as insignificant as you are and I recognize my insignificance," she writes . "Because of my insignification, I recognize myself as insignificant"
 "I have no dignity — no self-imposed beautiful lie to make my existence bearable," she writes . "I'm not a person who has no dignity," she says of her life . "No dignity is a lie," she adds .
 I am absurd and I believe this and so are all of you, but your vital lie prevents you from believing it . I believe it and so do so, but so do all of us, but you can't believe it,’s a lie .
 "When you sing me the songs of the weight of your individual crosses I laugh," she writes .
 You can always look them up in a book somewhere — it saves a lot of time that otherwise would be wasted on thinking . You can also look for them in books somewhere .
 We are sinners — each of us — if we give in to something so dead as our present situation . Of course, I cannot name it — we will deal with generalizations today, gentlemen — let our earthly professors know the specifics . We are sinners, each of them, if
 May your records all be broadway musicals — may all your books be heavily underlined . May all your records be broadways musicals .
 May your life be a survey course — perhaps you can spend two days on each sensation . Perhaps only one day on love because specialization is dangerous to a liberal education . Maybe only one-day on love is dangerous .
 Eliot tends to be too biographical, and personal polemics are dangerous to free thought . Eliot is not a great writer, but he's a great advocate for free thought, he says. Eliot is a great example of freedom of speech, he adds .
 Chevrolet Biscayne ' sedan — green, metallic prickly pear — or maybe the color of a 1949 Hudson Hornet . Unto each of you I will a Chevy Biscay ' sedan, or maybe a Chevy .
 To each of you I give a place on the social register — we need morally outstanding people there to keep the masses in line . We need morally outstanding people to keep us in line, says the PM .
 "I see the group disintegrating. This will be the last time that we shall get together here," says L.A. Gomez . "This is the last place we shall gather together here"
 Hamlet Brought To Knees But No One Cries 'Uncle' But no one cries "Uncle" in Hamlet .
 Shakespeare is difficult to produce well because of the greatness of the bard's poetry . Shakespeare's poetry outshines any antics of mortal players . The playwright's poetry is the best of all the world to produce .
 He is a character who has been subject to more interpretations than one would care to count . He is the subject of many interpretations, including the death penalty .
 "It is a part for a giant, and mortal men do not fare well tugging with its lines," says the author . "It's a big part for the giant, but mortal men don't fare well"
 Shakespeare created the most gigantic characters Shakespeare created were men — only God and he did it . Only God and only God did it. Shakespeare created men .
 Every man has his own Hamlet, and mine is not a whiny, weepy, adolescent, adolescent . "I'm not a wince-eyed, adolescent. I'm not going to cry. Every man's Hamlet is not his own," he says .
 Tod Lloyd's Hamlet was weakened because his anger and frustration sometimes seemed more like a child's tantrum than a man's passion . Lloyd's version of Hamlet has been weakened because of his anger .
 At times he was so sombre that he cast a pale shadow on his more playful scenes with Polonius or players .
 His scenes with Ophelia resounded more with angered mockery and sullenness than with tender pity . He was more of an angry mockery than pity .
 "Our sympathy deepens for him with every attempt he makes to control and direct his fate, with every perceptive thought," says the author .
 Hamlet is a man gifted with great powers of observation, who can attune his diction and his imagery to the situation and to the person to whom he is speaking . Hamlet was born in London, England, in 16th century .
 Lloyd's playing Hamlet overwrought with grief and as anguished as Lear dispossessed this adaptability . Lloyd's Hamlet is overwrought by grief and his performance as a result .
 American Gem Society CASH CHARGE BUDGET characters . Characters, including himself, as he plays the recorder .
 Lloyd's Hamlet had grace, power and charm; he did well wrestling with the giant . Lloyd's version of Hamlet has grace and power, but not charm .
 Lloyd's Hamlet remained irresolute and moody, gritting his teeth and dulling his own performance . The potential majesty and power of this tragic prince was not revealed to us, for Lloyd's .
 Judith Mossman is an actress whose exuberance of personality illuminates the stage with just her entrance, whose words fall as rose petals or hammers on a still-struck audience . Mossman's grace and command of position on stage makes every action and reaction seem effort
 After four years of searching, I've found someone who can equal Jane Damour . "Jane Damour" is the first woman to have a woman to equal Damour in the world .
 Polonius was advisor to the king was an enjoyable and most magnificent ass . He was an advisor to a king who was an excellent ass .
 Horatio was played with unusual spirit by John Strassburger; and Chris Chambers, majestic as the Ghost, turned in an excellent performance .
 The queen while not as deep and excitable a character as I would have liked to have seen, was played with skill and warmth . The queen was not as well as the queen as she was played, but was played well .
 David Kramer's Laertes was enjoyable if occasionally unconvincing and affected . David Kramer was occasionally unconvinced and affected by the play .
 "The sets and general direction of this production again serve witness to Miss Schaeffer's genius," says reviewer .
 She had a large cast and crew to aid her in this Olympian task and their names are too numerous to mention .
 The production as a whole showed evidence of much hard work, imagination and that all the people on stage and off must be congratulated on a most successful production .
 WRJR had some major additions to its facilities last Saturday . I did not envy Miss Schaeffer the task of producing this prince Air Waves .
 With the new equipment WRJR will be able to set up a recording studio which will raise the standards of the shows on WRJR to an even higher level . The new equipment will help WRJR set up the new recording studio .
 WRJR will host a training program in the fall for staff members . The training program is scheduled for the fall . The program is open on the opening day of registration .
 Anyone is welcome to train, and a special invitation goes to anyone who is interested in classical music . Anyone interested in training is welcome, and anyone is welcome .
 WRJR are interested in having a Masterworks Hour on WRJR . If you have some knowledge of music and are at all interested, you will be the more welcome .
 WRJR is planning to go on the air during the evenings of Freshman Week . Freshman week is the first time WRJR has gone on air in the fall .
 This is hoped to serve a dual purpose, one being to help the freshmen with information on the events of that week, and the other to relate some interesting data on the incoming class, such as the percentage from different states and where the furthest one hails from .
 It is true that I did not and still do not believe today's Robinson Players capable of capturing and controlling this giant . It is not the first time I have written this article that I thought Robinson Players would be able to capture and control this giant.
 Loomer's thesis and approach to the problems of education in our day is alive and vital . Not only is this topic of the greatest importance to those involved in teaching and learning, but also his approach to education in the future .
 He offers hope and direction to a system of higher education which, in this country today, finds itself growing increasingly stultified . He says: "He offers hope . and direction"
 If this college and others are to return to the mainstream of intellectual pursuit, a new direction is needed . The college is in need to become once again vibrant communities in the vanguard of education .
 This new direction — this turn toward vitality — was indicated by Bernard Loomer, the mayor of New York City . This is a new direction for the city, he said, and it's a good start .
 Out of a community of men and women ""devoted to education,"" a handful come to learn and ponder a new perspective on education . A handful of people come from the community of education .
 From a studentry ""striving for personal growth,"" come 37 to learn and grow. From studentry "striving to personal growth."
 A faculty which "delights in the adventures of intellectual curiosity" produces two members to take part in intellectual discussion .
 The poor attendance last week is not the disease, but merely a symptom, it's a symptom . Poor attendance is not a disease, it is a symptom of the problem, it says . It's time to get back on the track in the U.S.
 We must recognize this and other symptoms — they must be seen and interpreted correctly and boldly . We must also see this as a sign of progress in the world .
 Now is not the time for weakness, for timidity, for taking refuge in the past, for hiding our eyes and minds from the present, for letting someone else make decisions, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This, it will be said, is to attempt the impossible — the impossible which Dostoyevsky calls the stone wall . This, however, is the impossible, and the impossible . This is to be said to be the attempt to attempt to be impossible .
 We cannot subside in the face of the impossible — we cannot be reconciled to it . But we can subside, and we can't subside .
 Nature does not ask your permission, she has nothing to do with your wishes, and whether you like her laws or dislikes them, you are bound to accept her as she is, and consequently all her conclusions . Nature will not ask you to change your mind, but you must accept
 The three constitutions — Senate, Men's Council and Women's Council — appear on pages five and six . They are the only official copies of the constitution which will be distributed to students .
 It is this governmental structure which you shall be asked to approve or reject next Monday . The government structure will be approved or rejected next week .
 John Bart '64, Pamela Ball '64 and Sally O Smyth '65 Editorial Assistant Perry Bruder '65 . Pamela Ball' '64 Editorial Assistant David A Nelson Faculty Advisor .
 I heartily agree with your editorial of last week contemning the Extra-Curricular Committee's failure to approve the amendment to the P A. constitution recommending that the editor be given ultimate responsibility in matters pertaining to the paper as a whole .
 As the past editor of the STUDENT, I was partially responsible for the initiation of the amendments . I was partly responsible for this article .
 Ideally, no conflict should arise in the operation of the two major branches of the paper, the editorial and the business . The two are relatively autonomous. The editorial and business are relatively independent .
 The photography department, for example, has a budget, and is responsible to the business manager for it . Yet the editorial staff assigns the pictures .
 Last semester the business manager refused to release funds for expenses incurred while taking pictures of the fallout shelter, failing to realize that the responsibility for the content of the paper lay with the editor-in-chief .
 The two offices do occasionally conflict; when they do, only then is it necessary for someone to make a decision affecting both . Thus the two offices sometimes conflict, and only then, is the decision being made .
 Few businessmen, requiring an immediate decision, or any decision, on something involving their business would consider asking someone unfamiliar with the business to make the decision . Few businesses could survive with two presidents .
 Decisions have to be made, and someone must ultimately be held responsible for making them . Decisions must be made and someone has to be responsible for them .
 In the case of the STUDENT, I was held responsible by subscribers who were not receiving their papers, and by the faculty who failed to get copies delivered to them . Yet I was unable to rectify these mistakes because I was not authorized to invade the sanctity of the business section
 This, however, would set a precedent for faculty control of student organizations . This would be the first time faculty control has been granted to students .
 I could have requested special meetings of the P.A., (perhaps two or three a week), which would usually aggravate the problem . I could also request special meetings (perhaps 2 or three) a week, which would normally aggravate .
 Neither the faculty nor the majority of the P.A. know much about the daily running of the STUDENT, nor should they. Neither the staff nor faculty members know much of the daily run of the student body .
 Large boards are notoriously inefficient when it comes to making decisions . And large boards are notorious for being inefficient when they make decisions . This is the case for the U.S. government .
 Editorin-chief should be given responsibility on matters involving both the business and editorial sections . The paper which reaches students, not Wall Street rating, is most significant .
 The Extra-Curricular Committee did not query me on the practical operation of the paper . I was asked by the committee to explain how the paper was run .
 The Extra-CurricuStudent Senate To Institute Integration Of Government . Bates is New England's first coeducational college . Students will next Monday have the opportunity to vote in the long proposed Stuent Senate .
 The proposed proctor councils would be concerned with only the specific problems and requirements of the men's and women's sides of campus . Proctor councils will be concerned only with specific problems .
 The Student Senate would relieve these two bodies of matters concerning the entire student body . Students would be able to function more effectively in their own particular area, says the Senate .
 At the present time, a fantastic amount of red tape is envolved in making any decisions which would affect all-student functions . Red Tape Prevails at the moment .
 "Stu-G and Stu-C drain away the effectiveness of each body. Countless linkage meetings, and . repetitious discussions, and repetitious . discussions in Stu .G and C drain away effectiveness of the bodies, says Stu.C .
 Students support proposed amendment to Publishing Association Constitution . Student leaders of both past and present business managers support amendment .
 This amendment was discussed for several weeks among the P.A. members, the STUDENT staff, and the Extra-Curricular Activities Committee . This amendment would allow students to opt out of participating in the program .
 At no time during this period did I say that I was in favor of this amendment. "I'm not sure if I'm going to support this amendment," he says. "At no time I'm in favor"
 I was strongly opposed to the amendment, Mr. Ross said . Mr Ross said in meetings with Dean Boyce, Mr Nelson, and Mr Ross, he said . The amendment would have been a constitutional amendment .
 It was, therefore, a false assumption on the Editor's part when he stated that I was in favor of the amendment, he said . The Editor's comments were contrary to what he had said .
 In my opinion the proposed amendment was not the solution to a more efficiently run organization . In his opinion, I think the amendment would not be the solution for a more efficient organization .
 The original P.A. constitution purposely avoided giving ""ultimate responsibility"" to the editor . The original constitution was written to give the editor "ultimate responsibility"
 The fact that a personality conflict arose this past year involving editor and business manager does not merit a revision of the constitution . It's not necessary to revise the constitution, the editor says .
 The P.A. permitted this conflict to get out of hand instead of taking steps to correct it . "The P.E. permitted it to get so far out of control that it was not addressed by the authorities," said the mayor .
 In the future it would appear that the P.A. should have authority to meet the responsibility of solving such an issue rather than propose amendments .
 Robert J Lanz '65 was a member of the Committee for the University of Cambridge . The Committee has not been able to explain how it has been run in the past .
 ExtraCurricular Committee questioned the past and present ediing between both sides of campus would hopefully be increased . If the committee questioned both sides, it would hopefully increase the number of students involved in the committee .
 Betty Anne Little, outgoing president of Stu-G, has expressed the opinion that the differing views of these two organizations would have to compromise in order to do the best thing for the campus . Little says the differing opinions of the two organizations should be balanced .
 This would also give more students a chance to participate in student government affairs . This would give students a better chance to be involved in student affairs .
 It has been pointed out that much talent is wasted on the women's side of campus . Much talent has been wasted on women's sides of campus in recent years .
 Some girls may have an interest in how student affairs are handled, but they would rather not participate in Student Senate . Some girls would rather rather not spend a major part of their time in Stu-G .
 The Student Senate can only be as valuable as next year's students make it . Next year's Senate will only be able to be valuable if it is successful, says Sen. John McCain .
 Some see it as a merging of equal number of men and women . Others see it only as merging of equals working on all-campus activities .
 Students want changes and are willing to work hard for them, things can be accomplished, says student leader .
 The administration and faculty, by supporting the Student Senate, have proven their concern with student attitudes, all kinds . The Senate has proven its concern with students' attitudes toward all kinds of attitudes .
 Those students who claim Bates's students are apathetic will have a golden opportunity to disproven, stated one strong supporter of the school .
 The success of this success will necessitate active interest by the entire campus . This should be shown through activities, student opinion polls, student publications, and personal initiative .
 Student Support is essential for students to have Student Senate . If students want to be Student Senate they should support it, they should be willing to support it .
 If they don't want it, don't care about it, or want to support it, they should not vote for it . This would only mean failure. If they want it or don't like it, it would mean failure, they shouldn't vote for .
 A great deal of time has been spent in preparing the Student Senate for the student body, a great deal has been wasted because of lack of support . The Student Senate is a vital part of the university's student experience .
 Intergovernment Committee has been working over the possibilities of the Student Senate for three years . The senate's success lies with the students themselves, rather than the business manager .
 Following are the official Constitutions of the proposed Student Senate, and Men's and Women's Councils . John R Wilson '63 BATES STUDENT, MAY 1, 1963 Student Senate . John Wilson '1963 Bates STUDENT'
 It is obvious thai replacement of outmoded machinery will improve the system . efficiency and coordination are certainly to be gained from the campus-wide government .
 The system will fail without fuel. However, however good the machinery, it will fail if fuel is not enough .
 Life in a college is not a product of its buildings, budget, or machinery of its government . It rests on those who occupy the buildings, use the budget, and operate the machinery .
 The institution of the Student Senate is by all means a step forward, but we must not forget that it is we who make the step, and we must continue to walk . — Peter d'Errico '65. "We need to walk"
 Students of Bates College establish a Student Senate Constitution . The Constitution is intended to encourage the formulaton of responsible opinion .
 Article I Name The name of this organization shall be the Bates College Student Senate . Bates College's Student Senate will be the name of the Bates college Student Senate.
 Sophomore class, one man and one woman from Freshman class, and the Chairmen of the . Men's and Women's . Councils as voting members .
 To encourage the development of a campus attitude which stimulates intellectual freedom and concern . To seek effective communication among members of the college community; To seek for all students justice and the enjoyment of individual rights .
 To hold at least one meeting of the Senate each month of the college year; To have the responsibility for the allotment of its funds; To appoint a student to fill any vacancy in its membership which may arise; To attempt to coordinate the decisions of the Men's and Women's Council
 The Senate shall not have the power to alter, add, or void any section of the Women's Honor System . The Senate will not be able to alter or void sections of the system .
 The Dean of Men, the Dean of Women, faculty advisers, faculty members and administration offiicials on appropriate matters . Shall confer with the dean of men and women on matters such as sexual assault .
 Shall represent student opinion and act in the best interest of the students with consideration for the general policy of the college . Shall represent the student opinion .
 The Senate in cooperation with the four classes (and such All-Campus organizations as may elect to be included) shall secure each year nominations for the All-College Election .
 Nominees for the Senate will be those students who present a petition of forty signatures on an official form secured at the office of the Dean of Men . Nomineees will be students with forty signatures from a petition .
 In the primaries, a maximum of eight senior women, six junior women, and four sophomore women receiving the highest number of votes, shall be selected as candidates by the women . The women will be able to choose the candidates for the general election .
 The Senate, the four classes (and such All-Campus organizations as may elect to be included) shall conduct each year on the Monday before Spring Vacation a general college election .
 One week from the date of return to campus after Spring Vacation, an election of President and Vice-President shall be conducted by the outgoing Senate . The outgoing Senate will conduct the election of the President and vice-President .
 All registered students of Bates College may vote for the President of the Senate . Bates College students may also vote for a candidate for the position of president of the senate .
 During the interim period, those Senators desiring to be elected to the Presidency shall campaign. During the Interim Period, those seeking to be . elected to . President shall campaign for the Senate .
 Before final action is taken by either committee, the student shall have the opportunity to be heard by the committee . The student must also have an opportunity to speak to the committee before the decision is made .
 Any decisions or recommendations reached by either of these two standing committees shall be presented to the Committee on Student Conduct by the chairman of the committee involved . The chairman of each committee will be the chairman .
 No evidence presented before either of the Senate judicial committees or the Committee on Student Conduct shall be reported outside these bodies . The Senate judicial committee will not be used to report evidence presented outside of this body .
 Article VII Funds of the Senate Dues of $.75 per semester shall be collected from each student as part of the Student Activities Fee . Funds are collected from students as part bf the Student Activity Fee . Article VII funds will be collected by students at the University of Cambridge .
 A referendum shall be initiated by a vote of twothirds approval of the Senate members or a petition signed by one-tenth of the Student Body . A referendum should be initiated with the approval of twithirds of Senate members .
 A referendum must require a vote by secret ballot of three-fifths approval of the registered Student Body to be binding on the Senate . A referendum shall require a . vote by . secret ballot to be . binding on . the Senate.
 A question for a referendum must be appropriately posted at least five days before the Student Body is asked to vote . A referendum question for students must be posted five days prior to the student body voting .
 Amendments must be initiated by a vote of twothirds approval of the Senate members or a petition signed by one-tenth of the Student Body . Amendments may be initiated with a vote by the Senate or by a petition by one of the students .
 An amendment would require a vote by secret ballot of three-fifths approval of the registered Student Body to become effective . An amendment shall require a . vote by . secret ballot to become a . effective .
 Amendments must be appropriately posted at least five days before the Student Body is asked to vote . Amendments to be posted five days prior to the vote must be posted .
 The proctors of the dormitory in which the student resides shall be asked to serve as non-voting members of the Judicial Committee . Amendments to Article VII are subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees .
 The President, with the approval of the Senate, may appoint such other committees as are deemed necessary . The Senate may also appoint other committees .
 The Senate may approve any registered student for membership on standing or special committees . The Senate can also approve registered students for membership in standing committees .
 Faculty advisors will be designated by the Senate with the approval of the Extra-Curricular Activities Committee . Faculty advisors shall be designated . The Senate has the power to name advisors .
 The Dean of Men and the Dean of Women shall be faculty advisors, ex-officio . The dean of men and the dean of women shall be advisors to the faculty .
 "Robert's Rules of Order, Revised" shall be the parliamentary guide of the Senate . Article II rules of Order are the Senate's rules of order .
 Amendments to the By-Laws shall require a vote of twothirds approval of the Senate members . Article III Amendments Amendments are required to be approved by the Senate . The amendment to the Constitution is required by the majority of the House of Representatives .
 The men of Bates College established a constitution in order to act in the interest of the men of the college . The constitution was intended to help in establishing an atmosphere .
 This Constitution does not include those duties for which the Council members, acting as proctors in the men's dormitories, are responsible to the administration of the College . This Constitution shall concern the Council .
 The name of this organization shall be the Men's Council of Bates College . Article I Name: The name is Bates College's Men's council .
 Dues of $.25 per semester shall be collected from each man as part of the Student Activities Fee . Each man must pay $25 a semester to be collected by the university .
 The Council shall also have the responsibility of helping Freshmen adjust themselves to their new environment and to explain the relation that they have to the College and the upperclassmen .
 The Student Senate has the power to act in all matters pertaining solely to the interests of the men . To meet at appropriate intervals, or at the request of the Chairman, or . at the . request of . the Student Senate, To have the power . to act .
 The Chairman shall preside at all meetings; appoint committees as the need arises, be a voting member of the Student Senate, and preside as chairman of the Men's Judiciary Committee . The Vice-Chairman shall assume the duties of the Chairman in his absence . The Secretary Treasurer shall
 The men of the Student Senate (including the Chairman of the Men's Council) shall comprise the men's Proctor Selection Committee . The committee will be the Men of the Students' Proctor selection Committee .
 Committee will secure applications for proctorships after mid-term vacation in the second semester . Committee will also secure applications to proctorhips .
 Rec. ommendations for proctor appointments will be made to the Dean of Men not later than May SIX BATES STUDENT, MAY 1 .
 The Men's Proctor Selection Committee, shall be candidates for the office of Chairman of the Men's Council . The committee will select candidates for a position to be the Chairman .
 An election committee pointed by the president of the Student Senate will be respon sible for conducting the election prior to the beginning of the fi nal examination period at the end of the spring term .
 Members of this committee will be selected from the male membership of the student Senate . Members will have to be chosen from male members of the Senate . The committee will also have to include the student senate .
 The candidate receiving the largest number of votes cast by the registered male students shall be the Chairman and the runner-up shall be Vice-Chairman . The candidate receiving the largest number of votes will be the chairman .
 The Secretary Treasurer shall be elected by majority vote of the incoming proctors . This elec tion shall take place prior to the beginning of the final examination period following selection of proctors for the ensuing year .
 A referendum must be initiated by a vote of twothirds approval of the Men's Council or a petition signed by one-tenth of the men students . A referendum shall be initiated .
 A referendum requires a vote by secret ballot of three-fifths approval of the men students to be binding on the Council . A referendum shall require a vote in secret ballot by secret .
 A question for referendum must be appropriately posted at least five days before the men are asked to vote . A referendum question for the men must be posted five days in advance of the vote .
 Amendments must be initiated by a vote of two-thirds approval of the Men's Council or a petition signed by one-tenth of the men students . Amendment must be appropriately posted at least five days before the men are asked to vote . An amendment must require a vote by secret ballot
 No amendment shall be made to the Men's Council Constitution which shall alter the Council's relationship to the Student Senate . No amendment to the constitution will alter the relationship between the council and the student senate .
 The women's constitution was created by Bates College women's council . It was created to foster the ideals of Bates College and to develop wide-spread responsibility .
 The Honor System provides a common ground for the organization of corporate living to the mutual advantage of students and faculty . Students and faculty are encouraged to use the Honor System to improve their living experiences .
 Bates relies upon us to obey the fundamental rules for our own welfare and protection . We pledge our full efforts to make ourselves active participants in this organization and to avail ourselves .
 The name of this organization shall be the Women's Council of Bates College . Article I Name shall be this organization's name .
 The Women's Council shall consist of a Chairman, the presidents of the women's dormitories and the president of the Women's Uniorv and the first vice-president of Page Hall . Article II Membership and Funds Section I Membership, The . Women's . Council will consist of
 The Women's Council shall take office on the fourth Wednesday following All-College elections and shall serve for one year . Members of the Women's council shall take .
 Funds, Dues of $1.25 per semester shall be collected from each woman as part of the Student Activity Fees . Funds will be collected by each woman from each student . Funds are collected from the student Activity Fees and will be used to pay tuition .
 The Women's Council shall be responsible for the allotment of its funds . It will take up responsibility for the allocation of funds .
 Additional meetings shall be called at the discretion of the Chairman or at the request of four Council members . Additional meetings will be called in the future .
 To act as chairman of the Women's Judiciary Committee of the Student Senate of the University of California, he will serve as chairman .
 The Vice-Chairman shall assume the duties of the Chairman in her absence . The vice-chairman will assume the role of the chairman in the Chairman .
 To submit a copy of the minutes to the Student Senate and the Women's Council advisors, please submit your own copy of them .
 There shall be a Nominating Committee of eight women consisting of the Chairman of the Women's Council, ex-officio . A representative from the Senior class, a representative from Freshman class; two representatives from Junior class; three representatives from Sophomore class, one to be elected from
 These class representatives shall be elected by their own class members after two Seniors, four Juniors, six Sophomores, six sophomores and two Freshmen have been nominated by means of a primary ballot .
 The Nominating Committee shall appoint the House Presidents and VicePresidents who shall serve as proctors in their respective dorms . Two incoming Seniors who have served as members of the Women's Council during their junior year will be nominated for the Chairmanship . Names of these nominees shall be
 To manage all financial business in her dormitory with the approval of the House President . House President to manage financial matters with approval of House President.
 The House President shall call a general meeting once a week at which time information from the Women's Council shall be presented and dormitory business discussed . Each student is allowed two unexcused ab sences a semester from House Meetings . The House president must call a General Meeting once a
 The third and each succeeding unexcused absence within a semester should be re-ported to House Council by the woman involved . House Council should re-portport the third, each succeeding excess absence within a semester .
 Each House Council, except those housing senior women only, shall be composed of a Chairman who is the House President . A Vice-Chairman is the other proctor; one representative from the junior class; and one Representative from the sophomore class .
 At the first House Meeting the women shall be asked to consider possible House Council Representatives in their class . The women's first House meeting will be held at the beginning of the year .
 The women shall elect their class representatives by means of rating sheets . A formal vote shall be taken two days later to determine House Council membership .
 The qualifications for House Council membership shall be drawn up in each dormitory by the women . The qualifications are drawn up by women at the women's dormitory .
 Election to and representation on House Council in senior dormitories shall be approved by the Women's Council . Election to or representation on . House . Council in . senior dorms shall be . approved .
 Summer study and recreation in the stimulating climate of one of our country's finest vacation regions . Combine summer study and . recreation in one of the nation's finest summer destinations .
 To keep records of each meeting for purposes of efficiency and to destory these records at the end of each semester . These records will be destoryed at the beginning of the semester .
 A woman incurs a case for infringement of any rule enumerated in the By-Laws . A case is made against a woman who infringes on any rule listed in the law .
 She may state her case in writing and give it to any one of the House Council members . She may also state it in writing .
 She may state her reason for breaking the rule if she wishes and whether or not she would like a reminder . She may also say she wants to be reminded of the rule .
 She must indicate how she will take care of her case if she does not request a reminder . She may come before the entire House Council and state her case and explain her reasons if she wishes .
 In the event of a frequent or flagrant offender the proctors may intervene . Proctors will intervene in the case of the offender .
 Give a firm warning to the woman, Request that she come before the House Council for disciplinary action . Discuss the problem with the Dean of Women and/or the Women's Council . Ask that the woman come before her House Council .
 Women's Council or petition signed by one-tenth of all registered women students . Petition signed by 1-10% of students signed by petition signed . Women's council is the largest group of registered students .
 A referendum must require a vote by secret ballot of three-fifths approval of all registered women students to be binding on the Council .
 Decisions of disciplinary cases are not subject to appeal . Decisions are made in accordance with the law and are subject to no appeal .
 A question for referendum must be appropriately posted at least five days before, the women are asked to vote . A referendum question must be published at least 5 days before the women vote .
 Amendments must be initiated by vote of two-thirds approval of the Women's Council or a petition signed by one-tenth of all registered women students . Amendments shall be appropriately posted at least five days before the women students arc asked to vote . An amendment shall require a vote by secret
 The By-Laws shall be amended by a vote of twothirds approval of the Womens Council . The By Law is amended by the vote of thirds approval .
 No amendment shall be made to the Women's Council Constitution which shall alter the Council's relationship to the Student Senate . No amendment to the Constitution will alter the relationship between the Council and the student senate .
 Seven Garnet Nine Slams Black Bears, 4-0 Suffolk Falls 9-2 while Bobcats beat Penn State 4-1 . Sports is a passion as universal as people .
 Being of the latter term myself, I find this characteristic as much at home in me as the appreciation of a cold beer . I find it at home to me as well as being at home with a beer .
 The art of crystalball gazing, in regard to athletes and such, is based on optimism, hope and the last name in that most famous of all double play combinations, Chance Chance . Chance. Chance Chance is Chance Chance Chance, the son of the late Chance Chance.
 The thoughts of next year's sports fortunes in Garnetland are conversation pieces wherever Batesmen gather . With wonderful summer just around the corner and another college year Tripping out the door, the thoughts of a college year are often discussed .
 STUDENT Sports Staff wishes for Bates athletics and their respected coaches . Bates senior athletes wish for Bates Athletics and coaches .
 Football — A fall surprise package in the persons of two six foot plus, two hundred and thirty pound tackles . The tackles are transfers from junior college .
 Coach Hatch's Goliaths as weight men and return to the Lewiston campus of Mike Gregus . Coach Hatch used the Goliaths to be weight men for weight men during the weightlifting session .
 The luck of the Irish in replacing an entire outfield, plus the two big ones at first and on the mound . The Irish replaced the entire outfield with a new outfield and a new mound .
 Oh for another slammer for Jimmy Wallach's crew . Bobby Thompson arrived but didn't get into trouble with the tennis legend .
 Jim Wallach is a junior tennis star at the Bates school . The junior tennis player has been in superb form in recent weeks .
 Thorn Freeman, Garnet mound ace, reversed his dismal Colby showing in a fantastic three hit shut out over Maine in which he failed to walk a man . Freeman's three-hit shut-out over Maine was a huge turnaround for Colby .
 Bates Bobcats beat Maine 4-0 at Garcelon Field in their first State Series game in two tries . State Series opener ends with 7-2 loss .
 They had opened competition in the Series chase with a frustrating 7-2 loss to Colby at Waterville, Thursday .
 Colby leads with a 1-0 record, Bates 1-1, and Maine 0-1 . State Series standings find only two games played . Colby and Bates are tied for first place .
 Shoddy defense and a lack of timely hitting spelled the Garnets' doom against Colby . The Garnets lost to Colby in the first round .
 Thorn Freeman started on the hill for Bates, and while not having one of his better days, might have come through with better support . Bates was not the star of the day, but he came through with a strong performance .
 Bill Davis hit a drive which was dropped in deep center field for a two-base error . Bill Davis' drive was dropped by Bill Davis in the first inning . The error was the result of an error by Davis .
 Bud Spector's bunt sacrificed him to third, and John Yuskis' fly to right drove Davis home . Davis was on his way to the plate in the first inning .
 Colby came right back in their half of the first when cleanup hitter Charlie Carey singled home two runs . Colby also came back in the first with two runs in the second inning .
 The roof fell in on Freeman in the second, when a walk, passed ball, single by Colby pitcher Ken Stone, and a Bates error loaded the bases with one out .
 Bruce Waldman then lofted a 3-2 pitch over the left-center field fence for a grand slam homer . Colby led 6-1 in Colby's first-half victory .
 Twice they loaded the bases with no one out, but these two threats resulted in only one run . Twice the teams failed to score a single run .
 Colby's second run scored when Howie Vandersea's hard ground ball with the bases loaded in the fifth was turned into a double play by the Colby shortstop .
 Big Thorn struck out ten of the Black Bears and walked none . Freeman was removed for a pinch-hit in the seventh .
 The game was a fine pitchers' duel until the Bates half of the eighth inning . The game ended in a three-run victory for the Bates team .
 The Bobcats had scored an unearned marker off Maine pitcher Dck Dolloff in the second . Maine had scored a run of unearned runs in the first two innings .
 Vandersea's bunt was fumbled by Dolloff for an error, putting men on first and third . Dolloff fumbled the bunt for the error . Vandersea hit a bunt to give Dolloff the lead in the first half of the game .
 Paul Holt worked Dolloff for a run-scoring base on balls . After a strike out and a popup, Holt worked out a popup . Dolloff scored a run of three runs for the team .
 A power plant that has the message, plus saving ways with a tank of gas, has a message to the world .
 Muffler and tailpipe designed to last as many years as the original buyer owns the car . The car's tailpipe and muffler will last as long as the owner owns it .
 Bates could never break through the pitching of Stone, also a Bobcat nemesis in basketball . Stone was also a nemesis for the Bobcat in basketball, also in baseball .
 Bob Lanz, Krzynowek, and Ron Taylor combined to give Bates an easy win over Suffolk . The win was Bates' first win of the season .
 Suffolk opened the scoring with a run in the second, but the Bobcats got four in their half . Suffolk scored four in the first half, with four in each half .
 The doors opened when an error in a double play attempt let in two runs . The error led to two runs in the first two innings .
 Bates scored 6-1 in the first three innings . Steve Egbert's triple drove in Archie Lanza . Yuskis scored on an error in the third .
 Doubles by Spector and Taylor scored the final three runs >in the fourth . Spector, Taylor and Taylor both scored doubles in the game .
 Suffolk's other run was a solo homer by Ray Connerty off Krzynowek in the sixth . Suffolk's run came from a solo home run by Ray Conway .
 Freeman was back in top form Monday, twirling a masterful three-hit shutout for a 4-0 win over the Royals .
 Thorn struck out Dave Gaw to retire the side of the inning . Maine got a man to second in the fourth on a single and a wild pitch, but he struck out Gaw .
 Yuskis made a good play on a grounder to end the inning . An error and single put two Maine runners on in the fifth inning .
 With one out, singles by Lanza and Vandersea and an error put runners on second and third . Vandersea was on a 1-1-0 lead in the game .
 Vandersea scored on a wild pitch, and Spector's single drove in MacNevin's goal . Spector scored in the second half .
 Lanza led the 'Cats with three hits, including a broken bat grounder which traveled a shorter distance than one piece of the bat . Lanza also hit a short-ranged grounder that traveled a short distance .
 The large Bates crowd was kept warm in the sunny but windy weather with some caustic comments from the back rows aimed at the visiting players .
 Bates plays at Bowdoin Thursday, and plays Northeastern at Garcelon Field Saturday . The Bates team faces a trip to Northeastern Saturday .
 The Bates College golf team is off to a blistering pace under the handling of Coach Robert Hatch . Golfers 2-1 in series; Brown, Simpson lead by two strokes .
 Seven of Bates' linksmen have combined to compile a six win, three loss record, including two wins in three outings in state series competition . Seven of the linksmen compiled a six-win, three-win record in three matches .
 Last week saw the team win matches over Colby, Babson, and Bowdoin, all by the identical score of four to three .
 Tom Brown, from Houlton, Maine, has the best win-loss record, winning five while only dropping one . Tom Brown has won five games, dropping one, while losing one .
 Close behind with a four-two record is frosh Lynn Simpson from Bristol, Conn. Close behind behind with . Close second with a . four-second record .
 Two brothers from Statford on Avon, Conn., ""Chuck"" and Walt Lasher, both with three-three records . Representing the team as numbers one and two men are two brothers . ""Chuck" and Walt "Walt" Lasher are both three-two men
 Playing in the fifth and sixth spots are ""Willy"" Farrington and John Schatz . The pair will play in the sixth and seventh spots .
 Schatz, Walt Lasher, Tom Brown, Lynn Simpson, and Lloyd Bunten also have two wins in state series . Schatz is the only person to win two state championships .
 Scorecard wise, five members of the team have dipped below the eighty mark on the par seventy-two Martindale Country Club course . The team has won four of their last five tournaments .
 Lloyd Bunten turned in a below eighty score against U of Maine in a losing effort . The first four men, C Lasher, T Brown, T Simpson, W Lasher and L Simpson have subeightied the course more than once .
 With the course drying out and the greens getting faster, scores should be going down . The Bates win column should also be going up in the win column .
 Chuck Lasher and Tom Brown remain in competition in the current pool tournament . The two golfers are competing in a billiard tournament in New Jersey .
 Chuck is in the finals in the final of the billiard tourney with Tom in the semi-finals in the billiards . Chuck is also in the semis of the tourney . Tom is in a semi-final of the tournament .
 Trackmen Humble 3 Opponents; Williams Takes Three Big Wins . Williams takes 3 Big Wins; Williams takes three Big wins .
 The various Chase Hall tournaments are still in a very confused state . However, the finalists ought to be decided upon some time next week .
 It seems that many of the games have been played off-campus at Lou's Place . It's very difficult for me to obtain the scores, for I make it a point not to frequent such establishments .
 The pool tournament seems to be quickly drawing to a close with Tom Brown making the finals . Tom Brown will be playing in the final of the tournament .
 The winner of the GillespiePequegnot match and the winner of Strassburger-Kramer match will play each other for the privilege of facing Mr Brown . Mr Brown will be the first to face Mr Brown in the competition .
 The bell that rang Saturday afternoon included in its chimes a winning chant for the victorious track squad . The team posted 97% points at Colby, Brandeis and Norwich .
 Colby managed to obtain 31% points, Brandeis 27% points and Norwich 19% points . Norwich managed to manage 19% of points .
 Garnet thinclads unbeaten so far this spring in two outings in two matches . This leaves the Garnet Thinclads undefeated in two of their spring games .
 Paul conceded to a third win in the high jump, which Tom Bowditch handily won . Not satisfied with three wins, Paul conceded a third in high-jumper .
 Finn Wilhelmsen sets two new track records . The untiring gate of the Finns led him to not only two first places, but a pair of new records .
 Wilhelmsen broke the old record by one second in 4:31.8.8 . The one mile run was the fastest ever in the world for a distance run .
 A little later he smashed the established two mile track record by 14 seconds as he pranced across the finish line in 9:46.2.2 . He also broke the established track record of 9:45 seconds .
 Eric Silverberg placed fourth in the mile and second in the two mile . Silverberg and his cohort placed second and fourth in two mile races .
 Harvie managed to tie the track record in the high hurdles with a time of 15. seconds . The high hurdles took place in 15.2 seconds .
 Senior strongman John Curtiss wins weight events in weight events . Curiiss stars in the weight events for the first time .
 Curtiss then entered an event he had previously never competed in, the hop, step and jump, and placed fourth . Curtiss entered the hop and step, and then placed fourth in the jump and step event .
 Dave Harrison and Wayne Pangburn placed third and fourth in the hammer . Curtiss and Harrison finished second and third respectively in hammer .
 Although the Bobcats were favored in this tri-meet, it wasn't expected that they would crush their opponents by such a large margin .
 All in all, the 'Cats showed a great deal of strength, and their performance against the U of Mass., Tufts and Northeastern next week will be something to watch .
 Some individuals have still to play their second round of competition, while others have advanced to the fourth and fifth rounds . Some individuals still have yet to play in the second round .
 Some of the preliminary matches seem to be advancing at a very slow rate . This might be due to my second complaint, some of the matches are moving at a slow rate. I'm not sure why this is so slow .
 The boys from East Parker forfeited their A league game to J.B.; too many conflicting events . The boys forfeited the game because of conflicting events in the area . The East Parker boys were playing in the A league league .
 Nick Basbanes made 2 errors in left field that let in four runs for the opposition . The highlight of the game was the amazing inefficiency of one of the players .
 Stu Solomon, sometimes referred to as the ""Lion of J.B.,"" was exceedingly poor on the mound . Also known as the "Lion" Solomon, also known as "Stu Solomon," was a poor hitter .
 The score was 5 to 4 in favor of W.P. but it could have been anybody's game . The score of the game was 5-4, but it was anybody else .
 If all the games are as good as this one was, however, the A league should prove to be very exciting . The first game of the new Premier League season was played in London .
 The netmen lost 7-2 to the Polar Bear . Bowdoin Polar Bear eliminated a chance of anything but a tie for the state series title .
 Junior Jim Wallach, the only undefeated man on the Bobcats, has been pacing the team . Wallach has been in singles and doubles for the entire team .
 He defeated the Bowdoin captain, Sam Ladd, by the scores of 9-7; 4-6; 6-1 . He defeated Ladd by the score of nine-7 .
 Wallach teamed with freshman Bob Thompson to defeat Ladd and MacDonald in three sets . Wallach and Thompson defeated MacDonald in sets 4-6, 6-4; 6-2, 4-4, 6.2 .
 Thompson's three set loss to Norm Tom was the best any other Bates player could do . Bowdoin swept the remaining seven points with Thompson losing three sets .
 Wallach won the number 1 singles against Babson handily, defeating Gary Rottenberg 6-2; 7-5 . Wallach also defeated Gary Babson in the singles .
 The Wallach Thompson team smashed the Babson team off the court 6-0, 6-2 in doubles . Wallach and Babson beat each other 6-1 in doubles in the tournament . The team also smashed Babson's team off-court in the doubles .
 The Bobcats had another easy match against Colby in Waterville, Maine, on Saturday . Colby beat the Bobcats 2-1 in their last match .
 George Beebe, playing well both at the net and from the base line, won in straight sets 6-2, 6-1 . Beebe played well both on both sides of the court and at the back .
 Jim Wallach didn't remove his warm-up jacket in 6-2, 6-1 win over Andy Murray . Wallach beat Murray in straight set 6-3, 6.2 . The U.S. Open champion is ranked No. 1 in the world .
 Jim Wallach, playing ""his toughest match of the year"" won in three sets 6-3, 6-8,6-2 from Bill Deering . Wallach was playing his "toughest match of year" against Deering, playing his toughest match ever .
 Bob Thompson lost and Jim Corey was extended to three sets before winning . Jim Corey extended his three sets to win in three sets . Bob Thompson also lost to Jim Corey in the final set .
 Todd ""Hamlet"" Lloyd made his return to the Bates line-up with a 6-2, 6-1 win over Todd . George Beebe turned in another 6-0 win for the Bates team .
 The next imporant matches on the Bobcat schedule are Bowdoin, Friday, May 3, and Tufts, the following day . The Bobcat is currently ranked No. 1 in the men's volleyball team rankings .
 Although rated underdogs, the Bobcats must be given a chance to defeat the proud Polar Bear . The Bobcats are bolstered by the return of Todd Lloyd, who is expected to return .
 STate 2-3771 Bobcat Of Week Paul Williams is versatile junior Paul Williams . Williams is the Bobcat of the Week . Williams was a versatile junior at the University of Washington .
 Williams scored 17 points at Colby Saturday in a four-way meet with Brandeis, Colby, and Norwich . Williams, a biology major from Rutherford, New Jersey, displayed his potential Saturday .
 Williams has been hampered in the past by injuries, Williams took the field in top condition . Williams is expected to return to the field for the first time since his return to action .
 Williams tied for second in the high jump behind winner Tom Bowditch . Williams finished second in his day's high jump .
 "Willy" is pleased to have 'Willy' back in top condition, and sending out a warning to the upcoming Garnet foes to beware . It is needless to say more than we are pleased to . have ""Willy"" back on top condition .
 The Chase Hall Dance Committee, the Class of 1964 and the Outing Club have banded together to present Spring Weekend, 1963 .
 The Bates Art Association will be presenting an exhibit of student work . The exhibit will be on Friday, Saturday and Sunday, May 10 to 12 . These ""rites of spring"" will be kept on May 10-12 .
 Weather permitting the works will be exhibited on a snowfence along the walks facing Coram Library . If not, the show will be held in Hathorn Hall .
 Colby College students will contribute to the exhibit . Colby Art Association is pleased to announce that students from Colby college will contribute .
 In all likelihood this will be the first intercollegiate art exhibit that has been held at the college . The art exhibit is expected to be held in conjunction with the University of Wisconsin .
 The different media represented will include water colors, inkwash, block prints, oils and sculpture . Water colors will be represented in a variety of media .
 Tony Agby and his Continentals will play an open air jazz concert on Coram Library steps . This will be followed by a jazz concert from 8:30 to 10:30 on the steps of the library .
 In the afternoon, there will be varsity baseball and tennis with Clark, and Thorncrag cabin will be open all day . Thorn Cragg cabin will also be open .
 The highlight of the weekend will be the Ivy Hop from 8:00 m. to 11:45 . The Ivy Hop will take place on Saturday night at 8:30 a.m.
 A spring-like ""kaleidescope"" pattern provides the theme for this semi-formal gala event in the Alumni Gymnasium .
 The week-end will be topped off by the clambake on Popham Beach on Sunday . The event will take place at Pompam Beach in the early morning .
 Committee Omits Student Choice From Registration Procedure . Students found that they were not required to make out schedules before registering for next year . Students will be able to choose their own schedules .
 Many advisers were unable to answer questions concerning the omission of the schedules . The schedules were omitted from the schedules.
 Registrar Mabel Libby explained that students will no longer be permitted to choose the instructor or the time of courses offered in multiple sections . Students will not be able to choose instructor or time of course dates .
 The STUDENT consulted Prof. Prof. John Defterios to discover the reason for the change .
 Buschmann explained that "last year we had to change nearly every student's program" Buschman explained that last year's program had to be changed to accommodate students .
 The professor felt that a phenomenon such as this is the result of the large number of Core Courses students are required to take . Professor felt that such a phenomenon is a result of students being required to study Core Courmes .
 Buschmann replied that the Committee does not function like an IBM machine . Queried as to whether he felt this new system would tend to make Bates' students nothing more than ""small, friendly, coeducational" numbers"
 Committee will try to plan a schedule so that a student has three classes on one day and two on the following day . A Fair Schedule will be used to design a schedule for students .
 Certain students, such as those who work in the dining halls, will be given preference so that their sections do not interfere with their work . Professor Buschmann mentioned that certain students will be able to work in dining halls .
 Professor Buschmann explained that the confusion among the advisers concerning the change in procedure was an oversight on the part of the Sectioning Committee .
 In debating, oratory and extemporaneous speaking, Bates representatives finished first . The squad easily won the overall sweepstakes competition .
 Robert Ahern '64 and Tom Hall '64, on the negative, defeated Albertus Magnus, St. St. Mary's and St. Peter's . The two teams also lost their first two games .
 Blum's oration was judged best in that division . Ahern won the Extemporaneous Speaking Contest . Blum won the oration best in his oration .
 Both men received an individual trophy, the four debaters received a trophy for their combined efforts and the sweepstake trophy was presented to Bates for their total showing . Bates and the other debaters also received individual trophies .
 This Conference marked the conclusion of a year of competition which included 70 varsity victories and 35 losses in debates with colleges from across the country .
 Of late the varsity had finished third in the MIT tourney and second in the New England tourney .
 Kenneth Woodbury '63, a graduate of South Portland High School, acted as moderator of the debate . The debate was held in Portland .
 Isaiah described his dream of a peaceful world, and Edward Hicks, a Quaker from Jonitis, will study Arab world at Utah University . Dr. Hicks is a preaching Quaker and will study the Arab world .
 Dr. Dr. Martin Martin is an instructor of Race and Cultural Relations in a World Prospective . He is the author of a book on race and cultural relations in a world Prospective, Dr Martin says .
 Jonitis spent the summer of 1959 as the director of a group of college students participating in an educational seminar on Egypt and the Middle East . Jonitis was a member of the group who spent that summer in Egypt .
 He taught in Jordan during the academic year of 1959-60 . He traveled extensively in the Middle East .
 He spent the summer of 1962 as a Fulbright Fellow in Taiwan at the First Institute on Chinese Civilization . He spent that summer in Taiwan during the summer .
 Lewision -Auburn Chess Club is now meeting every Wednesday evening at 7:30 at the Auburn Municipal Building, 45 Spring St., Auburn .
 Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, illustrated these words and this dream in his painting, The Peaceable Kingdom .
 A choral work by Randall Thompson will be performed as the principle work of the Commencement Concert . This hope of all men inspired a work by the composer .
 The next two performances will take place during Senior Week at 8:30m. on Friday and Saturday, May 31 and June 1 .
 Other works included in the program are the Entrada Festiva for brass quartet and organ by Flor Peeters . Program Varied includes works from Flor Peeter, the composer of the same period of time .
 Commencement Chorus will sing a selection of light classical works . Gustav Hoist's Autumn Song will be performed at the University of Cambridge .
 English composer Henry Purcell represented by his Sonata m G Minor for clarinet and piano . Barry Davidson '66 on the clarinet, John Cook '65 at the piano . John Cook'65 on the piano at the end of the Sonata .
 Donald Fredenburg '63 will be featured in a performance of Parks Grant's Essay for French Horn and Organ . The performance will be held at the University of Cambridge .
 Commencement Concert will be climaxed by the chorus' performance of The Peaceable Kingdom . The peaceable Kingdom will be performed by the choir .
 The Student Senate, Women's Council and Men's Council Constitutions have all been passed by the required two-thirds percentage of registered students . The student senate, women's council and men's council constitutions have been passed . Students are encouraged to vote for the Student Senate and Women
 Seventy-one percent of the studentry voted last Monday and 96% of the voters favored the Senate . The Senate is the highest-ranking Senate in the country .
 On October 21, the initial election of Senators will take place and the selection of officers will follow a week later . The first election of officers is scheduled for October 21 .
 Salisbury's observations were not based on superficial knowledge of international politics, says Salisbury . Salisbury says it is not the first time the country has been in touch with international politics .
 Salisbury objects to the distinction commonly made between ""domestic policy"" and ""foreign policy,"" and feels that our political thinking must ""catch up"" with technological advances which have made these two ""worlds"" inseparable, Salisbury says .
 There are several minimum requirements which the U.S. must consider in dealing with other powers . The United States must consider these minimum requirements .
 American policy must meet the challenge and dangers of opposing systems, thus objective information and analysis are essential . In order to do this, we must measure the strengths and assets of the U.S.
 The convention has the primary purpose of providing the opportunity for delegates to work together in coordinating individual chapter activities and in gaining insight into the problems which presently confront education .
 The Bates delegation to the conference included Joyce Schilcher '63, Elaine Woodford '63 and Ron Stead '64, Dave Zuretti '65, and club advisor, Dr. Dr. David Zureti '65 .
 Dave Zuretti was elected vice-president of the Bates chapter . The Bates chapter will have one member among the three state officers this year .
 His duties in this capacity, in addition to filling in for the president when necessary, will be concentrated on publication of the Newsletter . His duties will be to report the entire world through the threat or use of force .
 To impress our dictates on other countries by force would actually have destroyed the democratic system . But this would be a logical contradiction, for ""Our way is a democratic way,"" says David Cameron .
 Russia has achieved ""clear technonogical breakthroughs,"" beginning with the first Sputnik, which gave her an enormous propaganda advantage, particularly in underdeveloped countries . Today, Russia is our equal in nuclear power, and has achieved clear technonational breakthroughs, says Putin .
 According to Salisbury, Russia will ""almost certainly"" beat us to the moon, and it is essential to the prestige of the U.S. that she accelerate her efforts in the space race . Salisbury says Russia will "almost certainly" beat us .
 Unlike the United States, he does not neglect non-military means of imposing the Communist viewpoint on other nations . Unlike the U.S., he does . Unlike U.K. President Barack Obama, he doesn't neglect nonmilitary means .
 The U.S. containment policy advocated after World War II has been ""leap-frogged"" as the Soviets infiltrated nationalist movements in India, Burma, Iraq, and Egypt .
 The Soviet challenge in coming years will be consistent in military advances, propaganda, and technology . Russia will challenge the U.S. military in the coming years, experts say .
 Salisbury: One new phase may dominate — growing disparities within the Communist world . Salisbury stated: But, one new phase, may dominate . But, Salisbury said, "one new phase ... may dominate"
 The United States might have been aware of the split between China and Russia several years earlier . With a more forward-looking foreign policy, the U.S. might have known about the split earlier .
 The SinoRussian rift makes the position of the U.S. more difficult, not less, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The rift makes it more difficult for the United States to deal with .
 Tony Curtis, Yul Brynner mm ""Tara8 HUIiBA"" J^K Burt Lancaster, Shelley Winters, Shelley . Winters . Curtis, Winters and Curtis .
 In 1960, he joined the State Department as Deputy Under Secretary of State in the Agency for International Development . He served on the Foreign Affairs Committee of the House for four years .
 Critics of the aid program agree that the U.S. has spent many billions of dollars in Asia . Coffin: "No final victories over Communism have been achieved"
 The alternative of withdrawal would open Asia to the Communist Chinese, Coffin says . Coffin says withdrawal is not the only option .
 This would lead, in turn, to a Communist threat to Australia, Hawaii, and other presently non-Communist sections of the Pacific Area . This would also lead to the Communist threat of Australia and Hawaii .
 At each step the aid program is reviewed and examined as though it were a new and precedent-shattering proposal . The aid program will be reviewed as though each step is a new proposal, experts say .
 Coffin believes that a consensus on foreign aid already exists in the United States . Coffin: Congress must realize that Congress needs to realize it .
 He called for an end to the constant ""reopening of issues that have been settled before,"" and a true coming of age in this field of foreign policy . He said he wants to end the constant "reopening" of issues .
 This should have been the answer of our nineteen weekend guests from the American Field Service Exchange Student Program . Most of them had a world view that greatly transcended the provincial outlook of the average citizen of any country .
 Guests were critical of the U.S. in the wake of a terrorist attack in Afghanistan . CNN invited the group to a White House dinner in Washington, D.C. on Sunday night .
 This is understandable because exchange students are always picked from the top echelon of each country . This is because they are picked from each country's top talent . The exchange students will be selected from around the world's top ranking .
 The greater validity and importance of their ideas because they are tomorrow's leaders is greater . Hence, the greater validity of ideas .
 One of their most interesting criticisms of America concerns our social life . Criticize stress oiu Sex .
 Most people felt that we place too much emphasis on sex and very little on friendship and conversation . Most felt that sex and friendship were too much more important than friendship .
 On the positive side, most of them enjoy the informal nature of our homes . On the negative side most of these homes are informal homes .
 Most Americans appreciate the easy and sincere friendship of most Americans excluding dates . President Obama and Hillary Clinton have been married for more than 30 years .
 The American student generally lacks any appreciation of culture and is immature to his counterpart in other countries, guests say . According to most of the guests, the American student lacks any appreciative of culture .
 Little Brother posters are posted in the men's dorms for those interested in having little brothers for the coming year .
 The Council would like to remind those who sign up that there is a good deal of responsibility involved, and only those truly interested should volunteer .
 Food and Smoker — Brooks reported that there will be a smoker on May 14th in Lower Chase Hall . The tournaments will be finalized in May .
 The remainder of the meeting was taken up with the discussion of proctorships . The meeting was adjourned to discuss the future of the university .
 Anyone interested in maintaining the bowling alleys in Chase Hall should voice their opinion to Dean Boyce soon . Bowling alleys should be maintained by the bowling hall .
 The Conduct Committee is considering removing the alleys, not those who object . The conduct committee is considering their possible removal . The alleys are considered to be removed .
 Anyone interested in a summer job career in the insurance field can call Paul Sadlier or the placement office . Anyone with an insurance job is encouraged to contact Sadlier .
 Bible Reading Contest was held last Friday night in the Little Theater . Although announced as canceled, the contest was canceled .
 Roberta Mescavage '66, reading from Isaiah, won first prize . Phyllis Porton '65, reading Ecclesiastics, secured second prize . Roberta's reading from Isaiah received first prize, and reading from Ecclesiastic .
 The Westminster choir was, for the most part, very successful . Some people were disappointed to hear the music of Pierre de la Rue .
 The proposed Administration Building on which work will be started this summer is expected to be completed this summer . Illil Illil will be the first building to be built on the site .
 "I also would like to be* in a city, that offers plays, concerts, etc. — an atmosphere more cosmopolitan than provincial," she says . She says she wants to live in a 'cosmopolitan' city with a cosmopolitan atmosphere .
 She said Bates has a tendency to suppress creativity rather than to support it . She said she left Bates for her own life .
 There is too much emphasis on memory in the courses, not enough thinking, says Simon Cowan . Cowan: 'There are too many courses that focus too much on memory'
 Professors require memorization because students expect it, but learning isn't a question of memorization . Perhaps the professors require it because of the students' expectations . Learning isn't an easy thing to learn, but it's not a question .
 "I've had enough of a small college atmosphere, and I'll have more opportunities in a larger college," she says . She says she's had enough to move to a larger school .
 "Lewiston is not appealing to me, nor is the cultural and social environment of Bates appealing. In addition, the cultural environment of Lewiston is also not appealing," she says .
 It has all the limitations of a small school in a small city in small state . It's a small town in a state with a population of about 500,000 people .
 This protracted minor piece seemed more like a lesson in difficult harmonics than a unified composition . It seemed like it was more like an attempt at a lesson of harmonics rather than a composition .
 Copland's solo part in this piece was well handled and so the blame for this let-down rests solely with Copland . The solo part of this piece is well handled by the composer .
 The extreme hollowness and brilliant diction made this piece memorable . The bass section was extremely subtle and gave me the feeling of a great gregorian temple . The extreme . hullowness . and brilliant . diction made it memorable .
 The first finale, de cribed as a ""scene of despair and lamentation," seemed to lack despair . Reviewer: "The first finale seemed, to this reviewer, to have lacked despair and lamented"
 The finale to Act II was very lively and if one shut his eyes, he probably couldn't see . "If one shut one eye, the eyes probably wouldn't see," he said. "The finale to . Act II is very lively."
 Most of the other pieces performed were rounds or other inconsequential numbers . The other pieces of the piece were rounds, or other numbers .
 Special plaudits should be extended to the director, Warren Martin and of course to their brilliant accompanist, Hadley Yost . The wellknown accompanist is the wellknown Hadley .
 There were times during the program when their music seemed esoteric, but this review er was happy that this group did not pitch their selections down to their audience .
 Tod Lloyd's voice, the variety of the tone, was magnificent . The whole performance was something very vibrant and spiritual, says Lloyd . Lloyd: "I thought Tod's voice was magnificent"
 Lewiston THE ""HOBB"" LAUNDRY SERVICE oi All TYPES PIPE DREAM by ELAINE KENSETH '65 .
 Robinson Players' production of "Hamlet" was seen in some quarters as being the efforts of a mediocre group of actors . This was Professor Tagliabue's comment on the recent Robinson Players production .
 This was not an attempt to rival any efforts of the Old Vic, or, as Prof. John Defterios says . It was not a rival of any efforts made by the London authorities .
 Shakespeare is difficult to produce, whatever the degree of experience and talent possessed by the performers, it is said . Shakespeare is a difficult play that is hard to produce . The play is set to be released in London on Sunday .
 Every actor and actress, as well as each individual member of the audience who has ever read the play, has some preconceived notion as to how the action should be reproduced .
 The great mistake is to take this preconception into the theatre with the thought in mind that one is going to see how well the performers measure up to one's own ideas . The greatest mistake is not to take preconceptions into theatre .
 A much better way to review, I feel, is to attend a production with as few preconceived notions as possible . A better way of reviewing is to focus one's attention on the interpreation of the perand criticizing because their interpretation doesn't correspond with one's own .
 Using this as a basis for criticism, one can fairly evaluate the performance of the U.S. government .
 Doctor Chute, for example, found the play highly enjoyable, but was still able to criticize it objectively . The play is set in New York, New York City .
 Judy Mossman turned in a vibrant performance in Stratford, England . Mossman was not trying to compete with her counterpart in the productions .
 The flames of enjoyment or dissatisfaction have cooled somewhat by now, but really the more important issue is whether or not college acting groups should attempt to stage such productions . The flames have cooled by now .
 The performers are not challenged and the audiences are not interested in attending plays which just seem to exude their milk-toasty, mediocre content . The audience is not interested at these plays, and the performers aren't challenged .
 The consensus is that noble efforts well done have their reward in the enjoyment gained by an appreciative audience . The consensus was that noble work well done has its reward in an appreciating audience .
 "There can be no doubt that the full-house audiences on all three nights enjoyed immensely this most worthwhile endeavor," the author says .
 China has employed Russian defeat in Cuba as a major propaganda weapon . Cuban dictator is economically dependent upon Russia, but he has been preaching Chinese ideology .
 According to Salisbury, ""Khrushchev is stuck with Castro,"" and probably dislikes him as much as we do . Not join China because Cuba requires so much financial aid from Russia, Salisbury says .
 Almost every major Communist party in Asia except India and Mongolia has supported China . That there are indications of panic in Moscow is not surprising, it's not surprising . Russia is the only major Asian Communist party to support China .
 Salisbury suggests that the government should be more selective in choosing areas in which to combat Communism . Salisbury says government should have been more selective .
 His plan calls for a ""strong-point policy" based on areas vital to our defense which can be defended . His plan is called for a 'strong point policy'
 India, for instance, ""is the key to Asia today,"" and is essential to its defense. India is also essential to Asia's economic success . India is an important part of the continent's economic growth .
 The Outing Club has required students wishing lunch purchase either clams or lobster . Popham Beach Outing requires students to purchase lobster or clams .
 This policy represents a change from previous years when beach-goers had hamburgers, potato salad, and desert supplied by the Commons without charge .
 Commons is again supplying the same free lunch, in lieu of the dinner served to students who remain on campus . The Outing Club is forcing students to pay at least a dollar for that lunch .
 For this dollar the student will receive clams in addition to the Commons lunch . The student will also receive a dollar from the student .
 The price of hamburgers remains the same regardless of the size of the burger . The price is the same if you want to buy a hamburger at a restaurant .
 Students must purchase Commons lunch that has already been paid for . The Outing Club hopes to use the money to finance the outing .
 An editorial in the January 30 issue of the STUDENT noted that many students use the time between semesters not to attend Winter Carnival, but to go home . No time to relax, students say .
 An evaluation of Carnival with a possible re-channeling of money and work into another weekend was suggested . To alleviate this situation, an evaluation of carnival with a re-charity is suggested .
 The Outing Club has asked for Winter Carnival to be held during the second term . Winter Carnival would probably be held on the weekend of February 8 and 9 .
 An expression of opinion on the following possible alternatives would be helpful to the Committee . The Committee would like to hear from the public about the possible alternatives .
 Examinations at the end of the first term would be rescheduled to run through Saturday afternoon, with the first classes of the second term to begin on the following Monday .
 Ostensibly the purpose of the change in dates is to encourage increased attendance at Winter Carnival . Ostensibly, the move in order to encourage more attendance at the Winter Carnival is hoped to encourage .
 The removal of the semester break, by scheduling final exams through Saturday and beginning the second semester on Monday, would deny many students the opportunity to relax pent-up emotions and frustrations .
 With Monday and Tuesday as no-cut days, the second semester would begin with many students not ready to start studying . The second semester of college will begin with no-cuts days .
 Students would spend Winter Carnival weekend as they presently do — relaxing at home . And it seems very likely that having been denied a respite between semesters, many students would spend it as they currently do .
 First semester finals have been extended from Thursday to Saturday . Winter Carnival has been extended to Saturday instead of Thursday night .
 Plan III — Complete first semester finals on Thursday and provide a Rob Players Movie on Friday night and an informal dance on Saturday night for those students who remain on campus . Plan III: Complete first term finals and provide first semester movies on Friday and Saturday nights .
 We realize there are difficulties involved in this plan, but still think it superior to abolishing the semester break or not changing the weekend for Winter Carnival . We realize that there are some difficulties involved, but think it's better than abolishing semester break .
 Sports Editor Nicholas Basbanes '65 Sports Editor Robert Lanz '65 Business Manager Steve Talbot '64 Photography Editor . The Bates College Daily News is published weekly at Chase Hall, Bates College, every week .
 The Robinson Players, the cast of Hamlet, and the director would like to express their appreciation for the overwhelming support of the Bates student body during the production of the play .
 Most college theater groups can expect to draw only 15% of the students at their performances . More than 50% of Bates students attended Hamlet .
 We would also like to take this opportunity to thank the student body for its support of the Robinson Players' film program this year .
 It is our hope to continue to bring high quailty American and foreign films to the Bates campus that could not be seen readily otherwise . It is also hoped that the films will continue to be shown at Bates .
 The article is one of the most disgusting, tasteless, and thoroughly stupid articles I have seen in the four years I have been at Bates . And yet I do denounce it, and denounce it wholeheartedly, as a tasteless article .
 Jim seems to have forgotten that he saw the play not in the Golden or Majestic Theatre, but in the Little Theatre at Bates College in Lewiston, Maine . For some reason, obscure to me, and I'm sure to most of those who read the review, he seems to
 His article would indicate that he had seen Sir Laurence Olivier's Hamlet the night before he saw Tod's . He was comparing the two, with the former's performance coming out on top by a substantial margin .
 Tod has a long way to go before he attains the stature of Sir Laurence . But he also thinks that Jim is not quite far enough along to aspire to Walter Kerr .
 "Jim's review is the only reaction to the play that most alumni will come in contact with," he says . "Most importantly — and I think most importantly — . unfortunately — unfortunately — Jim's review will be his only reaction," he adds .
 It is truly a same that the over-all student opinion is so grossly misrepresented by a single pen . To alumni, to the alumni, Bates' Hamlet is more a Paul Anka-like figure than the fine characterization that the overwhelming majority of Bates students felt .
 Most individuals expect a critical review to express a reasonably common opinion, or at least to be well justified . Most people expect the critical review of a book to express the most common opinion .
 For this reason they cannot always be expected to be valid and fair . But at least they should be consistent, they should always be consistent .
 The thought and actions of the I character Hamlet are so inti1 mately tied up with the play as a whole that the two cannot be separated without disasterous results . Mr Kier' nan's article on Hamlet which appeared in last week's STUDENT failed to fulfill even
 Either Kiernan's complimentary generalities were platitudes, or the bulk of his criticism was unjustified . Either Mr Kiernan’s generalities are platitudes or the majority of his criticisms are unjustified.
 Jim Kiernan's review of the Robinson Players production of Hamlet has been met with criticism . The Robinson Players' production of the play has been criticised by some .
 The common opinion has been that the play was a great success and that Jim's review was unjust, uncalled for, and just plain off base . The common view is that Jim was wrong to review the play, and that he was wrong .
 "All criticism is understood as a personal attack. In this college of this size, everybody knows everybody else," the student says .
 "It must have taken a degree of courage to write down what he did. I believe that Jim knows this, and it must have been courage to do this."
 'I suffered nothing from the review; my role was comparatively far more simple than that of the leading role. I suffered nothing," he said . 'I played a very simple role in the role of a leading role,' he added .
 The role of Hamlet is one of the most challenging roles an actor can attempt . Hamlet was a great play, and the role of the play is a great challenge for actors to overcome .
 It seems almost inhuman, especially for a college student who is carrying a full load of courses along with it . It's almost inhuman for a student to carry a full-load of courses with it, especially at college .
 Jim, unfortunately, seems to think that Hamlet, to remain a divine creation (which it most certainly is not), can only be read rather than acted, since to bring it to the level of mortals would be to desacralize it . But unfortunately, Jim thinks that Ham
 Shakespeare wrote for the Globe Theatre, not for some kingdom in the skies . He said: "I can only say that Shakespeare . wrote for Globe Theatre not some kingdom . Not some kingdom of the skies, he said of the Globe .
 Shakespeare was not only mortal, he was an Englishman; and I am sure Jim will agree with me that nobody has ever put words together as well as Shakespeare, and very likely never will . Nobody has ever been able to put together words together better than Shakespeare .
 As far as the criticism of Hamlet is concerned, Jim ran into a basic problem, he says . "As far as Hamlet was concerned, it was not Hamlet's fault," he adds .
 Hamlet review of Hamlet is a review of a play by the playwright . The play is set to be published in the spring of 2015 .
 The part of Hamlet dominates the play so uncompromisingly and in so garganteum proportion that I cringed when Miss Schaeffer just announced that the spring play would be Hamlet . Hamlet is so powerful that he cringed that he said, 'I cringed'
 Robinson Players are a group of hard working and devoted students, many of whom consistently turn in fine performances . The Robinson Players have a reputation for their performances .
 It would take more than what many of the players possess to master the giant, even if he was somewhat more sensitive than the rest of the rest .
 "I knew from whom Miss Schaeffer had to choose, and her choice surprised me," she said . "Her choice surprised her, and she surprised me"
 As with most of her casting ""surprises"" in the past, this one testified to her genius . It again displayed her perception of character .
 Tod Lloyd came very far but robbed himself of a complete victory because he did not lift his Hamlet and lost the full power of his character . Lloyd came far but was not able to lift Hamlet because he didn't lift it up .
 I won't again explain what I felt was lacking in his interpretation — it seems many of my fellow students believed I have already said enough . I will not again explain why I felt that his interpretation was lacking, but I felt it was lacking .
 Tod Lloyd created (something which at first I believed him incapable) and created well . Lloyd created something which I believed was incapable of . Lloyd's creation was something which he believed was impossible .
 His criticism was that he compromised what might have been a most masterful performance . He said he was disappointed that he had compromised his performance .
 I felt upset that he had reached so far — but because he wanted his Hamlet sullen — he did not reach any further . He said: 'I felt upset . But because of his desire to make Hamlet sulken, he didn't reach further than he did
 "There has never been anything that has held me emotionally and intellectually as much as it has. There has been nothing more than that," she said . "There is nothing more important than that in my life," she added .
 Our Readers Write kind of group has produced it. I seldom miss an opportunity to see a play no matter what I do . The play is set in New York .
 "I have made the assumption that I am more acquainted and more emotionally attached to the theatre than many of my fellow students. I have made an assumption that . I'm more acquainted with theatre than I am with other students," she says .
 I am an amateur, starved for theatre, who feels a part of their world when I am able to vicariously feel their excitement and write about it .
 "I haven't one set of standards or several sets to judge a production," she says . "Only an appreciation of talent and technique," she adds . "I'm not a judge, only a judge," she said .
 "I pick out what is good and find things that the people themselves (not others, especially not professionals) might do to better their performance. I pick things that I find good and good things to do to improve my performance,’s the author says .
 "It is not my purpose to find fault but in a small way to show my appreciation and to help others, possibly, appreciate more what the players have done. It is not the purpose of finding fault but to show the appreciation," he said .
 Each person connected with a play becomes emotionally attached to it . "As it grows, they grow. As it grows they grow," says the author of the play .
 In these troublesome times, it takes some doing to keep one's perspective . The book is helping us think clearly, and it's a book that helps us to think clearly .
 Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures by Mary Baker Eddy has helped many of us to do this . This book has helped us learn more about science and health with the Bible .
 We invite you to come to our meetings and hear how we are working out our problems through applying the truths of Christian Science . Christian Science is a Christian Science organization .
 Dr. Steve Browne's letter is as well guided and as sincerely written as his protest for Dr. Dr. Steven Browne . Dr. Browne's protest was as sincere and well guided as his letter .
 Mr Kerr is the theatre critic of the Herald Tribune — once my idol, but now an example for me of a theatre tyrant . He was once his idol, and now he is an example of him of theatre tyrant.
 I mention her in reference to Judy Mossman because I was sure the people in the Robinson Players would know of her . If I wrote for anyone, I write for and to them. I mention Mossman in reference .
 I have tried to be honest, objective but discreet, and not on any circumstance to attack anyone. I have been honest and objective, not attacking anyone, I said . I'm sorry for the way you've been treated to by the media, I'm sure you're going to be
 I have tripped along that thin line and have written criticism that I hope celebrated the people and possibly added to the readers' grasp of the play . I have been critical of the people in the play, but I hope it celebrates the people .
 Tod Lloyd ate, drank, and lived the part of his life, Lloyd says . Lloyd: "It was not just a part, it was a great responsibility. It was not a part"
 As I am not ignorant of these things now — I was not unaware of them last week . As I'm not ignorant, I was aware of them now, as I am now, I should have been. As I’m not ignorant now. As a result, I�
 My review stands as an attempt to see and understand just what went on when the Robinson Players produced Hamlet . It stands as a review of Hamlet's production .
 You may all disagree— and the more of you who do, intelligently and honestly, the better our understanding will be of Hamlet . The more people who disagree will be able to understand Hamlet, the more they do .
 When experts disagree, it is always wise to compare their qualifications, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 I would request that the Bates STUDENT publish the qualifications of their drama critic in order to compare the value of his statements with those of other critics .
 Brooks Quimby '18 TTTTTTTT7 Arbeitgeber bevorzugen |unge Damen mit einer GIBBS Ausbildildung . Brooks quimby "18" ise in ihineine gespective . Brooks
 Malcolm Mills' column has caused controversy in the STUDENT over the column of one Malcolm Mills . Support From Afar is a weekly feature on CNN iReport .
 While it may be whipping a dead horse to revive the controversy, I would like to offer an outside opinion . I'm not sure whether it's a good idea to use the controversy to revive it .
 This Mills may be a bit on the morbid side, but his detractors are infantile to quibble with him . Mills' detractors may be infantile, but he's got a lot of respect for his work .
 Self-righteous condemnation of ""Another Man's Poison" is whimperingly ridiculous . It's all very well and good to object to a column on reasonable grounds, but self-righteousness is ridiculous, says author .
 Malcolm Mills' last week's column was sarcasm-freezing, not sarcasm . Mills' column was written with sarcasm, not with the undeserved sarcasm of letters two weeks ago .
 Though his most recent creation may be poison to some, it was a tangy coke for me . Though his latest creation may . some, some of the most recent creations may . be poison .
 I cannot fail to fail to admire someone who has the courage to say what he believes, particularly when he knows his is a minority position . I cannot . fail to be impressed by the courage of a man who has courage to speak out .
 The same quality, spirit, and courage that were present in such men as Socrates, Jesus, Galileo, and Bruno, as well as Socrates and Galileo .
 Schopenhauer once said that nothing arouses antipathy in ordinary men so much as the presence of intelligence in one of their community . The presence of an intelligence in a community arouses the antipathy of ordinary men, he said .
 No Edisons any more, only X Research Center; no Jeffersons, but instead, a Department of State . No Edison any more . No Jeffsons any more. Instead, there's only a department of state .
 Don't misunderstand; I don't say this is bad, but just unfortunate in the context of the plight of the individual . Don't say that's bad, just unfortunate, but unfortunate, in context of individual .
 The day they make teamwork out of philosophy and religion is the day I'll think of migrating to Mars, says John Sutter . Sutter: "The day they . make teamwork . out of . philosophy and . religion is what I think of migration to Mars"
 I think last Friday's chapel exemplified exactly what I think students find objectionable in the programs . I think the students find it objectionable in programs. I think it exemplifies what they find objectionable .
 The fault lies not so much with the selection of speakers, for the qualifications of Mr Coffin and others we have had are excellent, says Mr Coffin . Mr Coffin's qualifications are 'excellent'
 If he had been speaking to a high school audience or if on this basis he had gone on to bring out important implications, then the speech would have been worth listening to with some degree of attention .
 I wish to comment and express my sincere appreciation to the campus community for the splendid attendance and response to Saturday evening's performance of the TRADEWINDS in Chase Hall . "I wish to express a sincere appreciation" for the performance .
 This was perhaps one of the first, if not THE first sold out performance of anything in that venerable hall . The show was perhaps the first sold-out performance in the venerable hall.
 It was a thrilling sight to see a live, enthusiastic, virile, and warm (in all senses of the term) audience thoroughly enjoying the program . The audience was enthusiastic and enthusiastic .
 Too many apologies cannot be offered for the inconvenience caused by the necessity for the rapid ""renovating"", but you will grant, I hope, that the results were more, much more, than union rates .
 "Such an evening at Bates is a tremendous social and psychological uplift," says Bates . Such an evening of such uplift is a "tremendous social" uplift .
 It is a pleasant indication that perhaps the campus isn't quite so dead after all . It's an indication that maybe the campus might be alive again after all, it's a sign .
 Much credit for Saturday's success must be rendered to the individual members of the CHDC, the advisor, Dr. Dr. Michael Lister . Much credit also must be given to the team's individual members .
 In Latin America, the most active revolutionary movement in the world is centered around Castro . Other dictators will arise unless the U.S. provided immediate economic assistance . The United States must provide economic assistance to the Castro regime .
 Our failure to plan for the future has been ""a product of our immaturity in foreign affairs,"" and must not be allowed to continue, says President Obama . Failure to plan is a "product of our immaturity in foreign affairs"
 "America must learn that foreign policy problems are never solved," says President Obama . In order to meet the Communist challenge, the U.S. must learn, he says .
 The most encouraging yet simultaneously discouraging impression I received from these students was their desire to return to their homes and work for the improvement of man — all men . The students were encouraged to return home and work in their homes .
 I sincerely hope that when they return to their homes that they will keep their world view without forgetting their heritage . I sincerely . hope that . when they . return to . homes that . they will . keep their . world view .
 CHDC is anxious to learn of your reactions, comments, and suggestions with regard to further events of this type . The CHDC wants to hear your thoughts and suggestions .
 "We hope to be able to build for the future upon the foundations so well established on Saturday. Thus, we hope to . build for . the future," he said in a statement .
 In several recent communiques to the student body various members of the administration have corrected the figures that I used in an article criticising the idea of accelerated education at Bates .
 I regret that the ideas which I presented were not likewise attacked . I am grateful for these corrections but I do regret that I presented my ideas were not similarly attacked .
 The ideas were subjective due to the nature of the case and were thus open for criticism . The idea was subjective and therefore open to criticism .
 The issue of acceleration is important to our college and only through discussion will the conflict of values be settled . Only through discussion, the conflict will be settled, says the college president .
 I hope that my article stimulated some discussion by presenting what I feel to be the shortcomings of academic acceleration . I hope it will stimulate some discussion about what academic acceleration is .
 Huskies Take 8-6 Slugfest at Slugfest . Huskies take advantage of Slugfest to advance to the top of the standings .
 State Series activity is spring-time activity in the spring . The spring semester is nearing the end of the semester .
 Bobcat baseballers finish their part of series commitments with Colby here on Monday not in first place . They have a fine opportunity to tie the presently reigning Mules for the Pine Tree laurels .
 The big bear from the North is expected to arrive in Orono, Maine, today . But they must first vanquish the big bear, which they must defeat today .
 Maine likely to throw ace pitcher Tim Thomas, who has already defeated Connecticut, Vermont, Massachusetts and Bowdoin . Maine has beaten both Bates and Colby, once beaten by both .
 The 'Cats and Thorn Freeman won't have a simple matter on their hands . Thorn Freeman will be the subject of a new book, "Thorn Freeman" The book is published by Thorn Freeman .
 These two games, in addition to Friday's game with Harry and his Bowdies, are essential wins for our Garnet baseballers in order to remain in contention .
 If we win all three, and Colby should later lose to Maine or Bowdoin (the other three play up to May 24), then we would be undisputed title holders .
 An essential requisite in the art of winning baseball is tight defense . A tight defense is a key to winning baseball games .
 At the beginning of the season the Bobcat infield was so tight that a hungry rabbit would in passing have had to make a detour . At the start of this season the infield was tight enough to keep a rabbit from getting in .
 This area of seemingly infallibility has weakened in recent years . But lately it appears that this area of infallibility is weakened .
 Northeastern's five unearned runs Saturday helped them win the game . This is evidenced by their unearned run against the University of Massachusetts . Northeastern won the game 5-2 .
 An improvement in this department is needed for the 'Cats to take their last three in the states . An improvement is therefore necessary for the Cats to win the last three .
 The State Track Meet will be held on May 11 at Waterville . The annual climax to spring track is the State Track meet .
 Our tracksters will be in search of a better showing over last year's defeat at Brunswick where they finished a dismal third, topping only lowly Colby . The tracksters finished third last year, topping Colby, in a dismal showing .
 We extend congratulations to the pugilist prize winning ""Gaylord"" Farquhar and ""Hawk"" Stewart .
 Both previously inexperienced, maybe ""next time"" experience will bring a bigger prize . The pair are hoping to win more medals .
 The Bates nine beat Bowdoin 3-0 in weekend baseball action . Thorn Freeman pitched a six-hit shutout for the Polar Bears .
 The 'Cats lost 8-6 to Northeastern at Garcelon Field . Saturday's loss was a heartbreaking loss to a strong Northeastern team . A large home crowd gathered for the loss .
 Thorn Freeman's fine pitching performance spelled the difference against Bowdoin . Freeman pitched a fine performance for the Bulldogs .
 Freeman struck out eleven and walked only two as he pitched his second consecutive shutout in state series play . Besides limiting Bowdoin to only six hits, Freeman also struck out 11 batters .
 Freeman retired the side on an infield popup and two strikeouts . With two men on base, none out, Freeman bore down and retired the .
 Frank Nicolai, the Bowdoin starting pitcher, was stingy with the basehits also .
 Paul Holt walked and wound up on third when Monty Woolson's bunt was booted around . Holt was on the way to third in the inning . Woolson had a bunt in the first inning .
 Fast-action Twin-Stick Floor Shift option lets you call the shots as never before . For instance, the fast-action floor shift option is a new addition to the Twin Stick Floor Shift .
 Rambler won Motor Trend Magazine's ""Car of the Year" Award . See your local dealer for some straight talk about why the car won .
 Ted Krzynowek's pickoff and Red Vandersea's tag keep N. E. baserunners close to the bag . See our fine Se&c* Used Cars y-M'Miiii'y: Ted, Red and Bud Spector's sacrifice
 Nicolai then dug his own grave by hitting Holt Holt to force in a run and by walking Yuskis for the final Bates tally . Nicolai hit Holt, forced in a single, then walked Holt to the plate in the final inning .
 Bates, Yuskis, MacNevin and Vandersea each collected two safeties . Paul Holt collected a double for the Bobcats' seven hits for the team .
 Bates has a 2-1 record in state series play and kept them in the running for the state crown . This win keeps Bates in the race to win the state championship .
 Saturday afternoon saw ""Old Man Weather" treat the home fans to the first warm day of the season . Saturday afternoon was a warm day for the first time in the Premier League .
 The Bobcat nine lost 8-6 to Northeastern in their first game of the season . The Northeastern beat the Bobcat 9-1 at the University of Washington State .
 A chamber of horrors display of fielding at inopportune times allowed five unearned runs to score in the first five innings . A Chamber of Horrific display of field errors allowed the hosts to win five runs in five innings.
 Tighter fielding for Bates during this stage of the game might have spelled the difference in the final outcome . Bates fielding might have been the difference of the match .
 Bates staged a rally in the bottom of the fifth . Howie Vandersea singled and Steve Egbert walked in the top of the inning .
 Dennis Feen stepped up to the plate as a pinchhitter and blasted a threerun homer over the left field fence to make the score 5-3 . Feen hit a three-run homer in the ninth inning to make it 5-2 .
 Northeastern countered with a two-run homer in the top of the sixth to pull away 7-3 . Northeastern scored in the final inning .
 Bates came back in their half of the sixth when Paul Holt's triple scored Lanza and Spector, and narrowed the score to 7-5 . Bates came from behind to win the game .
 Both teams failed to score in their next turn at bat and the Bobcats entered the home half of the ninth trailing 8-5 . The Bobcats went into the game 8-4 .
 Spector's fly ball ended the rally and the game . Egbert then walked, but Spector hit a fly ball to end the rally .
 The Bobcats showed that with tighter defense they can play ball with any team in New England . Bobcats beat the Patriots 3-2 in their first game of the season .
 Thorn Freeman has been selected for this week's honor of Bobcat of the week . The senior fireball pitching senior has been named the Bobcat . Freeman is a junior at the University of North Carolina .
 Thorn was selected this winter for the same prize as a basketball standout, of which he was captain . Thorn has displayed similar ability on the diamond as a player on the basketball team .
 The psychology .major was a two-sport star in basketball and baseball . He came to Bates and excelled in the same departments . He is a psychology major .
 Thorn pitched a three-hit shutout, striking out ten and walking nobody . Thorn pitched against Maine, striking ten and walked nobody .
 Thorn followed up this fine performance with a six hit shutout against Bowdoin . On Friday, Thorn pitched a six-hit shutout .
 For this game he struck out eleven and walked only two as he gained his second straight victory in state series competition . It was the second straight win for the state series champion .
 Thorn gets the toughest pitching assignments of Bates hurlers . This brought h i s seasonal . earned run average to date to 2.08 .
 The most amazing fact concerning the ability of righthander Freeman is the amazing control he exhibits . Freeman is known for his ability to control the ball .
 Seven golfers crush Colby, lose to St. Louis University . We feel that he deserves the chance to join its ranks . i i i Bates was a college student in 1963 .
 Even without number one golfer Chuck Lasher, the golf team still managed to break even, posting a .500 record for the week .
 The Bobcat linksters beat Colby 4-3 and then Monday suffered a 5-2 defeat at the hand of St. St. Mary's St. Francis .
 Top Colby John Schatz elevated from the lower ranks as a ""sacrificial"""" victim surprised by shooting an 82 and beating Colby's number 2 man one up . Schatz shot an 82 in Colby .
 Lynn Simpson took medalist honors with a 75 and a two-up win over McNabb . Simpson won the tournament by two shots . Simpson was the only person to win the tournament .
 Phil King made his ""return to the starting six a winning one as he bested Lapides 2 and 1 . Phil King won his first race back to the start six .
 Tom Brown took one of his rare defeats at the number three position . Wally Lasher Winner St. Louis defeated Tom Brown at number three . Tom Brown was defeated at the top of the order .
 Anselm's took the measure of Bates at the Martindale Country Club in a rather onesided match . Bates won the match in a one-sided affair at Martindales Country Club .
 Walt ""Whip"" Lasher, beginning to show a little of last year's form, won at the one position 2 and 1 . Lasher won at one position at the end of the race .
 John Schatz playing the ^role expected of him in the Colby match was routed 7 and 6 . Schatz was routed by Colby 7-6 in Colby .
 Tom Brown returned to winning ways and kept the best record on the team with a 3 and 2 victory . Tom Brown won the game 3-2 .
 At the present time, the linksmen have a 3-1 record in State Series play . The linksmen are currently ranked third in the world .
 The linksters, to keep in contention, must post a victory, even without the services of their number one veteran . They must win to keep up with the challenge they face at the top of the table .
 Coach Brian McCall of Maine rates the state series a toss-up . Maine coach McCall rates the series a 'toss-up' and this is a good chance .
 The mercury registered 80° when Harvie streaked over the hard-packed cinders to win the highs in 15. seconds and the lows in 24. seconds . The race took place in a scorching heat of 80° .
 Bobcats chalked up a total of 38 points in the contest, including three firsts, four seconds, three thirds, and five fourths . The Bobcats won the game by three points .
 Harvie Hurdle Champ placed second in the high hurdles and third in the lows . Captain Bill LaVallee came in third and fourth .
 Wilhelmsen clocked his best time so far this season, 9 minutes, 41 seconds, to finish second in the two mile run . Bronillet of U Mass. was also in the top spot .
 The high jump saw Tom Bowditch in second place with Dave Johnson in third place . The high-jump was a huge success for the high jumpers . The event was held at the University of Manchester University .
 John Ford placed third in the quarter mile and Pete Graves fourth in the half mile . Pete Graves placed fourth in a half mile. John Ford came in third in a quarter mile .
 Dave Harrison earned a fourth in the hammer while Eric Silverberg finished fourth in two mile . Dave Harrison also earned a 4th in hammer and 4th place in the two mile event .
 The Redmen reigned supreme on their home field, showing their power in the distance runs and the field events with plenty of depth all around . Redmen Tough
 Big Dick Ward, Penn Relay point taker, was nosed out of first spot in the hammer by Corsetti of Northeastern . Ward went on to win the high jump and discus and picked up a third in the shot for an impressive 15-point afternoon .
 Flashy halfback Fred Lewis was back in school to win the broad jump and take points in the dashes . Fred Lewis won the broad jumps and the long jump .
 Bronillet added a first in the mile to his two mile win as U Mass. piled up 60 points in a decisive victory . Bronillet also won the mile and the two mile .
 Northeastern looked good in the middle distance runs, and in the weight events, collecting a 46-point second place . Northeastern won 46-points in weight events and middle distance events .
 Tufts started off well, winning the dashes and the 440, but lacked depth and finished fourth with 21 points . Tufts won the 440 and dashes but finished fourth overall .
 State Meet scheduled at Colby this Saturday . U Maine looms a solid favorite for the title .
 Some outstanding performances could register an upset in favor of either school . Bates and Bowdoin may have to harry the Black Bear's heels in order to keep up the pace .
 Maine's McPhee will remain king of the dashes unless an overconfident staff allows him to enter the quarter . The state of Maine will not allow him into the quarterfinals .
 The remaining places should be divided up between Williams, Ford, White of Colby and Rounds of Bowdoin, according to state law .
 The 440, barring McPhee, will see two of his classmates, defending champion Parker and Spruce, up front . Ford and Bowdoin's S 1 o w i k also taking points in the 440 .
 Graves will have to defend his '62 championship against Slowik of Bowdoin and Ellis and Hodges, both of Maine . Graves will face Slowik and Ellis in the '62 finals .
 LaVallee and Maine's Hicken will be after Harvie's title in the high hurdles . Maine's L.A. Hicken also will compete in the event .
 Black bears and polar bears will compete for honors in the weights . Polar bears and black bears will go head-to-head in the final weigh-ups .
 Maine's Nason and Bowdoin's Frost will be trying to unseat last year's champion Blood of Maine . Maine's Frost and Nason will go head-to-head this year . Blood won't be the first time since 2008 .
 John Curtiss of Maine wins javelin at state championships . John Frost of Maine will be pressing Frost for shot at state championship .
 Maine's Dean Dean looks good in the pole vault, but no one is ruling out Kramer Kramer . Kramer has a history of pole vaulting in high school competitions .
 Bowdoin's McDowell will have to defend his broad jump championship against Williams . McDowell's broad jump title is the first time he has defended it .
 Maine's Lahait will not be giving them any helpful hints . Bowditch and Johnson would like to see first and second in tjie high jump .
 Curtiss will be chucking his spear alongside of Delaite for javelin fame . Curtiss is one of the world's most famous javelers . He will compete in the Olympics in 2016 .
 Two bears and a bobcat fight it out in a contest which will feature the burial of a mule in its own back yard . Whatever the results of the contest, the fur will be flying as the fur is flying .
 On Friday, May 3, Lewiston's City Hall was the recipient of an avid crowd of Bates students . Bates students were in attendance at the event in Lewiston .
 Amateur 'Cat gladiators' were scheduled to appear in the longawaited amateur fights . The event was the long awaited amateur fights in which three 'Cat Gladiators were scheduled for appearance .
 The fight card was composed of no less than 18 bouts . Two of the bouts were graced with the presence of our own pugilists . The fight was made up of 18 bouts, two of which were held by the British boxer .
 Officials were unable to pair Ron Leblanc with an opponent . The officials failed to find a way to pair the pair up .
 The ""Frenchman"" then paired with Teddy ""The Cut Man"" Davis, and served as a cornerman for the other boys . He then paired up with Teddy The Cut Man Davis and served as cornerman .
 James ""Hawk"" Stewart was the first of the Bates men to demonstrate his ring savvy . Hawk Meets Local t Jl .
 The "Hawk" met up with a tough local boy and held his own until fatigue set in .
 Hawk knows the full effects of gravity, which is evident in assessing Hawk's post-fight statement . Those that witnessed the fight should be aware that Hawk knows that he knows that .
 He told a reliable source that he didn't realize the gloves were so heavy and that thg canvas was built so close w his trunks .
 Gay Lord displayed an ability to ""mix it" but he too was the victim of the 3rd round fatigue . Gay Lord was a victim of third round fatigue in the final round .
 Many people in the crowd felt that Grant met up with the classiest fighter on the card . Many people thought that Grant was the best fighter in the world .
 Both boys lost decisions, but they put on a good show . Although both boys lost, both boys put on good performances .
 Bates fight crowd should be pleased with their respectable showing . Bates fight fans should be proud of their efforts .
 Gaylord and Hawk are now the proud owners of trophies, which were learned from each other .
 Beal 1 1 1 .000 . 2 1.000 after 11 games . Beal is the only player to have a record of 1.0.000 .
 Holt 35 5 10 2 3 7 1 1 8 18 9 .286 18 33 3 .286 . Krzynowek 10 1 5 1 .100 .100 5 1 1 1 Lanz 4 1 1 • 1 2 2 2 1 .250 1 3 1 .
 Lanza 34 6 11 3 1 1 1 . 1 1 7 17 4 .324 13 17 4 4 .883 MacNevin 24 3 5 1 3 2 1 10 8 2 .208 68 2 1. 1 1 Lanza .
 Vandersea 39 9 8 2 1 8 2 I 8 13 6 .205 80 3 5 .943 Woolson . Woolson 27 4 4 4 1 2 1 2 2 1 10 7 1. .148 10 1.1 Vandersea. Woolson. 9 1 1 .148
 Net ace Jim Wallach has only lost one of his net games this season . Wallach is the only player to be beaten only once this year in a row this year .
 Smith South will be the '62-'63 Intramural champions . Ah Hatttor £>m a Jt by RED VANDERSEA '63
 A late surge in the Chase Hall Tournaments will pull the Herculean Cult over the top . The cult will be crowned the winner at the end of the season .
 The Lewiston High Extension is located in the general area of Jackie B . Congratulations to Don Cellar, who was the individual bowling leader .
 Bill Beiswanger might make baseball practice this Thursday . Beiswillanger is expected to be back in the field for the rest of the week .
 Pete Peguinot or Dave Kramer will face each other in the finals of the pool tourney . Tom Brown is waiting confidently for either of the pair to reach the finals .
 A get well wish to Chuck Lasher who's in the hospital making a little money on the side . Lasher is making a lot of money from the side of the business . He says he wants to make a get well .
 He'll be in good shape for his championship billiard match with Tom Cameron . Tom Cameron is a professional billiards player and a professional athlete .
 Bill Graham, and Pete Glanz are all finalists in the Ding-Dong Tourney . Bill Graham is a three-time winner of the tournament . Pete Glan and Bill Graham are also finalists for the title .
 Paul Castolene and Pete Glanz have taken time off from their busy study schedule to be in the finals in the Bridge Tournament . The pair have been playing in the tournament for the past two weeks .
 A successful softball league is being carried out at Bates College, Bates College . With the pitter-patter of duty sneakers on the green playing fields, the softball team is playing .
 A special thanks to Al Francoeur, the very able intramural coordinator, who has done an excellent job this spring .
 West Parker took it on the chin last Sunday from their sister clan, East Parker . East Parker won their first game of the season against West Parker . West Parker won the game by a narrow margin of victory .
 After watching Roger Bill play last week I came to the conclusion that they just don't have it . Roger Bill plays for the USMNT, but he says he doesn't think he has it .
 Hon Stead is the greatest thing to hit the pitching hill since Satchel Page . He is the best thing you can hit the pitch with a good pitch . Stead is also a great thing for the game .
 "Bad Bobby" Cheklov performed at the end of his career in Russia . Chekkov is a Russian national known for his role in the Soviet invasion of Crimea in the 1990s . Chekov is the son of Chekov, a former KGB officer .
 Senior class leaves to Gaylord Farquar a jar of ""Smidlop Glue"" with which to put his chin back together . You have to do something if you can't hit .
 Smith South will hold an open house May 10th from 4:00-6:00 p.m. to prove to the rest of the campus what a swell bunch of guys they really are . The open house will be held in honor of Smith South students .
 Bobcats beat Bowdoin 7-2 in a match played at Brunswick . Bobcats defeated the college school in Brunswick . The Bobcats are ranked No. 1 in the U.S.
 Jim Wallach continued his brilliant play by again defeating Bowdoin ace Sam Ladd in three sets . Undefeated Wallach continues his brilliant tournament run with victory over Ladd again .
 Freshman Bob Thompson defeated Art MacDonald in straight sets 6-1, 8-6 . Captain Jim Corey defeated Norm Tom 6-2, 6-8, 6 -2 . Captain Corey downed Norm Tom in straight-sets 6-3, 7-2 .
 George Beebe beat Hugh Hardcastle 6-3, 6-1 to make it five out of six for the 'Cats' Beebe now has five wins from six in singles competition .
 Steve Hecht saved face for the Polar Bears by defeating Jim Dodds in straight sets . The Polar Bears defeated Dodds 6-2, 6-3, 6.5, 7-5 .
 The Wallach and Thompson doubles team defeated the Bowdoin combo of Ladd and MacDonald by the convincing score of 6-4,6-4 . Wallach, Thompson and Thompson are undefeated doubles team .
 Beebe teamed with Al Williams to defeat Hardcastle and Schwartz 6-4, 6-0 . Beebe and Williams teamed up to defeat the pair .
 Tom and Hecht spoiled* a Bobcat sweep of the doubles by upsetting Corey and Lloyd in straight sets, 6-4,6-4 . The Bobcat swept* the doubles doubles . Corey, Lloyd and Lloyd won the doubles .
 It was a must win for the 'Cats and they responded to the pressure in fine fashion . Assured of a tie it was a 'must win' for the Cats .
 The victory practically assured them of at least a tie for the State Series Crown . The victory was the first for the Red Sox .
 Bates handed Tufts its first setback of the season 6-3 in a match played Saturday on the 'Cats' home courts . Tufts lost the match to Bates in a straight sets set on Saturday .
 Jumbos ace Snider defeats Wallach in straight sets 6-1, 7-5 . Wallach was defeated for the first time in nine matches . Snider won 6-2, 7.5 .
 Thompson easily defeated Schlief 6-0, 6-2, and Corey defeated Trafton 6-1,6-4 . Thompson easily downed Schlief 6-0 .
 Dodds and Lloyd won in similar fashion as they were forced to three sets . Dodds, Lloyd and Lloyd win in three sets as they are forced to play three sets to win .
 Bender came through with the second singles victory for Tufts with a 6-4, 0-6,6-4 verdict over Beebe . Bender also won the second match by beating Beebe in straight sets . The Tufts women's singles team won the other match by 6-
 Bobcats won two out of three doubles doubles contests . Bobcats win two of the three doubles matches .
 Wallach and Thompson defeated the Tufts' team of Snider and Schlief 6-2, 8-6 . Wallach, Thompson and Thompson remained undefeated by downing Snider, Schlief .
 Beebe and Williams again combined for another victory, defeating Bender and Epstein 6-3, 6-2 . Williams and Beebe also defeated Epstein and Epstein in the same match .
 Trafton and Wallace prevented a Bates sweep by barely downing Corey and Jack Wilson 6-3, 3-6, 75 in a closely contested match . The Bates sweep ended in a narrow victory over Jack Wilson .
 The annual WAA Spring Sports Award Banquet was held in Fiske Dining Hall, Monday night .
 Nora Jenson Toastmistress . Dean Randall, Dr. Dr. Randall, Dean Randall and Dr. Jenson . Nora . Jenson was the toastmistress at the end of the ceremony .
 Milliken-Miichell Champs Nora then introduced Carol Kinney who first explained the system of awards and then made the presentations .
 Many girls from all four classes were awarded either numerals, ""B's"" or sweaters . Many girls were given either "B's" or "A's"
 Carol then presented the basketball trophy, this year having won by Milliken-Mitchell with a 6 win, no loss record . Carol presented the trophy .
 Captain of this team, Barb Remick, came forward to receive the trophy which will remain in Milliken until next year . Captain of the Milliken team received the trophy .
 The final and most coveted award to the outstanding senior athlete was then presented by Miss Kinney .
 This award is made annually to the senior girl who has won her sweater, competed in interdorm sports, been a member of ""playday"" teams, aided WAA, and has displayed the qualities of sports manship in competition .
 Two Cheneyites, Lou Carey and Judy Warren, were honored with trophies . Lou Carey was honored with a trophy . Judy Warren was awarded a trophy for her role in the community .
 A special thanks goes to WAA for time spent in preparing such a charming affair .
 There is fear that we lack understanding of the world challenge, the vision without which freedom will perish . The world challenge is the vision of freedom, without which it will perish, the author says .
 Sargent Shriver assumed the directorship of the Peace Corps in the spring of 1961 . The Peace Corps was the first organization to be created in the U.S. in 1961 .
 Peace* Corps has sent more than 4000 young (and not so young) people into more than forty countries throughout the world . More than 4000 people have been sent to more than 40 countries since 2001 .
 Often called the silent generation, these men and women are serving as surveyors in Tanganyika, farm extension workers in Columbia, rural school teachers in the Philippines, and as community health workers in Costa Rica .
 Two members of the present Senior Class have chosen to spend the next two years of their lives working abroad under the auspices of the Peace Corps . The Peace Corps is based in Costa Rica, Costa Rica .
 Other tests covered areas of particular pertinence to the candidate's specialized field . The tests included areas of special interest in particular areas of expertise .
 Peter will follow a similar schedule of training as that of Judy Warren . Judy Warren will be coached by Peter at the same time as Judy .
 He hopes to be sent to Colombia to teach English and participate in community health projects . He plans to spend time in Colombia teaching English and participating in community projects .
 Dean Healy: "Essential to personality of any institution is the maintenance of certain traditions" The Peace Corps has a new ring to AmerFifteen .
 Healy emphasized Honors Day as an important tradition at Bates . Healy announced the names of seniors who had earned recognition as outstanding members of their class .
 Professor Gesta Ernest Lexen died of a heart attack yesterday at 3:30 at his home at 32 Mountain Avenue . Lexen was a professor at the University of Columbia University .
 Lexen Lexen, 40, suffered a massive coronary. Haas, the attending physician, said that Lexen . Haas, who was forty, was forty . Haas . Haas: "Lexen was forty-years-old. Lexen suffered massive coronary"
 Lexen, who came to Bates as an instructor in Physics in 1954, has been an Assistant Professor since 1957 . Lexen has been Assistant Professor at Bates since 1957. Lexen is an assistant professor at Bates .
 Lexen was an active participant on Faculty teams and a frequent spectator at Bates sporting events . Judy stated that she believes in what they're trying to do and think it's a good thing .
 She will study language, customs, and geography of Latin America with special emphasis on Costa Rica . She will eventually work as an instructor in health education in conjunction with mobile health units .
 Peter Koch's interest in the Peace Corps is a strong sense of adventure . The Peace Corps Volunteers Tested by Peter Koch . Koch is a Peace Corps volunteer .
 The idea behind its creation dates back some fifteen hundred years, when St Benedict led young men from the comfortable society of Rome to work in the underdeveloped areas of Europe .
 William James proposed a ''peace army" of young men to go to war against nature . William James was one of America's greatest proponents of such a movement . James was a proponent of a peace army .
 Peace Corps was created by President Kennedy in fulfillment of a 1960 presidential campaign pledge . The present day Peace Corps is trying to furnish mankind with some of the substitutes . Purpose of Corps is to provide people with substitutes .
 Sargent Shriver Atlantic Honors Six In Essay Contest Prof. Prof. Michael Schriver: America must be present at the birth of a world community . America must help make it successful."
 Several Bates students have gained recognition in the 42nd Annual Creative Writing Contest sponsored by the Atlantic Monthly Magazine . The Atlantic Monthly magazine sponsored the contest .
 Funeral services for Dale Hatch '66, will be held tomorrow, at two o'clock in the Central Square Congregational Church in Bridgewater, Mass. Dale Hatch will be buried at 2 p.m.
 Flowers or other expressions of sympathy may be sent to the church or Mr and Mrs. Mrs. Smith .
 Steve Quattropani '65 is currently recovering in Bath Memorial Hospital . Steve is recovering from his injuries in Bath Hospital Hospital .
 What appeared to have been bronchial pneumonia has been checked with anti-biotics and his temperature has dropped markedly .
 Stetkevych hopes to be able to release Quattropani today or early tomorrow . He will have to wait and see if the fever continues to subside .
 A total eclipse of the sun will occur on July 20 and its shadow will cross Maine from Quebec beginning at 5:41m. The eclipse will take place at 5.41m . The sun's shadow will pass over the state of Maine from Maine .
 The eclipse will last for four minutes and pass into the Atlantic at 5:45. It will be the first time it will pass over the Atlantic . It will last four minutes .
 At any one point on the earth a total eclipse of the sun is visible only about three times in 1,000 years . In one calendar year two eclipses must occur and five are possible . Total eclipse of sun occurs at any point in 1.000 years, although in one calendar
 There will be only five total solar eclipses visible from anywhere in North America from now until 2025 . Only five total eclipses will be visible from North America until 2025.
 This eclipse of the sun will occur when the moon passes directly between the sun and the earth so that the moon's shadow is cast upon the earth . This eclipse will be the first of its kind to take place on Earth's surface .
 Solar eclipses do not occur each time the moon is new; the moon's shadow passes either above or below the earth . This always occurs at new moon, but solar eclipses always occur at new .
 Solar eclipses may be partial, total, or annular, depending on the size of the shadow cone falling on the earth . Partial, total or total eclipses can be seen in some cases .
 They are visible as total over a very narrow band of the earth at any one time . They may last from a few seconds to eight minutes .
 On behalf of the Bates students we would like to express our deepest sympathy to the Hatch and Lexen families . We are saddened by the loss of two young people .
 Carolyn Berg, Howard Blum, William Holt, William . Holt, David Hosford, Nancy Levin, Mildred Pruett and Mildred . Pruett . Trask.
 Carolyn Berg, in physics; Howard Blum, in government; David Compton, in French; William Dunham, in history; Nancy Levin, in sociology; Lois Payne, in mathematics; Anna Poehler, in biology; Natalie Shober, in economics; George Stone, in Economics .
 David Hosford, Leslie Nute and Mildred Pruett won high honors . Joyce Schilcher won mathematics, history and French .
 William Holt, in chemistry; and Judith Trask, in English . Highest honors were awarded to William Holt in chemistry and Judith in English. Highest honors awarded in chemistry, English in chemistry .
 Neale Schuman and Nancy Levin were honored as the outstanding senior members of the Outing Club . Schuman was honored as an outstanding senior member of the club . Levin and Schuman were honored for their service .
 Carolyn Berg, Elizabeth Davis, Joan Lang, Nancy Levin, Elizabeth Little, Nona Long, Carol Long . Elizabeth Little was elected to the Bates Key Club from the senior class .
 Howard Blum, Paul Castolene, Thorn Freeman, David Hosford, William Holt, William LaVallee, Douglas Smith, George Stone, Howard Vandersea, Louis Winkler were chosen as College Club members . William Holt was chosen as president of College Club .
 Bruce Frost of Bowdoin, with three firsts in the weights, won the Hillman trophy as the meet's most outstanding athlete .
 Garnet points were picked up by Williams, Ford, Wilhelmsen, Harvie, Curtiss, and Bowditch . Satisfying human relationships can make a big difference between success and failure in college .
 Whether it's a roommate, a professor, your family, or friends, you want to get along well with them . You want to be friends with your roommate or professor .
 We are learning a lot about this through our study of the Christian Science textbook, Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures, by Mary Baker Eddy .
 John Wilson and John Wilson climbed up to the very top of the mountain, and at the summit met Roland Baldrick the Yodeller . At the summit, the Yodyeller met John Wilson .
 Baldrick, 27, gave a recital lasting about a half hour . In between numbers he told us how he had learned to yodel, and interesting things about the art in general .
 Standing atop a rock, Baldrick appeared supremely free and happy . Baldrick is currently in a state of peace in South Africa .
 He became interested in this old form of music while in the Army stationed at Frankfurt, Germany . The shepherds and mountaineers wanted to call each other from one mountain peak to another .
 Baldrick remembers almost every new song he hears . Although he cannot write music, Baldrick can't write music . He would go up into the mountains and practice with the experts .
 He has appeared with the Grand Ol* Opery, on the Ted Mack Show, and on both the Steve Allen and Ed Sullivan shows .
 David David extended a general invitation to anyone on the campus to come up and listen, and talk, and maybe even learn to yodel . David extended the general invitation .
 Roland Baldrick i will make your day a much hap pier one . He will give you just a few minutes to watch Roland make you smile and laugh .
 WRJR will be leaving the air at midnight on Wednesday, May 15 . Fall broadcasting activities will resume soon after classes resume .
 WRJR will have the new equip. ment given by station WGAN I **** Friday night I went to installed. Mediocre Group, Faulty Piano from six-thirty to midnight .
 "This time, yes, this time, they'll fP endour of the Chase Hall — i, mu' v ballroom. I'm sure that many smile at * U » to the Perversity of Mother this, but all that I can say is, N f
 In the letter we send to freshmen, we advise them to an . wha * r ^ y0nd bring FM radios and this would ""J , W ° rSt f*™' 1 WBBrt that be worth considering for the w "" a was taking place .
 Head arrangements were botched; entrances by soloists were missed and had to be cov ered over . We plan our time unison head arrangements and head arrangements .
 The pianist was the only one who escaped, "because everyone else [was so loud he couldn't be heard] because everyone else was so loud," the pianist says .
 In passing I would like to say that it is an insult and a [disgrace to ask a professional musician to use the tinny, out of-tune upright piano that graces the ballroom . There are several concert pianos around, including a brand with you in
 The Alumni Association is currently compiling a Directory of all alumni . In its place the Alumni . Association is presently compiling a . directory of alumni .
 Anyone who is interested in such a Directory should see Frank Stred, or stop by the Alumni Association Office .
 JfWflf Lewiston new one, that seems to be just taking up space in Skelton Lounge, one flight up . Lewiston is one of the new additions to the Lewiston library .
 I don't in any way blame the students who brought this group here for the ""big"" spring event . God knows they tried to get some decent music this year .
 New ideas are a dangerous and troublesome thing . But you know what happened to those plans — no precedents allowed, for new ideas are dangerous .
 Miles Davis and his sextet will perform at Bowdoin's Ivy Concert on Friday night .
 Finals permitting, finals permitting, it is being held in the Sargent Gymnasium from 8:30 to 10:30 . For those who may want to go, there will be a chance to see the finals .
 An all-male student body makes for more dates, whereas Bates only has half as many men . Bates is more likely to be interested in good music, than in just a date .
 Bowdoin doesn't have much more money than Bates, but it would seem it has more money . Bates is a smaller school than Bowdoins, but the school has a bigger budget than Bates .
 Duke Ellington, Stan Kenton and Dave Brubeck have had big social events in the past two years . In the last two years they have had Duke Ellon, Stan . Kenton .
 These musician's names speak for themselves, but also note that they're all financially successful .
 One, with sharkskin trousers bloused in whiteskin boots, sprawls, standing up, against the wall and sucks and cups a cigarette . While his friend grips her greasy wooden thighs with etiolated hands, his hips worm and thrust and rock her into tender rhythm .
 Senior pictures will be taken during the first week of school in the fall . Senior pictures to be taken at the start of the school year .
 Girls especially, especially, should remember this, in having their hair cut for the summer . Girls will spend money to hear quality performers, especially in the summer.
 They may cost more, but if they are good, people will pay the extra money to hear them . They may be more expensive, but they may be good if they're good .
 Chase Hall Dance Committee helps students create Tradewinds at Chase Hall . Chase Hall dance committee has been in the spotlight for over a decade .
 The difference in the two campuses seems to be that Bowdoin lets the students take a chance, and it has visibly paid off . The difference between the two is that the students are willing to take a risk, according to students .
 Year in and year out we are flooded with mediocre talent because we have mediocre funds, due to a maze of red tape . We have to rely on mediocre funds due to the maze of bureaucratic red tape, says Simon Tisdall .
 The breakthrough must occur with the refusal to accept mediocre entertainment and also in a broader sense a mediocre world . The breakthrough will occur in the future, says the author of the book .
 The sad and funny thing about accepting the mediocre is after a while you discover that your life has become mediocre . The sad thing is that you accept your life as a mediocre life .
 What I am calling for is rebellion, a nasty word, and it can begin by the utterance of the simple word ""no"" to what is wrong . What is needed is rebellion and rebellion, the author says .
 The faculty and administration have produced a stifling, unhealthy and unrealistic atmosphere . The student is unable to either assert himself or live the way he must . The students are unable to breathe the air .
 This external control is felt most strongly in the fields of both academic work and social life . It is felt particularly strongly in academic work, social life and academic life .
 The new process of registration, and also the one looked forward to by Professor Buschmann, is just one illustration of an administration which curtails and conceals . The new registration process is one example of the administration's policy of secrecy .
 An inordinate number of students try to take a course with one particular member of the faculty . The problem underlying the changes made by the Scheduling Committee is one of the students trying to take the course .
 The Committee, however, does not realize, or wish to realize, the more serious problem which these registration difficulties indicate . The fact that Bates has perhaps more than its share of incompetent and inept professors is all to evident to the students .
 Some sections are naturally and rightfully more in demand than others . For this reason, some sections of the art of art are naturally more popular . Some sections of art have been more popular than others in the world .
 Under the proposed system the privilege of getting the education we are paying for, and studying under men who have earned the right to teach, is revoked . Under the new and proposed system, we will no longer be able to study under teachers .
 The penalty for the desire to learn is a deprivation of choice and responsibility . It is the penalty for wanting to learn, it is the responsibility of responsibility, it has been said .
 In the classroom, also, the individual is sadly neglected; he is often not allowed to express his own ideas and opinions . Critics and commentators assume a primary role in research and in term paper writing, he says .
 "The voice of the studentry is rarely listened to, and seldom, if ever, heeded," says the author of the book, "The Voice of the Studentry"
 The Extra-Curricular Committee is not alone on this campus in believing that the students are ill-informed, and lacking responsibility and judgment . The committee believes that students are lacking responsibility, judgment .
 The individual is constricted and restrained in the area of his social life as well . The individual's social life is also restricted, says the author .
 Rules which dictate to the mature individual are evil in intent and conception . Rules which are made for the benefit of a group of people living together are good rules . Rules that dictate to mature individuals are evil, says the author .
 If the student sees fit to drink, to have women in his room, that is his business and his decision . The outdated set of restrictions we are forced to live under is to be reviled . Not only is it provincial and unrealistic, but it imposes external laws on the student under
 In an age which is growing ever more aware of the value of the younger generation, of education as a tool which may be used for peace and tolerance, Bates is woefully shortsighted .
 Tomorrow's hope is not to be found at Academia Batesina Conditiona 1864 . Tomorrow's best hope is likely to be in the form of tomorrow .
 Peter d'Errico '65, Editor; John Holt '64, Robert Borland '66, Dennis Hill '66' Granville Bowie '66,' Richard Derby '66 . Carole Cooper '66', Jennifer Wingate '64; Carole Cooper '66;
 The only change in policy for this year's Popham Beach Clam Bake is tht the price of hamburgers has been equated with the cost of clams . Only change to policy is that hamburger prices are equated to cost of clam .
 There has always been a charge for lunch, whether it included seafood or not . There has been no charge for lunches at the U.S. Museum of Natural History .
 It provides soda, fuel for the fires, equipment, paper goods and must pay the cost of renting the parking lot for the day . We appreciate the help given to us by Mr Steele .
 The hamburgers, potato salad and desert are supplied by the Commons, but the $1.00 is charged to help pay for the other costs mentioned above . The meal is served at the Commons' expense .
 The O C. makes no profit on the Clam Bake and the Council works hard, not for their own benefit, but for the student body's enjoyment . The Council makes no profits from the event .
 I am writing to take exception to Mr Kiernan's criticism of the Robinson Players' presentation of Hamlet . The Robinson Players presented the play at the centre of the drama .
 I would be sorry if readers of the STUDENT who are not a part of the college or community, received the impression that his view is shared by the majority of those who were privileged to witness this mighty effort . I would like to see the students' view expressed in this article .
 Mr Lloyd's performance, in particular, was brilliant and sensitive . The whole presentation was outstanding, and Mr Lloyd was outstanding .
 I suspect I have not had the opportunities our critic has had to view many productions of the play and so am less able to make comparisons . But I have read and studied it and think his criticism of Mr Lloyd's interpretation is unfair .
 Miss SchaefTer has given the college and local community twenty-five years of excellent college theatre . She has been at the centre of the theatre for more than 25 years .
 "I still feel a compunction to set down these thoughts if they are for nothing else but my own satisfaction," she writes . "Realizing full well that this letter will probably not weigh in the balance of campus events," she says .
 Somehow I do not feel unburdurdered by not having to select my schedule and desired professors . Somehow I feel uncontented by not being able to choose my schedule or desired professors, I said .
 Bates was one advantage that Bates held over many other institutions throughout the country . Now it seems more like a hardship because of the loss of that advantage .
 If Professor Buschmann is correct in intimating that the day is near when the only thing a course will have to recommendt itself is a catalogue number, it will be time to move on .
 It is questionable to me whether the decision of a threemember sectioning committee can really hand down an enlightened judgment to ninehundred faculty and some odd faculty and students .
 In this process of intellectual automation we are losing one of our most valuable indicators of cerebral depth . We are losing a valuable indicator of intellectual depth that was so easily evidenced by how many students signed up for individual professors .
 Rambler's new Classic V-8 lets you go in style and save like sixty . Sincerely yours, Bradford F Andersen '66 Everything Is V- 8 .
 From $76 to $195* less than the other two best-selling low-priced cars . The car is a low-cost, low-price car with a price tag of $195 .
 Add the low-cost Twin-Stick Floor Shift to the V-8 and driving fun really begins . Add the Twin Stick Floor Shift .
 Stick-shift command performance and lightning fast kickdown kickdown from overdrive to passing gears . Stick-shopped command performance .
 Check out the sleek lines, rich interiors, and ample room for six 6-footers . There's plenty of room for 6-6 footers .
 Garnet nine enjoys leaving drab Maine background on its spring swing south . Garnet enjoys leaving behind drab background on his spring swing .
 No game in the world is as tidy and dramatically neat as baseball, with cause and effect, crime and punishment, motive and result so clearly denned . No game is more tidy and dramatic neat than baseball . Baseball is one of the world's most tidy games, with the result
 Baseball is a rookie (his experience no bigger than the lump in his throat) trying to begin the fulfillment of his dream . Baseball is just a rookie, but baseball is a dream .
 The search for talent has produced a virtual bonanza for un tested ballplayers . Un tested players promise the homerun jackpot and the never-never land of the no-hit game .
 The genial Mr Boiling is now cast in the role of executive assistant in the minor league system .
 In this capacity he regularly views the panorama of area baseball action in search of another Ted Williams or Cy Young . He regularly visits the area to view the baseball action .
 Milt seemed understandably nonchalant about the current high bonus system reflecting the attitude of his Boston organization . Milt seems to be less concerned about the high bonuses system .
 Milt hopes for early acceptance by most colleges of a tri-semester plan . Milt hoped for an early acceptance .
 This would of course leave the entire summer season to the college coaches . It would provide the lengthened season needed to produce more and better college baseball players .
 The pension system and a high bonus make it an attractive venture for a high schooler to sign a professional baseball contract . Milt felt college was an important step in his' life .
 A high school player is sure to benefit from minor league experience and the added incentive of knowing he doesn't have a college diploma to fall back on . High school players will benefit from the experience of playing minor league baseball .
 Thom Freeman looked very impressive in limiting Colby to four hits, Milt said .
 The pitcher with the blazing ball and the hitter with the quick bat are the prime targets of the big league bonus bankers . The players with the best pitch and the best bat are prime targets for big league bonuses .
 Bates is a loser and over on Mayflower Hill they ought to be wreathed in smiles . Bates was a loser, but he's not a winner, he says. Bates is the loser .
 Thirty Graduating Men Leaders Of 9 Successful Garnet Squads . Former Sports Editor 'As the 1962-1963 sports seasons draw to a close the STUDENT Sports Staff looks back and salutes those members of the class of 1963 .
 Fullback Pete Aransky playing for his first year last fall . Fullback playing for first time last fall, anchored the soccer squad's defense .
 The rugged East Parker proctor played a big part in the team's 5-3 record . The team won the first game of the season 5-2 .
 Veteran harrier Ed Belden was a consistent pointgetter for Walt Slovenski's cross country squad . Four year veteran harrier was consistent point getter for the team .
 Golf captain Tom Brown is still actively competing as this edition goes to press . He boasts one of the top individual match records among the '63 linksters . Tom Brown's golf record is one of golf's top individual records .
 All-State and All-New England end Paul Castolene was a twoway standout for head coach Robert Hatch last fall . He was a standout for Hatch's coaching staff .
 The Bristol, Conn., native also was a rugged performer for interim basketball coach Verne Ullom . He is heading for a teachercoach career next year . He also played for the interim coach .
 Captain Jim Corey led his tennis cohorts to a share of the state series title, while posting an outstanding individual record . Corey was captain of the team, and posted an outstanding personal record .
 Curtiss was a standout fullback in his underclass years before being held to kicking duties this past fall by a junior year injury . Curtiss played football in the fall, playing in the summer, before returning to kick duties .
 Curtiss also was a consistent pointgetter as a ""whalie"" on the Garnet thinclad squad . Curtiss was a regular point getter on Garnet's thinclad team .
 Gridiron quarterback Bill Davis led his teammates to an outstanding 5-3 record last fall . Davis was a cocaptain at the University of Columbia .
 The fiery little man proved to be an outstand ing backfield ace, having played all four positions in his Bates career .
 Dick Dolan played an important pinchhitting and reserve infielder role for the Leaheymen this spring . Dolan was a pinch hitter in a pinch-hitting role this season .
 Bill Dunham co-captained the '62 cross-country squad to a fine record . Dunham was a member of the U.S. team that won a record of 1,0-0 . Dunham's team won a state championship in 1962 .
 Hard-hitting Dennis Jeen is named the Bobcat of the Week . Hard-hitting DennisJeen is the hard-hitting junior at the University of Columbia .
 Charlton Heston Heston Yveite Mimieux ""13 WEST STREET"" | Alan Ladd Rod Steiger Sun., Mon., Tues., Tues. — ""BARABBAS"" and ""PIRATES OF BLOOD RIVER""
 An economics major from Scarsdale, N. Y., Jim has held the elite number one position since his freshman year . Jim is a junior at the University of New York State .
 Jim has amazed followers and opponents alike with his speed and repertoire of shots . Boasting a seasonal record of nine wins and two losses, and 10-1 in doubles with his partner, Bob Thompson .
 Jim is considered the favorite to win the state tennis championships at U Maine this week . Jim is expected to win state tennis championship at Maine University .
 M-G M p,i,i ^W^Tlw-M proved to be a valuable pinchhitter, reserve catcher for the Garnet nine this spring . M-W^W was a pinch hitter and reserve catcher .
 Feen collected a circuit clout in a pinch-hitting role against Northeastern . Feen is a circuit star for the U.S.
 The Arlington, Mass. resident was an outstanding hurler for the past three years . Within the next few weeks, he will be inking a pro baseball contract .
 Rugged Pete Glanz became famous for his performances in the Bowdoin Gym . Glanz was a member of the Gymnastics team .
 The tall blond always came up with his big games while visiting the Polar Bears . He was always coming up with a big game .
 The East Parker resident also garnered varsity letters in tennis and was a three time Chase Hall finalist . She was also a three-time Chase Hall winner .
 Future Marine Web Harrison proved to be a hardnoser on the Hatch eleven . The Hatch eleven is the latest in a series of cars that have been driven by Future Marine .
 Torrington, Conn., native was a four year letterwinner in the Hatch backfield . Hampered by a leg injury last fall, he was hampered by a knee injury last season .
 Halfback George Hunter developed into a dependable soccer player . Hunter was among the senior letter winners last fall . Hunter is a junior at the University of Maryland .
 Indoor and outdoor co-captain Bill LaVallee holds several hurdles records for the Garnet tracksters . He developed into an outstanding indoor relayman and developed into a standout athlete .
 LaVallee was the recipient of numerous track awards because of his ability, dedication and fine leadership . He was awarded numerous awards for his ability and dedication .
 A Gift To Your College Can Result In A Larger Income For Your Family . Trust Department will be glad to work with you and your attorney on the financial and trust aspects of the educational gift you have in mind .
 Inlramural Softball Champs, the Smith North ""Yankees* By SEG The Intramural season has arrived at its bitter end this week .
 Both softball and the bowling league have completed their appointed rounds . Both the softball league and bowling league has completed their appointments rounds .
 The bowling league championship was won by the West Parker A league team .
 Beisswanger was the leader for West Parker, while Cox led his team to utter defeat . The lovely and singularly beautiful Dave Cox was the star of the show .
 Smith North B squad defeated all three of J.B 's teams to win softball league title . Smith North North B beat all three teams to take the title .
 An interesting sidelight to the championship was the uncontrollable happiness of one John Devendoff . The championship was won by the U.S. Olympic champion .
 As a psych, major, I personally was very happy to see a 20-year-old regress to the age of six . "As a psych student, I . personally was happy to . see a young person's age regress to six," she said .
 Since I have a little space left I will finish my column in the style of Mr Vandersea . Since there is no space left he will finish his column in a style of his .
 Mr Kiernan, you don't 'have any friends left, unless you find the boat', says Kiernan . He says you 'have no friends left' unless you 'find the boat'
 Pele Pequognoi should stick to his usual extra-curricular activities and keep away from the pool tables .
 Al Marden loves the company of Housemothers . He says he has a lot of respect for the House of the South .
 Red Vandersea's latest books — Call of the Wild and The Days of Wine and Roses — are out now . Vandersea has also written a book about the wild .
 I went to the Smith South open house but I couldn't get in — the Dean was in the doorway . Special note — I went . to Smith South but I . couldn't . get in .
 Closing note: The ""Herculean Cult" may not win the intramural championship . Closing note is a very poetic statement concerning a very unpoetic mob .
 C Bates Nine Tops Colby, Bowdoin To Stay Alive In State Series . Bates Bobcat varsity baseball team closes out another successful season .
 Ted Krzynowek foxed the Polar Bears from Bowdoin, Maine, on Friday afternoon . He limited them to two unearned runs, limiting them to just two . The Polar Bears were the only one to make an error .
 Krzynowek had it in the clutch and escaped any serious damage . Although he was in trouble on several occasions, he was not in danger of serious injury .
 Krzynowek allowed only five hits, while striking out ten and walking three . The left-hander also struck ten and walked three times .
 John Yuskis with a fourth inning three-run homer, which put the game on ice, and Archie Lanza, with three singles, were the heroes for the Bobcats . Archie Lanzza, who also hit three singles for the team, was the hero .
 Bobcats beat Colby 4-3 in state series home encounter . Thorn Freeman bested Ken Stone in pitcher's duel . Monday, in another home encounter, Bobcats prevailed over Colby .
 Ace Thorn Freeman survived a shaky first inning in which he surrendered two runs . He threw a shaky start to the game . Freeman was the only pitcher to get out of the inning .
 Freeman walked two batters who both scored on a subsequent Colby double . A spell of wildness in this inning hurt Freeman as he walked two .
 Colby didn't score again until the fifth when a walk sandwiched between two singles produced Colby's final tally . Freeman remained slightly off form but Colby continued to score in the game .
 Through the first three innings, Colby's Stone put the Bobcats down in order . Stowe Tires through Stowe Tire .
 Stone began to lose his touch as he walked two batters in the fourth inning . Stone walked two in the first inning .
 Bates reached him for a single run in the fifth inning on walks to MacNevin and Spector, and a single by Howie Vandersea . The game was tied at 1-1 when Vandersea scored a single .
 Later in the inning, the 'Cats had the sacks filled with one out, but Stone pitched out of the jam . He pitched out the inning .
 From the sixth inning to the ninth, Freeman regained his control and was never better as he retired the side in order in each inning . Freeman regained control from the sixth to ninth .
 Stone and his Colby mates survived until the Bates half of the eighth inning when the roof fell . Stone survived until he and his team mates survived . The roof of the Colby baseball stadium collapsed during the game .
 Monty Woolsen opened the inning with a walk and a push bunt single . Captain Ron Taylor followed with a push-bunt single in the second inning .
 Freshman John Yuskis then delivered a two-bagger to rightcenter, scoring Woolsen and putting Taylor on second . Taylor then put Woolsen on second and Taylor on third .
 MacNevin's blast into left field, good for the bases, scored Taylor and then Yuskis with the winning run . Taylor scored Taylor with the bases . MacNevan's blast in left field scored Taylor, Yuski and Yususis .
 Freeman retired Colby easily in the ninth and the Bobcats prevailed 4-3 . Freeman then retired the pitcher in the inning .
 Freeman Fires Freeman was very effective for the most part, especially in the late innings . Freeman was the most effective in the game .
 He permitted five walks, but compensated by limiting the Mules to four hits while fanning six . He allowed five walks and struck out six .
 Colby's first loss in state series play kept alive Bates hopes for a share in the state series crown . Colby lost to Colby for the first time in a state series game .
 The Bobcats finished the state series race with a 4-2 record, insuring them of at least a second place finish . The Bobcat finished the series with a record of four wins and two losses .
 The win clinched at least a tie for the state series crown pending the U of Maine and Colby's last two matches . Bowdoin's victory clinched a state series title pending the final two matches against Colby and Maine . The win was the first time the team has
 The win leaves the Bobcats with an impressive 10-1 record . The match with Clark was snowed out because of the snow .
 Bill Deering defeated Bates ace Jim Wallach in three sets 6-1; 3-6; 6-4 . Deering defeats Bates ace Wallach 6-2, 3-4, 6-3, 6.4 .
 Deering displayed remarkable ability to return the ball down the sidelines in his win . Deering returned it down the sideline for the first time in his career . The win was a comfortable victory for Deering .
 Deering teamed Gene Elliot to end the 10-game winning streak of Wallach and Thompson in doubles, 6-3; 6-2 . Deering and Elliot ended Wallach's 10-match winning streak in doubles in doubles .
 The Maine tandem were runners-up to the Yankee Conference Doubles champion and seemed to have gained confidence . The Maine duo are looking to build on their recent success in the tournament .
 Clip out this ad and send it home monton in three sets 4-6, 6-1; 6-3 . Clip out the ad and sent it home in 3 sets . Clip-out the ad is available at South Casco Maine .
 Jack Wilson and Jim Dodds had an easy time winning at five and six in straight sets . The pair won at five-set sets and six sets in straight-sets .
 Jim Corey and Todd Lloyd beat Todd Lloyd 7-5; 6-4 in their first match . The two teams had earlier lost to each other earlier this year .
 George Beebe and Al Williams stretch their doubles record to 5-0 with a 6-4; 6- 4 win . Beebe, Williams win their doubles doubles doubles matches to record 5-1; Williams win 6-2, 6-3 .
 Wallach and Thompson tied for runner-up honors with identical 9-2 slates . Thompson and Wallach also tied for second-place honors . Wallach, Thompson both won 9-1 slates for the title .
 George Beebe was 7-2, missing the last two matches of the year because of an injury . Beebe won 7-1, missing two matches due to a knee injury .
 A darkhorse candidate is Bowdoin's Steve Hectt who has gained a lot of experience playing summer tennis . Bowdoins will be hoping to win the tournament for the first time .
 The Black Bears were practically assured of victory when they handed Bates a 52 defeat Monday afternoon at Bangor's Penobscot Valley Country ^fclub .
 Lynn Simpson and Walt Lasher were the two Bobcat golfers to hit pay dirt . Lynn Simpson was one of the two golfers who hit pay-dirt .
 Simpson shot a blistering 77 while Lasher went 20 holes to defeat Maine ace Gordon Curry . Simpson Pacesetter Simpson shot 77 . Lasher won the tournament by 20 holes .
 Black Bears of State U dominate meet. that will be played at Maine, deserve to be ranked number one. Black Bears are ranked No. 1 in the world .
 The Wallach Thompson duo with a sparkling 10-1 record is rated an eyelash behind . Wallach . Thompson duo are rated an . eyelash . behind the Wallach. Thompson duo .
 The Bowdoin duo of Ladd and Hecht are also very strong if there isn't a clash of temperments . The pair will be reunited at the end of the season .