 "Maybe what you want to know is whether or not I’d use reasonable force in the circumstances," he says . "I’m not sure what I would do if I used reasonable force"
 The Barrett probably is right up there with Accuracy International and McMillan rifles . The Barrett rifle is one of the best rifles in the world, according to CNN.com .
 Schmidt-Bender 5-25x56 PM III is a high quality scope . The BORS determines the range and the range of the scope . This scope is a standard scope .
 I have the Leupold Mark IV 8.5-20x56 ER/T on the Super March along with an ACOG I can switch to for Close Quarters . I also have the ACOG that can be switched to for close quarters .
 Range considerations explain why scopes are sighted in with Match ammo . Range considerations also explain why the scopes can be sighted with match ammo .
 My primary handgun was the Custom TLE II with laser grip sights . My backup handgun was also a Kimber, the subcompact Ultra Aegis II in 9mm .
 "I wanted my firearms to work the first time, every time, without a hiccup. I wanted my guns to work first time," he says .
 Gunsmiths work on anything presenting a problem, such as polishing the feed ramp and trigger work, etc.
 One example was the M16A3 lower topped by a Bushmaster upper with the gas piston modification . Another example was a lower-topped M16 A3 topped by an upper with a gas piston modified .
 I had a Surefire suppressor for my Super Match and an Elite Iron for the model 99 . I also had an Elite iron for the Super Match .
 I wasn’t born with a silver spoon in my mouth; it was probably gold or platinum . I wasn't born with any silver spoon, it's probably gold, or platinum, he says .
 It was what they call ‘old money’, dating back to my great grandfather . It was 'old money' dating from his great grandfather, according to his great-grandfather .
 My grandfather had quadrupled it and my father had quadruple it again . My grandfather and father had tripled it again, and I had quadruped it up .
 When we met, her name was Janice Sarah Jenkins and we were both majoring in History . Janice and Janice were major students at the University of Cambridge .
 "I was only in the top 5% of my graduating class from a private prep school," she says . "My SAT score was around 1,400 and there was all that old money," she adds .
 We both got Master’s degrees in History and went looking for teaching jobs in any city where we could both work for the same school system . We both went looking to work for any school system where they could both be teaching at the same time .
 Barnhart, population circa 6,000, is located along 1-55 in Barnhart . Barnhart is located in a small community along the main road along the highway .
 A realtor directed us to a 40-acre piece of land not that far from the interstate access . The realtor listened to our description of what we wanted to do and directed us toward the land .
 He had a basement with a separate ‘storm’ shelter, a deeper basement with reinforced overhead and so forth . He had several including a regular basement . basement with separate 'storm' shelters, deeper basement .
 He suggested a separate shelter built under a log cabin style 4stall garage . The shelter was built under the log cabin-style garage .
 He would do it as a turnkey project, if we chose, excluding supplies but including everything else for 6 people . He would like to build a house for six people, including himself .
 I’d never given any thought to having a ‘storm shelter’ and asked him to elaborate . ‘Storm shelter” is a 'shelter’ in the city’s largest city .
 These days, there are more and more people getting into preparedness so come what may, they’re ready . These days we're looking to get ahead of the weather .
 30’ deep by 60’ long with a separate door on each of the 5 stalls . I’d recommend 30” deep by . 60” long with separate doors on each stall . separate door .
 You’re going to need some military style firearms, probably 7.62x51 mm, 5.56x45mm, 9mm, ,45acp and maybe a .50BMG rifle .
 He said he prefers suppressors on his military arms and they can be had, for a price, although they’re illegal in Missouri .
 I also know a very good gunsmith who can do anything needed to convert a firearm from a shooting weapon to a piece of art . I'm not afraid to go to a gun shop to buy a gun and sell a gun .
 I’d given him 50% down with 40% due at completion and the final 10% due within 30 days . I'd given him 40% down . 40% of the project was due to be completed at completion, 40% at completion at completion .
 The shelter access was beside the garage; a long stair with a blast door on the left at the bottom of the stairway . The shelter was behind the garage .
 There was a separate concrete block structure holding the Kohler generator connected to the shelter with and oval shaped concrete pipe . The generator was attached to a concrete structure connected to a separate structure .
 The power came underground from the road and went first to the generator room where the ATS was mounted . The ATS is mounted in a room where it is powered by a generator room .
 My old guns went into the gun safe in the Master bedroom and my new guns into the safe . My new guns were placed in the safe at the shelter in the shelter . The shelter is located in the master bedroom .
 All of the weapons beyond the original firearms I described earlier were acquired during this period along with the supplies of ammunition . All of these weapons were acquired in this period .
 The NFA dealer seemed to be a shady character; he didn’t want to know names or anything . The dealer seemed . to be . shady character, he didn't want to . know names, anything .
 His only interest was his friend Ben Franklin or gold at the current spot price . He was only interested in his friend, Ben Franklin .
 John helped me get the Super Match with the Leupold Mark IV, the Barrett 99 with the Schmidt and Bender, 2 Raptor 6X night scopes, the Kimbers, the Glock and the Glock . The shady guy supplied the full auto lowers with John assembling the Ml
 We’d purchased dried firewood for the fireplace and it was stacked on the concrete cover of the stairwell to the shelter . The firewood was stacked in the shelter's concrete cover .
 At John’s suggestion, I purchased two Stihl chainsaws and a hydraulic splitter . John's suggestion, he purchased two chainsaws .
 Castlebrook Barns assembled very good barns and would built to suit . A company name Castlebrook would assemble very good Barns . Castlebrook barns would be built in a very good way .
 We could have two feeder cattle, some feeder pigs, some chickens, chickens and so forth. We could also have some other animals, some of which are feeders .
 The old fencing across the front of the building area was left in place and a remotely controlled gate was added to the building .
 Other improvements had been added during the three years we’d lived here . Other improvements were added during that time .
 We took shooting instruction and became familiar with each of our firearms . We also learned how to use each of these firearms .
 The instruction for the CCWs had to wait until we’d been residents for 6 months . We’ve been here for six months. The instruction was required to wait .
 We were no longer that naive couple who had moved to Missouri from Rhode Island . We had moved from the Rhode Island state to Missouri .
 We had let John select our initial supplies and had over the course of the 3 years tried them all out . We had been given John select his initial supplies . Over the years we had tried them out all over the world .
 We liked some better than others, but there wasn't anything we didn’t like. While we liked some of the things we liked, we didn't like some of them .
 The opened cans were finished off and replaced with identical supplies . The cans were then replaced with the same supplies .
 We also began to shop Costco and Sam’s Club to fill the shelves in the basement .
 We found that butchering a whole beef and 2 hogs gave us too much beef and insufficient pork . We found it was too much meat and too much pork, but not enough pork .
 To compensate for that, we bought boneless pork loins, bacon and Cure 81 hams, some from Costco and some from Sam’s .
 Butchering beef became an every other year exercise and we still butchered 2 hogs and added to them . We added to beef in the last year's beef .
 They got new saddles, bridles, saddlebags, scabbards, pommel bags and lariats . They also got new saddle bags, bridals, scuffles and lareats .
 What we didn’t buy were chickens, electing instead to order a full case from a grocery store each year and wrapping them . We order a case of chickens each year from the grocery store and wrap them .
 We did the same with small Butterball turkeys, buying the smallest they had . We also bought the smallest Butterball turkey turkey they had. We did not buy the smallest turkey we could buy .
 It was around the time that we bought the horses with the . assorted tack that we got into Single Action Shooting . We got into single action shooting .
 "We didn't really get fully involved, stopping after acquiring the firearms and ammunition," he says . "We stopped after acquiring weapons and ammunition"
 We had an assortment of loads, both Cowboy and full power and, as with our other ammo, we had them in quantity . We had a variety of loads .
 John didn't buy radiation equipment from Radmeters4U, electing instead to buy everything from Arrow Tech . John didn’t buy radiation equipment from Radmeters 4U .
 The shelter was well equipped with medical supplies including OTC drugs and prescription drugs in the sealed manufacturers’ containers . The shelter is also equipped with OTC drug supplies .
 There were two types of haemostatic bandages, stretch gauze, non-stretch gauze and both adhering and nonadhering gauze pads .
 He recommended we take a civilian version of the Combat Lifesaver program . If we did, he'd add to our medical supplies with something to bulk up blood in a true emergency .
 The prescription drugs included 2mg ampoules of Dilaudid, Mark I NAAK (Nerve Agent Antidote Kit) and prefilled syringes of diazepam, one for each three Mark Is .
 He pointed out that if the sensing strips didn’t indicate a nerve agent, taking the Mark I kit would be fatal . He pointed 7 out that taking Mark I kits would be a fatal mistake .
 The M256A1 Chemical Agent Detector Kit is a compact, simple, simple-to-use kit . It is designed to detect blister, nerve and blood agents . It can detect blister and nerve agents .
 It also determines the type of agent present or confirms the absence of a hazardous concentration of agent . It also confirms the presence of an agent that is present or is not present .
 It is used after a suspected chemical attack to confirm the event and then later later to determine if it is safe to unmask or reduce the protective posture level .
 This is one of the military's most sensitive devices for detecting Chemical Agents . The device detects all agents at levels below those that can kill or injure people .
 It was used extensively during the 1st Gulf War and is widely deployed with our troops in Iraq today . It is used extensively in Iraq and widely deployed in the country .
 You would use the sampler detectors to test for chemical agents in the vapor form . Sampler detectors would be used to detect chemicals in vapor form.
 The M256A1 vapor-sampler is used to test vapors for the presence of nerve agents, blood agents, and blister agents . As its name implies, the device is designed to test for nerve agents .
 When issued, each new M256A1 kit contains 12 of these miniature chemistry sets, each sealed in a plastic laminated foil envelope .
 Two persons should conduct a vapor-sampler test; one person reads the instructions and the second person performs the action . To minimize the chance of error, two people should conduct the test .
 The attack was directed against trains passing through Kasumigaseki and Nagatascho, home to the Japanese government . It was directed towards trains going through the area .
 Members of the cult released a cloud of sarin which floated near the homes of judges who were overseeing a lawsuit concerning a real-estate dispute which was predicted to go against the cult . With the help of a converted refrigerator truck, members of a cult released the cloud .
 Letters containing anthrax spores were mailed to several news media offices and two Democratic U.S. Senators . Five people were killed and infected 17 others in anthrax attacks .
 Anthrax is a gram positive bacillus and may be treated with Penicillin G, Ciprofloxacin or Doxycycline . Anthrax may also be treated by Penicill G, . or . Penicillo G or Ciproprofl
 If the patient is allergic to those, you may want to use Erythromycin or Chloramphenicol . The patient may also be allergic to certain medications, such as Erythyromycin and Chlorampshenicol.
 "I checked our drug supplies in the shelter ... found Cipro, Doxy and Erythro," says shelter worker . "We're going to try and find them," she says . "I'm glad to see them in the face of the drug crisis," she said .
 "I thought that up to this point in our marriage, I done rather well by my family. I thought that . up to the point of our marriage," he said . "I did rather well"
 We are protected against most natural disasters and most manmade disasters . We were protected from most of the world's major disasters, including natural disasters .
 Both drove 2008 Suburban’s with the Cummins 6BT engine, non-electronic . We had food, water, fuel, shelter, medicine, self-defense and self-defence .
 Both vehicles are fully equipped with hitches, winches, pioneer tools, extra spare tires and long range fuel tanks . Both vehicles were fully equipped .
 I wanted a son and we agreed to try one more time and give up if we had another daughter . I wanted to have a son but wanted to give up on having a daughter . We had a daughter and decided to have one more daughter .
 Admittedly, I didn’t buy gold for $270 an ounce, but I got in under $400 . Admittedly I didn't buy gold at $270 per ounce . I got into gold for less than $400.
 We put some of that old money to a new use, guarding the inside of our safe in the shelter . And we put some old money in a new place .
 There was also $3,000 face value each of 90% silver dimes, quarters and halves plus 4,000 Silver Eagles . There were 4,500 Silver Eagles, 4,800 Silver Dimes and 4,200 Silver Eagles.
 Old money is defined as the inherited wealth of established upper-class families or a person, family, or lineage possessing inherited wealth . Old money defined as inheriting inherited wealth from established upper class families .
 The term is typically used to describe families that have been wealthy for multiple generations . It is used to refer to wealthy families who have had multiple generations of wealth .
 Greenwich, CT, Westchester County, NY, and Philadelphia's Maine Line are often associated with old money . Locations such as Greenwich, Connecticut, and Westchester . County of New York, NY and New Jersey are associated with the old money.
 My father had old money but he worked because he wanted to, not because he had to . My father worked hard and worked hard, not for the money, he says .
 The same applied to me; I inherited a substantial amount of money from my grandfather in that generation skipping scheme to beat estate tax . The same applies to my grandfather, who died in 2011, in that way .
 Dad never told me if it worked, but I had a very comfortable 8 figures tucked away . Dad never said if it was working, but he kept it in his pocket .
 Much of what Jan and I earned was put back into the same investments where it came from when we drew on it for our 40 Acres and a Mule . In turn, much of the earnings were put back in the investments .
 With each child we had, we added another gelding and tack on their third birthday . We added each child's tack on his third birthday, adding more and more each child .
 The geldings were mere colts or fillies and would be ready to ride when the children were old enough, say 6 . The children would be able to ride them when they were older than 6 .
 "Every time we went shooting, I replaced what we shot up with new ammo. Plus every time I went shooting I replaced it with ammo," he says . "I replaced what I shot with with new ammunition. Plus I replaced every time we got shot up"
 With each additional firearm came the acquisition of a ‘standard loadout’ of ammo . Each additional firearm comes with a standard loadout of ammunition .
 We acquired Bushmaster semi-auto A3 rifles with the conversion and Browning Hi-Power pistols . We also acquired Browning pistols with conversion and Bushmaster rifles with conversion .
 The thing I liked about Bushmaster was that if you wanted something specific, like an A3 upper with a 20” barrel and a gas piston conversion installed plus a spare parts kit, you had your dealer call them and you had it in no time .
 The AR-15/M-16 with a barrel less than 20” long lost too much velocity, IMHO, and wasn’t worth having . The gun is now being used in the military for the first time .
 For someone who learned everything he knew about military firearms during the past four years, I was a quick study . For someone ... I was quick study, I learned everything I needed to know about firearms .
 "We couldn't let them sit around and collect dust. Considering the amount of money we had invested in firearms and ammo, we couldn’t let them stay . We couldn't afford to let them collect dust, so we put them on the list .
 "It would be a real wakeup call if one morning we woke up in the shelter with a group of firearms we didn't know how to use," the shelter says . The shelter says it's a "real wake-up call"
 St. Louis isn’t a bad city by any means, but it does have gang problems like any city of its size . The city has a history of gang violence .
 Every day somebody bustin', somebody shootin'', somebody gettin' locked up, somebody done got killed, says St. Louis native . Every day someone bustin' and shooting somebody gets killed .
 "I always assumed it would be my luck that she was off on maternity leave when some kid decided to drop a cap on someone in the hallway outside my room," she said . "I'm not surprised that some kid dropped a cap and dropped it on me," she added .
 The first day when we started, the kids were really confused having two new History teachers both named Adams who turned out to be husband and wife. Speaking of which, the first day .
 Had it been up to the students, I’m sure she’d have had all the boys in her class and I'd have ended up with the girls, she said . She said: ‘I’ve ended up in the girls’
 Better call them what they’re supposed to be, young men and young women, says CNN.com .
 It's around $700 right now and I think that regardless of who wins a year from November, it’s going to go higher . It's going higher. I think it will go higher.
 Afghanistan I can understand up to a point, but I would have limited it to an air war . Afghanistan can be a problem, but it's not a problem. Afghanistan is a problem I would not have allowed it to be a war .
 Initial Soviet deployment of the 40 th Army in Afghanistan began on December 24, 1979 . The initial Soviet deployment began in December 1979 .
 The final troop withdrawal began on May 15, 1988, and ended on February 15, 1989 . The final withdrawal of troops from the U.S. ended in February 1989 .
 The conflict in Afghanistan has often been referred to as the Soviet's Vietnam . Due to the interminable nature of the war, the conflict has been called Afghanistan's Vietnam.
 We ignored both our own experience and their experience when we went looking for bin Laden . We ignore both ourselves and their experiences when looking for Bin Laden .
 "We’ve had boots on the ground for about 7 years and haven’t accomplished much," says President Obama . "We have been in the U.S. for 7 years," says Obama .
 I'll contact my broker and have him move ten million into precious metals. I’ll contact him to have ten million of his money moved into precious metal. I'll call my broker to get him to move the money in precious metals, he says .
 Lucy Morris was a widow from Barnhart whose children were grown, married and moved away from home . She was the widow of a woman whose children moved from home to live in Barnhart .
 "Between what we paid her and what she received from Social Security, she made a living," she says . "She was able to make a living. Between what she paid her ... Social Security," she said .
 The key to the padlock, for the large steel door covering a portion of the stairway, was on our keyboard in the kitchen . The padlock was also on the keyboard of the kitchen, where the key was found .
 "It would take some time to get back to our previous financial status. We had spent a fair amount getting to where we were," says manager Mark Hughes .
 We kept enough in the bank to cover our bills and a little each month went into the gold safe . We kept a lot of money in our bank and a lot in our gold bank .
 I talked to John about what I wanted to do and he suggested a concrete block storage room with a vault door from any of several companies . The room will be a concrete storage room, he says .
 Two weeks later, the floor and footing were poured, the block erected and the door installed . Two weeks after the ground and footing was poured and the block was erected .
 Two days later, he came by and gave me the combination to the vault and we inspected it . Two days after that, he gave me a combination and I inspected it. The vault was inspected by the vault, and we got the combination back .
 It was a room about 10’ square with the outward opening door with 2 rifle racks which could contain 24 rifles/shotguns each and a set of covered shelves for pistols . The room was a good setup, a room with 2 . rifle racks and 2 . rifles racks . each
 I could write a maximum of 3 checks per month before they charged a fee . I was able to write 3 checks a month before the fee was charged . I'm not afraid to write a check .
 After he left, I called the dealer and told him I was ready for delivery of our additional gold and silver . After the dealer left I called him to tell him he was ready to deliver the additional gold .
 He told me they’d be here in about 3 hours and confirmed the bank wire transferring the funds . The funds will be transferred by the bank .
 "They would unload it at any spot I designated, but it would be up to me to haul it to where I wanted it," he says . "I would be able to get it to my destination, but I would be responsible for getting it there."
 10 million of the 10 million went into gold, 25% in each of the four sizes and 1,000 silver Eagles . I’d added another $7,000 face value of 90% silver dimes, quarters and halves . The remainder of the money was added to the
 I don't know if they ever took the cruise, I never talked to him again. I don’t know if he ever took a cruise, he said. "I never talked with him again."
 After he left, I unlocked the steel cover to the stairs, grabbed two bags of coins and went down to the open blast door . "I went down the stairs to get the coins," he says .
 "It was standing open and I put the bags in the cabinets and went back for more," says the author of the book . "It's standing open, and I went back and put it in my cabinets," she says .
 Canning Pantry has 50 cases each of regular mouth quarts and pints plus wide mouth pints . You can also buy wide mouth quart quarts or pints from the canning pantry .
 Better get jelly jars, pectin, and spices to make pickles and tomato sauces . Pickles, tomato sauces can be made from jelly jars and sauces .
 They sell spare lids by the case so get two additional seasons worth of lids . They also sell spare cases by case so you can get two extra seasons worth .
 We should run water to the new building and install a wood burning stove . And, another thing since we’re considering worst case scenarios, we should be running water and installing a wood stove .
 I think most of it in our current sizes with a bit extra one size smaller and more one size larger . We need to be one size small and one size large, says author .
 Wrangler brand jeans, shirts and shirts; and either Stetson or Resistol hats . I’m think Wrangler jeans and shirts .
 I had called John and he said he’d come by the next day to discuss a large log storage building . The next day, John said he'd come by to discuss the log storage .
 We had clothing from Australia, the United States and some probably made in China . We had quite an assortment of clothing .
 We ended up with Resistol hats, but only because we liked the style better than the Stetson’s they had in stock . The Resistol hat is available in the U.S. market for $99 .
 He asked if I wanted to approve the plans or should he just get it designed and installed, he said . He asked for approval of the plans, but he said he wanted to get it done and installed .
 "I also wrote a check on our money market account for half of his estimated price," she says . "I'm not afraid to buy him," she adds .
 The storage building went in quickly and included a Vz bath, the wood stove, countertops and much more . It included a wood stove and countertops .
 The Canning Pantry and Lehman’s orders came in faster than I anticipated and I covered them with plastic in case of rain . I covered the canning pantry with plastic .
 I noticed about halfway through the construction of the storage building, that a second area was being graded . The storage building will be used as a storage facility in the future .
 I got the web address from one of Tired Old Man’s stories and checked it out . The web address is located at the address of TIRED Old Man's blog .
 "I talked to John about getting it erected and he had a crew with some down time. I talked to him about it," he said . "He had some time to get it erected"
 "I’m not going to renew my teaching contract for next year. One thing more, I'm not going . I'm going to not renew my . teaching contract next year," she says .
 I had school tomorrow and made sure when I left that I had the checkbooks for our bank account and our money market account . I also made sure that we had checkbooks in the morning for school .
 I bought everything I wanted at the gun store and what wasn’t in stock would be in within 10 days . What’s in stock will be in in 10 days, he says . What he says he bought everything he wanted was in stock .
 It went faster than I thought and I had time to check with Freightliner about the Unimog . It went fast, and I was able to get back to the road .
 They had a crane in stock to go with it and I bought that, just in case . The crane was in stock in stock, and he bought it just before he got injured .
 They also had a cherry picker which got me to thinking about apple trees and I bought it too . It also got me thinking of apple trees, which I bought too .
 We can grow any of about 18 varieties of apple, 9 of pears, 6 of peaches, 3 of the nectarines, 9 kinds of plums, 2 kinds of cherries both sour, 3 kinds of strawberries that include 10 cultivars of the June bearing .
 Twelve different kinds of grapes, 2 kinds of early red raspberries, 4 of the late red, 8 of the black, 8 different thornless black, 4 different thorned black . 10 different high bush blueberries, 2 types of red grapes, 4 types of black grapes,
 Nut trees include chestnuts, hickory, pecan, black walnut and English walnut . But apparently almonds don’t do well .
 I told him you’d come in to see him and choose what you wanted and he’ll arrange transplanting, he said . You’ve got to choose your own transplant and he'll arrange it for you, he added .
 While it may appear that our wealthy couple, has covered all bases, only time is tell . Only time will tell .
 Jan limited her activity to nursing Seth . Lucy cared for the three and Jan limited herself to nursing him .
 Lucy and she turned to the greenhouse which was also plumbed with water, had adjustable vents and grow lights . Lucy and Lucy turned the greenhouse into a greenhouse for the family .
 While I was concerned about getting power to the lights, it probably wouldn’t be a problem due to the PV panels on both the barn and the storage building .
 John had installed overhead propane heaters in the greenhouse and the storage building . John installed the heaters .
 I began to notice an increase in our propane consumption and asked if we could increase our storage capacity to double what we had . I asked for the increase in propane storage capacity and asked for it to be doubled .
 He suggested it was overkill but provided a crew, for a fee, to install the new tank and connect the two tanks together .
 He had three idle crews at the moment and that postponed laying one off . That postponed laying off one of them off .
 Composting toilet, sink with a small water heater and same 4 in one you have . Composted toilet with small sink with small heater and small heater . Composter toilet with sink, sink, small heater, toilet, toilet and sink in one .
 "We found out that this baby is a boy and he will have exactly the same as I have," says mother-to-be .
 I forgot to tell you, I replaced the Benelli Super 90 with a Mossberg 590A1. I replaced it with the Mossberg .
 Jan asked me to get those small 9mm Kimber’s as backups for the girls and her . Jan even asked him to get them as backup for her and her family .
 We went through Jan’s and my armory and added suppressors for every firearm except the .22 rifles and shotguns . We went to the armory to add suppressors to every firearm in the arsenal .
 My pay was directly deposited and our purchases were mostly limited to the light bill, groceries and keeping our tanks topped off . We were able to buy a few groceries and keep our tank topped off with the money .
 The light bill was all but nonexistent due to our solar panels and wind turbine and frequently was a credit . The solar panels were often credited with saving the light bill .
 Had you asked Jan or me on that day we received our Master’s degrees if we could imagine a time like the present, we’d have suggested you see a shrink . Jan and Jan have been married for more than 20 years .
 None of this was brought to our parents’ attention when they flew out to visit . None of our parents were aware of the fact that we were in danger .
 Jan's mother Jill was a homemaker and her father Joseph worked for Xerox . Jan’s mother Jill and father Joseph were both homemakers and Xerox employees .
 My father Seth and mother Margaret lived in Westchester County as did the Jenkins . The Jenkins family lived in the same area as Seth and Margaret .
 She was busy with her social circles and he was an investment counselor . He was primarily managing his own investments . She and he were busy with social circles .
 They were all somewhere on the scale called upper class, ranging from lower upper to middle upper . Although my father considered them to be upper upper, they were all considered upper upper . They were in the middle of upper class .
 Not quite, upper upper measures their wealth in billions, not millions . Not quite . Upper upper measures wealth in millions, not billions . Wealthiest people in U.S. are in billions of dollars .
 Before I finished up my last year of teaching, I set about figuring out the new Unimog and assorted accessories . The new vehicle is a new breed of car .
 I got the rototiller mounted and made three passes through the area we’d staked off for a garden . The garden was double the size we'd originally planned, doubling the size of the garden .
 Jan had some of each of the different fruits, but only one cultivar of each . Jan had only one of the fruits of each fruit .
 The nursery plant thorny blackberries all around the inside of the fence enclosing the building area . The nursery also had thorny, thorny and blackberries around the fence .
 John sent plumbers out to run water lines to the orchard and installed an automatic watering system . The orchard is now an orchard full of fruit .
 "Our well had been one of the first projects on the property back in the beginning," says owner of the property . "We had been working on the well for the first time," he says .
 Access to the wellhead required lifting a manhole cover and slipping down into the concrete enclosed well head . Access to a well head required lifting manhole covers and slipping into the enclosed wellhead . The well head is enclosed in concrete and covered in concrete .
 It is powered by inverted electrical current from batteries kept charged by solar panels . It was powered by an inverted current .
 The buildings were all oriented with a south facing roof and that roof covered by solar panels . Although it was a little on the expensive side, the buildings are all oriented .
 Other than the exercise cycle, I can’t remember the last time the generator ran . Other than exercise cycles, the generator has never run .
 The PRI products were added to the tanks once a year on July first rather than take a chance of all of that expensive fuel going bad .
 Surefire suppressors with the Fast Attach adapters were the first things out of the gate were the Surefire suppressionors . The Surefires suppressors are the latest additions to our little armory .
 A short time later, the .50 caliber suppressor came in and was installed . The suppressor was installed by the owner .
 New threaded barrels and 25 Gem Tech suppressors are the latest additions to the gun industry . The new threaded barrels were followed by the new suppressors .
 The final delivery was the most expensive, 4 crates of M-72s, 2 cases each of every kind of hand grenade excluding less than lethal and 30 cans of Mk211 . The final shipment was the largest of all the hand grenades delivered .
 I ordered more concussion and fragmentation and counted out 12 of good old Ben, telling him % concussion and % fragmentation . I then counted 12 of Ben's 12 of the 12 concussion and fragment fragments .
 John asked about locating a singlewide mobile home on the property and I discussed it with Jan, explaining about my offering them space in our shelter . Jan explained about the idea to move them into a single-wide home . John asked for space in the shelter .
 "She said we might as well let them, she said, because we didn't really have room in the house," she said . She said she didn't want to let them in, but she said they might well as well .
 He asked about a separate meter and I suggested that should we actually get a light bill instead of a credit, he pay the bill . He said he would rather rather than get a credit for a credit .
 I purchased an above ground 3,300-gallon propane tank for the mobile home . The tank is above ground and has a capacity for propane storage .
 The home was in good condition considering its age which he said was about 30 years old . The home is in a good condition, he said .
 They furnished it with their old furniture and bought new for their home near Oakville, Ontario . They furnished the home with old furniture .
 From then on, they usually came down once a month and John and I’d drive over to the river . John and John would drive over the river to see them in the river.
 Sally and Jan struck up a great friendship and Sally usually helped Jan can and Lucy watched the kids . Sally usually help Jan can while she and Lucy watch the kids. Sally usually helps Jan can, and Lucy usually watched .
 It was agreed to butcher one steer and four hogs per year and split the meat . It was also agreed that one steer would be butchered per year .
 With the problems in the economy in the latter part of Bush's term and the early part of Obama’s term, we sat tight on our blue chips . We sat tight with the blue chips in the aftermath of the recession .
 We might possibly lose a little dividend income but not the value of the investments represented . We might lose a bit of the dividend income, but not a little of the value it represented .
 "I was almost tempted to buy more gold, but it was too rich for my blood," says the author of the book .
 We also bought 2 Angus cows with their calves, one a new born and one a yearling . The family also bought two new calves and two yearling calves .
 Under USDA organic standards, manure must be subjected to proper thermophilic composting and allowed to reach sterilizing temperature .
 I just built a 3x3 bin 20 feet long and dumped in the manure, with a little loam on the bottom and top . The bin was filled with manure and loam .
 It would be used the following year on the garden and in the greenhouse . It would also be used in the garden .
 We staggered breeding the cows so we usually had one fresh, giving us our milk . We stagger breeding so we could have a fresh, healthy cow giving us milk .
 From each litter of pigs we brought to market weight, we kept four and sold the rest . We kept four of the pigs from each litter, selling the rest of the animals .
 We gen26 erally kept four from the second litter so we could have the beef and hogs butchered around the same time . The beef and the hogs were kept together so they could be butcheered around the time .
 Massachusetts adopted a law when Mitt Romney was Governor requiring a special election to fill vacant congressional seats . Massachusetts had adopted the law when he was Governor .
 Democrats lost their filibuster proof majority in the Senate . That backfired because it meant it meant the Democrats lost filibuster proof . The Senate is now a Republican majority .
 Early in 2009, they didn’t have it because of that fiasco in Minnesota, they said . The state was forced to pull out of the state of Minnesota .
 Once they got Franken seated, nothing much got done before Kennedy died . Kennedy died before he died .
 The lower and upper chambers of Congress are essentially divided down party lines . The House of Representatives is expected to be split between Democrats and Republicans .
 When I quit, I opted out of the COBRA and got us a top notch healthcare package . This package covers optical, dental and medical, including dental .
 Jan used it for herself in much of the same manner and for the kids, most especially the kids . Jan used to use it for her kids .
 Trudy would be starting school this coming fall and we had her lined up with a private school . We had been hoping she would attend private school in the fall, but she was never able to attend .
 Trudy would be 5 before the deadline, Sarah would be close in two years and Seth might have to wait a year . Seth might need to wait one year for Trudie to be ready .
 Some private schools are more flexible than others which follow the state guidelines . Private schools are 'more flexible' than others who follow state guidelines, according to the author .
 Obama was being forced to build our troop strength in Afghanistan as rapidly as he was drawing down Iraq . Obama's troop strength was being built up as fast as Iraq drew down as Iraq did .
 Most countries supplying NATO troops to that war wanted to bring their people home . Most NATO troops were in Afghanistan, but many wanted to return to their countries .
 The Healthcare package was totally bogged down in a Congress that didn’t appear to be able to get a bill on the President’s desk . The bill is expected to be vetoed by the President .
 Every time one of the Congress critters attended a meeting with his/her constituents, they got two ears and 3 bags full . Congresscritters attended meetings with constituents .
 TOM discussed 4th generation warfare in a story TOM had written where he discussed 4 th generation warfare . Jan drew my attention to a story Tom had written about 4 generations of warfare . TOM is a father of two children .
 "Any type of insurrection that arose in this country would have the very character of a 4 th generation war, complete with United States trained insurgents," says President Obama .
 My take on our new President was that he was more a man of words than deeds . My take is that he is more of a 'man of words' than deeds, I said .
 My emphasis was more on American History than World History and Jan was the opposite . Jan was more focused on World History than American History, she says .
 From the middle of the 20 th Century, America had its domestic problems; first, John then Martin and finally Robert . America had domestic problems first, first, then Martin .
 Don't forget the attempt on Ford or the killing of John Lennon and the later shooting of Reagan . But don’t forget the assassination of Reagan and John Lennon, the shooting of John Reagan .
 The codename was later changed to Operation Iraqi Freedom, due to the unfortunate acronym . The operation was originally called Operation Operation Iraq Freedom . The Iraqi Freedom operation was later renamed Operation Operation Iraqi Fallujah .
 Jan’s emphasis was in world history, she paid more attention to world events than I did, she says . Jan's focus was on world history . Jan paid attention to the world events more than she did.
 One of us should see what was coming well in advance and be able to warn the other, he says . "One of us would be better than one of us," he says. "We should be more alert to each other," he adds .
 It eventually turned into a dinner time discussion, exchanging the late breaking news .
 We were each able to lend a bit of an unbiased perspective with that news, something MSM failed to do . Fortunately, we were able to do that, something that the media didn't do .
 None of our kids would want for help with their homework, although we didn’t outright do it for them . None of us would want to help with homework although we did not outright help with them .
 "We taught them to think and reason out the solutions, regardless of the subject," says the schoolgirl .
 For those things that were rote memorization, like the name of continents, we taught them word association, e.g., there is only one continent in the world with south in its name .
 Europe and Asia were the east west game . Everyone knew where they had Rhinos and everyone knew the largest island nation . The Rhinos were a big part of the game in the world .
 If the ice in the north was the arctic, it would be the Ant arctic . The ice in south must be the antctic, according to the theory .
 To enforce a lesson, we could always pull up a satellite link and go to Wiki and look at pictures of penguins .
 One of the few things that really were totally rote memorization was the math tables . "Math tables" was the one thing that really required memorization of students .
 There is a long list of Presidents who promised change, it’s one of their favorite campaign promises . President Barack Obama promised change .
 Ronald Reagan was the president of the United States in 1980s and '80s . Reagan's administration was the only president to have actually succeeded . Reagan had a very successful record in the 1980s .
 Ike and Patton were the Majors sent by MacArthur against the Bonus Marchers . Ike was the Major Major in the battle against Bonus Marcher . Patton was the last Major to be sent to fight the Bonus March .
 Patton getting killed like that was probably the perfect end to his career . Patton's death was the perfect ending to his playing career, Patton says .
 Iran has one goal, acquiring nuclear weapons to use as veiled threat against Israel . North Korea changes its position almost daily while Iran has nuclear weapons . Iran's one goal is to use nuclear weapons as a veiled threat to Israel .
 "She zips right through the preparation process and makes sure I know what we're doing," she says of her daughter .
 We'd need help with the children and she has a skill set beyond anything we might have. We’d need help . She’s skill set is beyond anything else she might have, she says .
 There is an empty hole in the storage building where we could store more jars . There is also an empty space in the building to store jars .
 I have no proof, but I believe the lids lose their ability to seal by becoming dried out . I believe that dried out lids can seal if they are dried out and dry .
 Although we do have a large amount of LTS foods, I’m beginning to believe you can’t have too many . I'm beginning to think you can't have too too many.
 See if they have the bulk chickens on sale and if they do, get a cart full . Buy a few bulk chickens at a local grocery store .
 Once it starts producing, we’re going to have more food to can than you can imagine . Once it begins producing, there’s going to be more food than you’ve ever imagined .
 I might just as well order the jars and lids now before the prices go up further . The jars are now available in the US and Canada .
 We also purchased two additional 30 quart canners to fit on the wood stove . This is the limit that would fit the 4 canners .
 Lucy's propane stove is a good idea in and of itself, but were it not for Lucy, we’d have replaced it with a propane .
 She taught Jan and Sally the delicate balance to keep just the right amount of wood burning for a canner load, or two or three or four .
 Arabian and Morgan breeds produce horses specially bred for the western disciplines . Western pleasure classes offer western pleasure classes that draw large numbers of competitors . Arabian breeds are specially bred to produce horses for western pleasure .
 "Once Jan and I were trained, everything worked out fine. Our Morgans were well trained," says Jan . "Our Morgans are well trained and once they were trained they were fine"
 We even bought a buggy and a buckboard for when we had them under harness . We even got a buggy for when they had to be harnessed .
 "We never took the horse drawn vehicles off the forty, limiting our excursions to trips around the pasture," says author .
 Hornady 168gr 168gr A-MAX match. I asked for alternatives and he recommended 168gr match . Hornady: "I asked about alternatives and I asked him for alternatives" Hornady said he wanted to play a 168gr game .
 It looked bad on both the domestic front and the international front . And, it looked bad for both the players and the fans .
 Kim Jong-won: "North Korea is the most powerful country in the world, but it's not the only one." He says North Korea is now the world's most powerful state of war . He says the North Korean regime is the only nation to hold a nuclear arms deal with
 Kim Jong II died and his selected successor, Kim Jong Un, was in charge . The so called Brilliant Comrade is in charge of North Korea's North Korean state .
 Speculation was that he died of pancreatic cancer but the rumors remained unconfirmed . Speculation that he may have died of cancer was unconfirmed, but it was not confirmed .
 To the East, to the East there are several problem areas where the problem areas are . Bypassing the domestic front for the moment, there were several problems areas .
 Iran tried the protesters and executed all that were classified as leaders behind the unrest following the election . Iran tried to try and kill the protesters after the election, but executed them .
 Mousavi had best keep his mouth shut and head down before he lost his head, literally . While it appeared that Ahmadinejad would continue as President it seemed that Mousavi would continue .
 A little further east brought us to Afghanistan where the War on Terror was going from bad to worse . Afghanistan was one of the worst places in the war on terror .
 Starting back around June, the American body count started to climb, edging up one or two each succeeding month from the previous month’s level .
 Besides all the international concerns, Obama’s promise of change isn’t happening . Besides all these concerns, the president's promises of change are not going to live .
 Until the Special Election to fill 33 Kennedy’s seat is certified, the Democrats lack their Super Majority . The Democrats lack a Super Majority until the election is certified .
 She spoke at the California State Republican Convention in February 2009 . She is a former Republican presidential candidate for California .
 Fiorina is said to be considering a run for Senate against Barbara Boxer in 2010 . Fiorina is a Republican presidential candidate for the first time in a decade . Fiorina has said she is considering running for the Senate .
 On August 18, 2009, she announced that she had filed papers to form an exploratory committee to start exploring a candidacy for Boxer's Senate seat . She announced in August 2009 that she would be seeking to replace Boxer .
 Diane Feinstein has been reported as considering a run for Governor of California when Republican Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger is term limited . Arnold Schwarzenegger has been term limited and is term-limited .
 A private poll in July 2008 showed Feinstein far outpacing Jerry Brown, a former governor, 50 percent to 24 percent . The poll showed current Lieutenant Governor John Garamendi at 10 percent .
 A February 2009 poll showed that 36 percent of Democrats said they would support Feinstein if she ran for governor . The poll was conducted by Democrats in California .
 Brown earned 14 percent, followed by Newsom, Newsom and Villaraigosa . Gavin Newsom pulled in 9 percent . Antonio Villarigosa earned 9 percent in the poll .
 The election held in November 2010 saw Feinstein win the Gubernatorial race and Fiorina beat Boxer handily . Fiorina beat Fiorina handily in the 2010 election .
 The other elections of interest saw Mitt Romney in the Senate seat for the next 6 years . With other swaps the Democrats were down to a bare majority in the Flouse and 53 seats in Senate . The other election of interest was Mitt Romney .
 Harry Reid also lost his seat, but Pelosi retained hers, unfortunately . Pelosi retained her seat in the Senate . Reid lost her seat .
 The new male Senator from California is a former body builder . He first came to 34 world attention as a body builder and married into the Kennedy family .
 Wiki explains the history of the U.S. military . Wikipedia explains the origins of the war .
 When they made Terminator IV without him, I assumed he’d stay in politics. I assumed that he would stay in . I thought he would be in politics, but he was in politics .
 It takes big ones to erect a tent on the Capital grounds so you can smoke a cigar . A cigar tent is erected on the grounds of the U.S. Capitol Park .
 With the change in the makeup of Congress, the President was fit to be tied . With the new Congress, it was too soon to be able to tie the President .
 Without the promised change, some of the Fox All Stars wondered aloud if he’d get a second term . The Fox All Star says he won’t be re-elected .
 Charles Krauthammer, a perennial contributor to Special Report with Bret Baier, was now a total skeptic concerning Obama’s chances . Juan Williams was pretty much in agreement, with Charles in agreement with Charles .
 Many authors have a tendency to have their main characters being well prepared by using some device, like an insurance settlement, auto accident, inheritance and what not .
 "I had old money from my grandfather and my father had more than I did. That was not our case, I had old . money from our case," he said . "That's not the case, that's the case. That's the fact that I had more money from
 Jan and I would probably have 9 figures tucked away not counting what she might get from her parents . So, come the day that mom and dad were gone, Jan and Jan would probably be able to get 9 figures .
 That assumed that everything went as it should and we didn’t experience any natural or manmade disasters . That assumption was that everything would go as well as everything should .
 "Even if that happened, we could fall back on our preparations and the contents of the vault addition to the shelter," the shelter says .
 The authors did 90% of my research for me. I did appreciate one thing about the Patriot Fiction . The author's research was done by the authors .
 Just because a person has money and spends it as needed doesn’t make them a spendthrift . Just because someone has money does not make them spend it as much as needed .
 An AW-50 is like $13-$14 grand, the M82A about $9 grand plus all those options and the Tac-50 about $ 9 grand complete . The Tac 50 is a complete package and the AW50 is about $13 grand .
 The Hornady 168gr AMax finally came in and I pretty much filled the vault . I'm not sure how much of the vault will be filled with the new material .
 Our haul from the garden the previous year was substantial, mostly due to doubling the size of the garden . The haul was due to double the size the garden had doubled in the year before .
 An unused portion of the unfinished side of the basement was stacked with case after case of home canned food . During spring and summer of 2010, with the compost added and thoroughly mixed in, the haul was even better .
 John and Sally kept the temperature in their mobile home between 55-60° and 60° . About half of their share from the garden was stored there .
 All but 6 weeks’ worth of their LTS food was moved to storage building where we were storing our most recent order . All of the food is now in storage .
 Lucy was there watching the kids and asking questions . Lucy and her family came down every weekend to help with the canning .
 Melody took over baby sitting with her sister Cheryl, half helping and half needing a firm hand herself . At Sally’s suggestion their oldest, Melody, took over babysitting herself .
 I swear he squirted half of the milk on the floor. I taught him how to milk a cow, but I swear half the milk was spilled . "I swear, I swear, he squirt half the milking on the ground. He squirted it," she says .
 Danny took to riding like a fish to water and we had him riding one of the geldings . We had him ride a gelding and he rode it like a horse to water .
 The guns for their three had been acquired but not distributed save the Marlin 1895 Cowboys and the Ruger Vaqueros . The guns were acquired and not distributed . They were acquired by the family of three people .
 There were three Loaded Ml As and 3 Browning HiPowers for the kids that they were only allowed to use at a range . The kids were also given three loaded ml As .
 He thought long and hard before deciding on 590A1 shotguns for their family . He thought very carefully about the shotgun design . He chose a shotgun with a shotgun for his entire family .
 He confided that the money he made off the various projects he’d done for us had paid for Sally and their kids’ firearms and ammunition . The money paid for the children's guns and ammunition, he said .
 It was obviously quite a bit if he had purchased 5 of everything to outfit his family . It was a lot of things to buy for a family .
 Ours had all of the improvements, short stoke gas piston, chrome lined chambers and barrels, 3X ACOGs and a lot of magazines . Ours . had all the improvements .
 The BATFE arrested a fella last week who dealt in illegal firearms and ammunition . The fella was arrested last week in connection with illegal firearms .
 The guy didn’t keep any records and denied knowing the names of any of his customers . He denied knowing any of those customers .
 If you have any illegal firearms and/or ammunition, you would be well advised to either turn them in or dispose of them . The U.S. Attorney General for the U.N. says illegal firearms should be handed over to police .
 Have a couple of Barrett’s and some Bushmaster semi-autos and so forth. Have a few Barrett's and a few Bushmaster semis . Have some Barrett's .
 She stopped with her third pregnancy and I stopped a year later . She and her husband were in St. Louis for a while .
 "My family has some money and I didn’t really have to work so I’ve concentrated on our small 40 acre homestead," says owner . "I've concentrated on 36 acres of land and my family has a lot of money," she says .
 "If we actually believed you were the customer he was talking about, I wouldn’t be here by my lonesome. If we actually believe you are the customer," he said. "We wouldn't have been here by our lonesomes."
 I gave the Deputy, Rob Simmons, a complete tour of the house including opening my gun safe and showing him the finished portion of the basement . The Deputy opened the safe and showed him a portion of his basement .
 He asked about the remainder of the basement and I explained that we were into prepping in a big way and it was mostly storage of food . The basement was mostly food storage .
 We have food stored so we wouldn’t have to be a burden and take food from others who might need it worse . We have the food stored . We don't have to take it from other people who might be worse .
 I store our Unimog U500 and accessories plus our Toolcat 5600 and accessories in there . I store all of my tools in the garage .
 We have spare canning jars, some long term food and a wood burning stove . We also have spare jars and some long-term food . We hope to be able to use the ovens and spare jars .
 John brought that up before the log home was erected because of tornados . John brought it up before he built the home because of the tornados.
 "We decided on a separate shelter because the house could fall into the basement," says owner . The shelter is located in the basement of the house .
 Why build a shelter and leave out the most important parts like the blast door and air filtration system? The shelter is designed to provide shelter for people in need of emergency situations .
 That door over there opens to an oval concrete pipe with the backup generator in a small room at the end of the pipe . The backup generator is in the small room in a concrete pipe . That door also opens to a small concrete room with a small, concrete room .
 One of the things John and I had done was move the faraday cage/cabinet to the area in front of the vault door . The vault door was moved to the right side of the door .
 If you opened the cabinet and slid a lever to the left, the cabinet was detached from the wall and rolled silently forward against the piano hinge on the right side . If you open the cabinet, you can open the left side and slide a lever .
 To secure the vault door, the cabinet was returned to its normal location and the lever slid to the right, locking it in place . The cabinet was used to store items in the vault .
 Bad news spreads fast and 38 we knew about the arrest of Mr Shady almost before the Sheriff . You see, bad news spreads quickly and 38 people were arrested .
 I had called John the moment I’d heard and he was down within an hour making the modification . John was down in an hour to make the modification, and it was a matter of minutes .
 Faraday cage/cabinet sat on newly installed soft rollers allowing it to move effortlessly .
 We could give anyone the tour and except by remote chance, our secrets were safe . We were able to give anyone a tour of our home, except for remote chance . We could tell anyone anything about the house, except that it was safe .
 Even if Mr Shady had John and my names written down, they’d have to find the illegal stuff before they could make an arrest . Even if he had written them down, it would be illegal to arrest them .
 Sheriff's office made local inquiries . Apparently he described one of his purchasers as a Cowboy and the Sheriffs office made inquiries .
 The President also lost any chance he had of getting the Assault Weapons Ban re-enacted with the results of the 2010 election .
 Arnold said he would support it if it came up, but it didn't come up because of other pressing issues . Arnold said it didn’t come up due to other, more pressing issues, but said he’d support it .
 Fiorina took an opposite stance, essentially cancelling out Arnold’s vote . Fiorina took the opposite stance . Fiorina's vote was essentially cancelled out by Arnold's vote .
 Obama made a last ditch attempt to spur action from Congress on the war in Afghanistan and healthcare reform . Obama decided to address the nation in a speech to the nation .
 Lucy 39 stayed to see the broadcast on Valentine’s Day, 2011 . Lucy stayed to watch the broadcast . Lucy 39 was taken out for dinner with Jan .
 The President walked down the hallway to the podium and began his address . The President began his speech at the podium .
 President Obama takes on the Taliban in Afghanistan and healthcare reform in the U.S. Congress is stalled in Congress .
 Our efforts in Afghanistan have become mired by the continued bombings by terrorists, says President Ghaffar Hussain . Hussain: "We are mired in the continued bombing by terrorists"
 The Secretary of Defense and I. in consultation with the Joint Chiefs of Staff have concluded that it will be necessary to once again increase our troops deployed to that country . President Barack Obama has declared that the U.S. will increase troops in Afghanistan .
 Five additional combat brigades will be deployed during the next six weeks . Additional support personnel will be added to the force .
 A ground detonation of a large nuclear weapon occurred in the proximity of the White House . It appears that the detonation occurred in close proximity to the President's residence .
 We lost our satellite feed of the broadcast and our Washington Bureau is offline . The Washington Bureau was offline during the broadcast .
 At the moment there is no indication if this was a terrorist attack or an act by one of the nuclear powers . No indication if the attack was a terror attack or a nuclear attack .
 At the moment, I think maybe terrorists finally got their hands on a large warhead, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Only two countries build multi-megaton warheads, China and Russia . Russia and China have the most powerful nuclear weapons in the world .
 There have been allegations that the Russians have lost track of some of their weapons . Well, you know there have been . allegations that they have . lost track . Some of the Russian weapons are still missing, but some of the weapons have been found .
 Well, if Sally and you think it best, I’ll go turn up the heat in your mobile home, I'll go turn it up, Sally says . Well, it's a good idea, she says. Well, I'm not sure .
 He seems to be concerned that because of the size of the weapon, Russia and/or China are going to be blamed for the loss of power .
 President, Secretary of Defense and all but one of the Joint Chiefs attended the ceremony . The event was held in Washington, D.C. for the first time since 2001 .
 There is the twin bed in the girls’ bedroom and some night gowns that will fit in the dresser . There is also a twin bed for the girls, and a night gown for the night .
 By the time I finished getting them set, Lucy was pulling back in the drive . Lucy was pulled back in in the car .
 When she got out of the car, she set her cat on the ground and pulled a suitcase from the back seat . She then pulled out a suitcase and put it in the back of her car .
 Lucy returned 30 minutes later . John, Sally, Sally and Melody, Melody, Danny and Cheryl did . Lucy returned to her family's home .
 John was pulling a trailer and I opened the door to the storage building so he could back it in . The trailer was pulled into the building, and John was able to get it in safely .
 "I gave him the grand tour and with the exception of the vault, he knows what we have," says manager Mark Hughes . "He knows what he has," says Hughes .
 There are multiple sources of nuclear material available in the world and if terrorist organizations get their hands on some, they can easily bring a weapon into the country and detonate it .
 This maintains continuity of government with regard to presidential succession in the remote possibility of a catastrophic event which might wipe out large portions of the US's federal government, including the entire slate of individuals designated by law in the line of succession .
 U.S. law does not provide for anyone to assume the office of president if everyone on this list is simultaneously killed . The practice of designating a survivor is intended to effectively eliminate the chance of that happening .
 Only cabinet members who are eligible to succeed to the presidency can be chosen as designated survivors . Only Cabinet members who succeed to succeed can be designated survivors of the presidency .
 A surviving Representative and Senator could ascend to the offices of Speaker of the House and President Pro Tempore of the Senate . Those offices follow the 43 Vice President in the line of succession . A surviving Senator and a Representative and a Congressman could ascend .
 If such a legislative survivor were the sitting Speaker or President Pro Tempore as for the 2005, 2006, and 2007 State of the Union addresses, in which Ted Stevens or Senator Robert Byrd was also a designated survivor he would take the office of President .
 The weapon was determined to be a 2 megaton warhead constructed by the People’s Republic of China specifically for their DF-5 missile .
 A Cabinet Officer, a Representative and a Senator were designated survivors . Apparently a Cabinet Officer was among the survivors . A Senator was also designated survivor of the disaster .
 I speculated that either Al Qaeda or the Taliban was behind the bombing because of the timing . The timing of the bombing suggests that Al Qaeda and the Taliban could be behind it .
 Bin Laden has been trying to get his hands on nuclear weapons for about 15 years now . Bin Laden is believed to be in the process of getting a nuclear weapon .
 Locke, the Secretary of Commerce, was sworn in as President at 3am Eastern Time . Locke was sworn into office of the new President of the U.S. on January 1 . Locke is the Secretary-of-Commerce secretary of Commerce .
 Gary Locke is the first Chinese American to be elected as the King County Executive . Locke was elected to office in 2010 . Locke is also the first Asian American elected to be a county executive in King County, Washington .
 He then became the first Chinese American to be elected as Governor of Washington . He was elected to the state legislature in 1994 .
 On December 4, 2008, Locke was a potential candidate for Secretary of Interior in then President-elect Barack Obama’s cabinet . Locke was reported to be a possible candidate for Interior in Obama's cabinet .
 Eventually, then Colorado Senator, Ken Salazar, was nominated for that position instead . He was eventually nominated for the position .
 Locke was announced as President Barack Obama's choice for Secretary for Commerce in 2009 . Locke is a former Secretary of Commerce Secretary . Locke was appointed by President Obama on February 25, 2009 .
 His nomination was confirmed by the United States Senate by unanimous consent on March 24, 2009 . He was confirmed in 2009 by the Senate .
 He is the first Chinese American Secretary of Commerce . He joins the late Energy Secretary Steven Chu and Veteran Affairs Secretary Eric Shinseki, the most of any administration .
 Locke will serve out the remainder of Obama’s term and be eligible for two terms of his own because the remaining portion of the term was less than 2 years as provided by the twenty second Amendment . Locke will be eligible to serve two terms in his own .
 Locke is the Designated Successor of the U.S. House of Representatives . Chu or Shinseki could have been the next president of Japan . Locke has been the designated successor .
 Congress could raise a quorum in both the House and Senate . Congress had more members away from Washington than normal and could raise quorum . Congress has more members in Washington than usual and could have a majority .
 Under the circumstances, I felt sure they would confirm most, if not all, of Locke’s Cabinet appointments .
 Congress had moved temporarily to the Greenbrier Hotel, although some had suggested Watergate . Congress moved to the hotel after Watergate .
 For most of its history the hotel was owned by the Chesapeake & Ohio Railway and its successors, currently CSX Corporation . The hotel is located near the intersection of the main railway lines .
 CSX placed the hotel into bankruptcy in 2009 after a year of heavy losses . The hotel was placed into bankruptcy by CSX in 2009 .
 Local entrepreneur Jim Justice subsequently bought the property and guaranteed all debts, resulting in dismissal of the bankruptcy . Jim Justice was the owner of the bankrupt property .
 Justice promised to return the hotel to its former status as a five star resort . Justice has promised to introduce ‘tasteful’ gambling for guests as a revenue enhancer .
 The Greenbrier is also the site of a massive underground bunker that was meant to serve as an emergency shelter for the U.S. Congress during the Cold War . The bunker was built in the 1950s .
 On March 20, 2009, the resort filed for bankruptcy, listing debt of up to $500 million and assets of $100 million . The resort was listed for bankruptcy on March 20. 2009 .
 Marriott says it had a valid contract to purchase the hotel . The Marriott Corporation says it expected to see that contract honored . Marriott says the contract is valid .
 The bankruptcy judge dismissed the case on May 19, 2009, clearing the way for Justice's purchase of the property . However, Justice ultimately settled with Marriott, and the case was dismissed .
 The center was maintained by government workers posing as hotel audiovisual employees, and operated under a dummy company named Forsythe Associates . Government workers posed as hotel employees posing as employees .
 Many of the same workers are now employed by the hotel and, for a time, gave guided tours . Many of these same workers now work for the hotel .
 The complex is still maintained by The Greenbrier . The facility remains much as it was in 1992, when the secret was revealed in 1992 .
 Almost all of the furnishings were removed following the decommissioning of the bunker . The facility now has similar period furnishings to approximate what the bunker looked like while it was still in operation .
 Since today is Tuesday, Sally and you ought to consider spending the week, while things get sorted out . Sally and Sally should spend the rest of the week while things are sorted out, Sally says .
 I don’t really know, but I’d imagine accusations are going to be flying every which way until they find someone to blame for the detonation . I'd imagine accusations will fly every which which way .
 "They have a lot of information, but unfortunately some of it is conflicting," says CNN.com . "Some of the information they have is conflicting. They have a little bit of information that they need to know, but it's conflicting."
 The United States called for an immediate meeting of the UN Security Council . The U.S. called for a meeting of immediate meeting .
 "That was probably a delaying action so they could figure out who did what. That was probably the case," he said .
 There is only the international community, which can only be led by the only remaining superpower, which is the U.S. The international community can only lead by the United States .
 Our Ambassador complained to the Security Council about the use of a Chinese warhead being used on American soil . The U.S. ambassador to the U.N. Security Council has complained about the warhead .
 The Chinese Ambassador countered with evidence that it wasn’t the only country with 2mT warheads and that an inventory accounted each and every one of their weapons .
 The Russia Ambassador also claimed that its entire stockpile of nukes had been checked and as of an hour before the meeting, none were missing . None of the nukes were missing, he said .
 Russia and China could prove their claims by permitting an IAEA inspection, he said . He again suggested that they could do so by allowing an inspection of their claims to be carried out .
 Russia finally agreed forcing the Chinese to do the same . Although reluctant, Russia agreed forcing them to do so . Russia and China agreed forcing each other to agree .
 The IAEA would be allowed to inspect all of our weapons once the Russian and Chinese inspections were completed, the ambassador said . A Russian nuclear weapons expert could accompany a Russian nuclear weapon expert when they inspected ours .
 China agreed to allow a Russian expert and a U.S. expert to work with the IAEA provided they could provide an expert to join the Russian inspecting the American weapons . China then agreed to let the Russian expert join the United States expert .
 Russia had more than 4,000 weapons spread out over a large territory resulting in a 20 month verification that confirmed their inventory was complete . Russia also confirmed their weapons were complete .
 The now conventional B-1B had been restored to carry nukes . It took a full year to verify our weapons stockpile . The now-deployed B-2B is now a conventional bomber capable of carrying nuclear weapons .
 John and Sally had only stayed until the weekend and then returned home . Sally and John were only there for the weekend, but returned home.
 This verification process was like waiting for a pot to boil, it seemingly lasted forever with nothing amiss at the end . It seemed like nothing was wrong, but nothing was amiss in the end, it was like nothing else .
 Saying that he only intended to serve until the election of 2012, he was a shoe in . He was expected to be re-elected in 2012 .
 Locke had been reelected twice having done a respectable job working with both parties ironing out healthcare reform . Locke was reelected in 2010 and 2012 . Locke has been re-elected twice .
 The weapons signature indicated a thermonuclear warhead, i.e., a hydrogen weapon . The weapon was a hydrogen warhead . It was detonated in a controlled detonation .
 "Our forces remained on DEFCON 4 even though all of our troops had been withdrawn worldwide," says President Obama . "We will continue to be on the brink of war," says Obama .
 When the last person was withdrawn from the Middle East, the Afghanistan drawdown began and when it was complete, South Korea followed . South Korea was the first country to withdraw from Afghanistan in the region .
 President Locke retained such military that reenlisted but recruiting efforts were put on hold . Recruiting efforts to recruit new members of the military have been put back .
 Even then, the military got a fair number of volunteers and they were accepted as replacements for eventual retirees . The military still accepted volunteers as replacements .
 Last troops brought home were those stationed in Germany, during the third year of Locke’s first 48 elected term, about five years after the assassination .
 NATO was forced to accept that role and our participation in NATO was limited . NATO's involvement in NATO has been limited in the past, says President Obama . The US has been criticized for its role in Afghanistan .
 The Senate had a Republican majority and the House a Democratic majority . Rarely did the twain meet in the Senate or the House .
 Jan and Jan provided home schooling, both being certified teachers . Our children were growing up and Jan and I provided home education, both of whom were home schooled .
 The end of the War on Terror saw a sharp increase in supplies of ammunition . One could buy all the Lake City ammo wanted for a fair price .
 The economy had recovered in fits and starts and housing prices were finally back to where they had been when the housing bubble burst . Housing prices are now back to what they were when they were in the bubble .
 Auto makers were forced to produce vehicles meeting strict emission and mileage criteria . Auto makers had been forced to meet strict emissions and mileage requirements .
 Our two Suburban’s had been tweaked about to the limit and could still meet the emissions standards . Our Suburban's had to be tweaked to meet the standards .
 I wasn't sure that would hold, given the compulsory limits for future years . I wasn’t sure that . I was in the middle of the conversation, but I was sure it would hold . I’m not sure that’s true .
 Twice a year trips to Sam’s and Costco constituted our ‘long distance’ travel .
 "I believe in my heart that my mother grieved herself to death because she died within a year after he did. I believe in her heart that she grieved themselves to death," she said .
 I arranged for the distribution of the clothing and furnishings of the Westchester County home to charity and sold the home . The home was donated to a charity .
 The attorney handed the estate called and asked me what I wanted to do with the contents of Dad’s safe . The attorney for the estate handed the . estate called the . attorney . asked him what he wanted to . do .
 When I asked what was in it, I got the shock of my life, United States Eagles, silver and gold, and a lot of them . The Eagles were "United States Eagles," "Silver and gold" and "a lot of" them .
 "I asked him to arrange secure shipping and send any of the remaining firearms that Dad and Mom may have had," says son . "Dad and Mom's guns may have been in the family home," he says .
 His combat rifle was an M21 from Springfield Armory and he had a H&K USP tactical with suppressor . He had a combat rifle and a combat weapon .
 It’s a shame that he didn’t have a Surefire for the M21 or a suppressor for the AS-50 . It's also a shame he didn't have a surefire or suppressor .
 When she passed, I got what was left after taxes, cementing our place in the low nine figures . When she died, he got what he got after taxes . "I got what I got, cemented our place of the low 9 figures," he says .
 "We wouldn’t be on anyone’s list of the richest people, but we were more than comfortable. We would be comfortable," she said .
 Talk to John and explain the problem to him, indicate that price is no object . Talk to him and indicate that he is not interested in buying a replacement .
 I’m beginning to think that we should get those automatic lowers for the Bushmasters . We should have one apiece, he says, and one each .
 The lowers weren’t a major problem; the suppressors were described as difficult but doable . The suppressors are said to be hard to suppress .
 The Mk211 was a whole different matter which he described as extremely difficult . He described the Mk211 as 'extremely difficult' to use .
 If I had money to burn, he’d get it done, for a consideration, he says . However, if I had cash to burn I’m sure he'd do it .
 The consideration was 5 cases of Ml 18LR and 10 cases of Mk211 for his .50 . The .50 was considered for the consideration .
 In the fall of 2016, that ongoing problem over the Kashmir raised its ugly head yet again . Kashmir is still a major issue in the region .
 China, Pakistan and India are battling in a three-way battle involving Pakistan, India and China . It was turning into a three way battle involving China and Pakistan .
 The Chinese had started it this time, sending in an overwhelming force and seizing the half claimed by India and the third claimed by Pakistan . The Chinese seized the half of India's territory and claimed the third of Pakistan's .
 The latter two countries mobilized and actually joined forces to expel China . China was expelled by the U.S. and other countries, including China .
 When China was expelled, Pakistan got the territory claimed by China, effectively give each country half of Kashmir .
 We had finished harvesting the outside garden, had Lucy’s new home installed and occupied and John had come through with the needed items . Lucy's new home is now being occupied and the garden has been harvested .
 The ammunition he wanted 50 was stored in their mobile home at their place . He wanted 50 of the ammunition was stored at their home at our place .
 We reactivated our warning system, Delta Echo/Alpha Delta Echo and improved it to include other possibilities . The system was reactivated and improved to include more possibilities .
 Tango a threatened tornado and Alpha Sierra for an Asteroid/Comet from Space . Alpha Sierra gets a look at a possible Asteroid from space .
 During the course of building the shelter and the homes at the MAG compound, John developed a source that could provide the current DEFCON/THREATCON/ERTCON/LERTCON and EMERGCONs and Material Conditions of our military .
 By opening a single document on my laptop I could review the steps involved in establishing Material Conditions and translate the various Defense/Threat levels and respond appropriately . By opening the document on his laptop he could review and respond to the various threats .
 In addition, we had established an unscheduled monthly check-in confirming current conditions . "We had established a monthly check in confirming current condition," she said .
 'Not only was their education better than all but all but a fancy Prep school could offer, it kept them home and under our watchful eye. Not only was . It kept them . home and kept them under . eye, it also kept them at home, under . watchful
 Jan and Jan were now of a mind that there was no such thing as being too prepared . Jan and I were now . of course that there were no such . thing to be too prepared.
 We were careful not to put up more home canned food than could be consumed in one year . Maximum supply before the summer was a one year supply and towards fall approached 21 months .
 Add to that the one year supply of commercial food from Costco and Sam’s and it could be as much as 33 months before we were forced to open our LTS food supplies . LTS has a one year commercial food supply of one-year supply .
 Those were rotated on a continuing basis because they needed to be and we actually preferred some of the freeze dried to home canned or store bought . Those were rotations because they had to be .
 Both Jan and Jan carried portable NWS SAME radios, just in case . Jan was a world history specialist, she kept an eye on the news and kept a watchful eye .
 Her expressed fears was that one of the three nations involved in the Kashmir war would resort to nuclear weapons, and in the process, involve other nations leading to an all-out global thermonuclear war .
 When the U.S. economy crashed in ‘08-‘09, we’d taken other countries with us. When the United States crashed in '08-'09, it’s taken other nations with us with us, says Obama .
 Our recovery took a while but some of the others were still in the recovery phase . Bringing our troops home had eliminated a fair number of U.S. dollars from their economies, he says .
 My source seems to think that something is going on behind the scenes . We remain at DEFCON 4 and THREATCON Normal and the Navy is at X-Ray .
 U.S. Army, fought in Iraq one tour and Afghanistan for one tour, but in the other order .
 His failing, if any, was insufficient time to practice especially recently when he’d been working on the MAG project .
 His rifle had the Night Force NXS 8-32x56 Mil-dot telescopic sight plus a MUNS AN/PVS-27 . He also had a Night Force X-8mm 8mm/32mm scope .
 Over the years, John had accumulated quite a bit of the ammo and stored it in our armory . John had collected quite a lot of the ammunition and stored in the armory.
 There was a case pending before the Supreme Court challenging the NFA arguing that it violated the 2 nd Amendment . The case was pending .
 Successful challenges had already been made to Bush’s EO, FOPA, the 1968 Gun Control Act and the 1968 Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act .
 Only the one left to go and Americans would have their rights back, where permitted by local laws . Americans would be able to have rights back in the U.S. Only one left is left .
 That challenge to Bush’s EO was the only the third time an Executive Order had been challenged .
 It was during early September and the situation in the Kashmir had continued to heat up . The Kashmir situation in Kashmir had intensified during the summer .
 incoming missiles have been detected, but no country of origin was being reported . This was confirmed by the radio, incoming missiles had been detected . The missiles were detected in the area, but were not being reported by the country .
 Since Jan had her radio, I started to take care of the livestock, ensuring they were housed and fed . "I started taking care of them," she says of her livestock .
 The new barn was connected to the generator room and thereby the shelter . The shelter is connected to a new barn that was built for the animals .
 It was a dome constructed of reinforced concrete and covered with six feet of earth . The dome was constructed in a dome covered in earth and covered in concrete . It was the first dome of its kind .
 I hastily moved the livestock to the barn and activated the heavy duty shutters designed to provide a protection factor about 5,000 . The shutters were designed to protect the livestock from harm .
 When I finished, I helped Jan, Lucy and the kids with the last load to the shelter . I helped them with the final load of food and water . I'm not sure how much of the food will be donated .
 We entered and I pulled the AMP radiation equipment from the faraday cage/cabinet and hooked it up . I pulled it up and hooked up with the equipment .
 A banging sound on the shelter door indicated we had company . A banging was heard from a few minutes later indicated there had been company in the shelter .
 It was John and his family and they had parked the SUV and trailer in the storage building . John says they were parked in the building and they found the vehicle and trailer .
 Deputy Rob Simmons with wife and two teens with wife, two teens . About 5 minutes later, there was pounding on the door a second time, one each deputy . Deputy Simmons was taken into custody .
 We soon learned that their children, Maria 15 and Robert 13, were accomplished shooters in their own right and had weapons of their own . Maria and Robert, both 15 years old, were also armed with weapons .
 I opened the cabinet, moved the lever to the left and swiveled out of the cabinet . I then swerved out the cabinet. I opened it up and swived out .
 Maria, the mom, was from Mexico originally and it wasn’t uncommon there. Maria, was originally from Mexico . It wasn't uncommon there .
 They had perhaps a six month supply of LTS food for four or one year for two . Food for four was perhaps six months for four . Food was perhaps a year for four for two.
 "That was reasonable because we were about 20 nautical miles from St. Mary's," she says . "That's about 23 statute miles from the island," she adds .
 When warheads began to rain on Russia, they implemented an all-out attack . Russia implemented an attack on the U.S.
 "We probably retaliated with our Minuteman III missiles since they were in fixed locations," he said . "They were probably retaliating with their Minutemen III missiles," he added .
 No doubt as many bombers as could be loaded with weapons were moved to a secure location like Groom, Rogers or Rosamond . No doubt many of the bombers were loaded up with weapons .
 That leaves us with a full load of Trident missiles to use as we see fit . That means we can use Trident missiles as we choose how we want them .
 We have most of the by golly gee wiz accessories like night scopes, match ammo and multipurpose ammo . We also have night-scopes and match ammo like night-glance ammo .
 Ail of our Bushmasters have military A1 lowers and the Bushmaster short stroke gas piston uppers . Ail said that all of the Bushmasters were made of low-grade gas piston lowers .
 Jan and Lucy had started a batch of bread and she said it would be sometime before the cinnamon rolls were finished .
 The dough had to rise, be knocked down shaped in loaves and placed in the pans . The dough was knocked down and placed into the pans to make loaves .
 The leftover dough was rolled out, topped with butter, sugar and cinnamon and allowed to rise while the bread baked . The bread was then rolled out .
 The coffee urn had stopped perking and we had plenty of coffee . However, the coffee was not perking at the end of the day .
 Jan had two Cioer Electric Water Kettles and got water going to tea and hot cocoa . Jan also had two electric water kettles .
 Mutual assured destruction is a doctrine of military strategy in which a full-scale use of nuclear weapons by two opposing sides would effectively result in the destruction of both the attacker and the defender . The doctrine is known as mutual assured destruction .
 It is based on the theory of deterrence according to which the deployment of strong weapons is essential to threaten the enemy in order to prevent the use of the very same weapons . Deterioration is based upon the theory that strong weapons are needed to threaten enemies .
 The strategy is effectively a form of Nash equilibrium, in which both sides are attempting to avoid their worst possible outcome nuclear annihilation . Both sides are trying to avoid the worst possible outcomes of nuclear war .
 Today, all lesser nations are believed to be keenly aware that any use of nuclear weapons, in any context, is the recipe for their annihilation .
 Significant nuclear powers operate under the deterrent effect of potential retaliation with respect to “first use” in the conduct of brush fire wars . The United States, the Russian Federation, and the People’s Republic of China .
 The US continues to exercise its vast nuclear might as a cornerstone of its foreign policy with regard to rogue states and communist nations . The US has the largest and most deployable stockpile of nuclear weapons .
 U.S. military forces stand on permanent alert in order to deter potential nuclear adversaries . United States military forces are on alert in response to potential nuclear threats .
 Nondemocratic nations cannot use nuclear weapons against the US or her critical allies without threat of a ‘full retaliatory’ response by the U.S.
 In game theory, Nash equilibrium is a solution concept of a game involving two or more players . Each player is assumed to know the equilibrium strategies of the other players . No player has anything to gain by changing only his or her own strategy unilaterally .
 If each player has chosen a strategy and no player can benefit by changing his or her strategy while the other players keep theirs unchanged, then the current set of strategy choices and the corresponding payoffs constitute a Nash equilibrium . The Nash equilibrium occurs when each player chooses a different strategy and the other
 Stated simply, Amy and Bill are in Nash equilibrium if Amy is making the best decision she can, taking into account Bill’s decision, and Bill is taking the best decisions he can . Amy is being taken into account by Bill's decision and Bill's, and taking into
 Many players are in Nash equilibrium if each one is making the best decision that he or she can, taking into account the decisions of the others . Likewise, many players can be Nash equilibrium, if each is making a decision that takes into account other decisions .
 It would be a while before we could extricate ourselves from the shelter, somewhere between 9 and 16 months according to the radiation readings . Danny was noting that radiation readings were showing up to 16 months .
 The natural decay of the radiation would put it below lOOmR at 9 months and below 50mR in 16 months . Natural decay of radiation would mean it would be below loomR for 9 months .
 "We didn’t really need to go out for much, not with the access we had to the dome barn," coach says . "The dome barn is a great place to go for a game," he says .
 "We would want to exit briefly before then to begin the process of removing the radiation around the homes," says the official .
 The camera mounted on the antenna tower survived the EMP and radiation . Fortunately the camera survived the radiation and EMP and EMP .
 Mounted on a standoff, it was a Pan/Tilt Zoom Veilux SVP-F18X Dome Security Camera . The camera was mounted on the standoff .
 The greatest feature that this auto tracking camera can provide is starting auto tracking from different triggers . Start auto tracking when motion is triggered at the home view location of the camera, or start auto tracking after the camera moves to the predefined preset .
 A dwell time for auto tracking can also be set to restart auto cruising after motion stops at the present location . Auto cruising can be restarted after a motion is stopped at the current location .
 Auto tracking PTZ cameras also come in different day/night mode with extremely low LUX functionality . The auto tracking cameras come with different day and night modes .
 The cameras can operate up to 0.01 LUX at dark conditions with the automatic electromechanical infrared cut filter to provide clarity black and white picture .
 Cut filter provides crisp clear day/night image . Filter filters out UV sunlight during the day and clear picture noise filtration during the night .
 The cameras also offer enhanced backlight compensation giving . providing . comparable to a wide dynamic range camera quality . The cameras are also capable of providing comparable to . a wide . dynamic range quality .
 Only one parent of a couple could be suited up and outside the shelter in case we needed to go out . I decided to invoke the one parent rule, ergo, to avoid going outside .
 "To avoid giving away the shelter location, we would exit from the dome. And, to avoid giving . away the . shelter location. And to avoid . giving away . away from the shelter. We would exit .
 This meant that in the near future, someone was going to have to close the metal stairwell covering and move some of the firewood on it to conceal it . This meant someone would have to go outside and close the stairwell .
 1,800ft 2 shelter now held 6+5+4 or 15 souls, reducing the square footage from 200ft 2 per person to 120ft 2 .
 Had it not been for the four additional guests sleeping in the main shelter area, it wouldn’t have been a problem . Had the four extra guests sleeping there wouldn't have been the problem, the shelter says .
 We generally kept a 24-hour watch consisting of two people, one watching the radiation and the other using the camera to survey the scene .
 "That was the difference from starting into preparedness having money as opposed to not having money. That's the difference," she said . "That's a big difference"
 The other expression was money isn’t the most important thing in the world, but it beat the heck out of whatever is in second place . Money isn't most important, but money beats second place, the other expression is money .
 I was surrounded by my immediate family and hoped that Jan’s family was ok. "I’m surrounded by her immediate family," she said . She said she hoped that her family would be ok .
 On the other hand, that upscale neighborhood, Westchester County, made it difficult to keep a low profile . "I'm not going to hide out. I'm going to live in a low-profile, but I'm not afraid to hide," she says .
 A minor targeting error would wipe out White Plains and Westchester County . White Plains would be wiped out of White Plains, Westchester, by 2020 .
 "I didn’t plan on driving halfway across the country without a good reason to do so," he says . "It's a good thing to do," he adds .
 I was curious about TOM being an auditor for the state of Iowa and asked a few questions . TOM is a former state auditor for Iowa . TOM says he is an "auditor" for the Iowa legislature .
 He dropped two names of companies he’d ‘heard of in the area Xerox and Gulf and Western . Xerox is a Xerox-owned company, and Gulf & Western .
 I assumed he couldn’t tell me the names of companies he audited, but was free to mention the names he ‘heard of’
 He’s probably there in Palmdale sitting on the fault line with his Ml A in his lap daring the San Andreas to shake . He's probably sitting in the ground with his . Ml . A. L.A. in California .
 I paused and checked the hour meter on the generator and it wasn’t due for an oil change . The generator wasn't due to be oiled, but it was still running .
 "We continued to the dome and fed the livestock and moved the manure off to one side. We continued to feed the livestock," she said. "We fed the animals and moved manure off one side"
 We added masks, gloves and tape and went outside to close the stairwell cover and move some fire wood . We added our masks and gloves to our masks .
 "When we got back, I read the dosimeters and recorded the readings before I zeroed them. When we got . When we . got back we . read the . dosimeters, I . read them and recorded them. before I . zeroed the readings .
 Subsequent trips would be shorter and we’d get less until we went out to begin decontamination . We had received doses of ~1 R doses of 1 R dose .
 "We had a long discussion and agreed to limit our total dosage to 10R, if possible, before we started decontamination. We had to limit the total dosage of 10R before decontaminating," says Dr. John MacIntoni .
 It was built to raise the number 7 to a power beginning at 7 raised to the 0. power and continuing until 7 was raised to 10 th power . The number 7 is the highest power in the world .
 Seven represented the number of elapsed hours and the 1 st power is 7 hours . 7 represented 7 hours and 7 represented the length of the elapsed hours .
 "It really got deceptive between 7 to the 6 th power and the 7 th power," says the author .
 At the 6th power, the total time is 13. years and at the 7th power the total 58 time is 94 years, a lifetime . At the 7 th power, a total 58 years is a lifetime, the time is just 13 years long .
 Despite the primary fear during the Cold War coming true, we were ok for the moment . The Cold War ended 25 years after it ended, we still have a Cold War moment .
 "If the worst that happened was that we were a little crowded, it was ok," says the author . "We're not going to be disappointed. If the worst is that we're not, it's ok," she says .
 "There is safety in numbers and we had added as many as 4 potential shooters for the bad times sure to come. Ok because there are safety in . numbers" "Safety in numbers" is a precautionary measure .
 More of the 40 acres could be turned into garden using the existing equipment . We had livestock; hence a source of protein and more of the . 40 acres .
 The existing equipment would work, come what may, I had spares for everything . I had a spares of everything, including the equipment that would be needed .
 "We had the right idea but didn’t go far enough. Well, when we picked the . location, we had the . right idea, but didn't go far too far enough," she says .
 We had to let nature and physics work its magic under the 7/10 rule so we could leave the shelter in due course .
 As radiation level fell, the three of us pulled some plywood and 2x4s from the storage building and erected a temporary bedroom for the Simmons . As the radiation level . fell, we pulled up the plywood to create the temporary bedroom .
 It was a tight squeeze, but gave the shelter the feel of having more free space despite not really having more space . The shelter is located in a small space in the middle of the street .
 It was a full 9 months of shelter time for those that were going to risk going out to decontaminate . It was 9 months for those who would risk going outside .
 The well could supply sufficient water to the gasoline engine powered fire pump and we had one IV 2 ” line that could reach the enclosed buildings . The well was well enough to supply enough water for the fire engine powered pump .
 We scraped and hosed down the entire area, checked for residual radiation and did it again for spots we missed . We also checked for radiation and re-examined for spots that missed .
 This was November 2016 and there was snow on the ground hampering our efforts . This year's efforts were hampered by the snow, which was hampering efforts .
 In May of 2017, we slid back the metal cover over the shelter stairs and everyone was permitted to exit . The shelter was reopened in May of 2018 .
 We turned out the herd of horses to allow them to run off the accumulated energy . We turned them out for a break from their energy .
 The cattle, hogs and chickens were transferred from the dome barn to the Castlebrook barn . The cattle and hogs were transferred to a new barn .
 "We could clean out the dome barn completely and after it aired out, use it for storage. We could use it as storage," says the owner .
 Until we had a feel for conditions above ground, everyone but our three children would go armed, including Lucy . Lucy is one of the youngest children in the UK to be armed .
 "That was one new hard rule and would not be relaxed until we had a better feel of the situation," says the manager of the club .
 Maybe Jan and I had read too much Patriot Fiction, but until we knew for sure, that was the way it was . Until we knew, Jan and Jan had to wait to find out what had happened .
 Rob and his family lived in Hillsboro, the Jefferson County seat which was southwest of Barnhart . Rob and Rob lived there with his family and friends .
 He was "practically dying to go down and check on their home and see if any of the County government was intact" He was practically dying to drive down and drive down to check on the home .
 Hillsboro, Hillsboro was an abandoned ghost town . Hillsboro is now a ghost town. Hillsboro has been abandoned for years .
 They had loaded the rest of their clothes, his reloading equipment and emptied their pantry . They had also loaded the other items from the pantry, including his reloads equipment .
 I guess I could have purchased one of those fancy Dillon Precision progressive loaders and all the supplies . I guess it could have been easier to buy a progressive loader . I'm not sure what I would like to do with the new equipment .
 It was easier to just acquire the loaded cartridges and save the brass . However, it was easier than just to just buy the cartridges . It was also easier to get the brass from the gun .
 The guy we’re going to see does, he sells reloading equipment in addition to the supplies and reloads himself . The guy will sell reloading gear and reloading himself .
 Rob's friend lived outside of the city and his business was adjacent to his home . Rob’s friend lived in the same area and Rob's business was nearby . Rob says his friend was a friend of the friend who lived outside the city .
 We pulled in and were greeted by an older man and some younger men we took to be his sons . We pulled into the house and were met by a man who appeared to be a man's son .
 The sons stood down and Rob explained the purpose of our trip and who we were . Rob explained to Rob that the sons had stood down . Rob then explained to the boys that they were going on the trip . Rob said that the boys were not interested in the trip.
 If you have it, I’d like enough powder and primers to reload 5,000 rounds of .50 . If you want it, you’ve got it, it’s not just enough powder .
 A tube on one ounce of Eagles was taken out of the fanny pack . It was a tube of one ounce Eagles .
 "It was when and what, not if. Being in the business I am, I always figured it was when ... not if," he said .
 Powder gets old after a while and I didn’t stock as much as I should have . I still have several pallets full of powder .
 I’m not sure, but I think I know someone with a huge supply of the A-MAX bullets . I'm not sure .
 I doubt those hand grenades hanging off your web gear are the less than lethal variety . I doubt these hand grenades are the least deadly variety .
 "I’m sorry if you think my attitude is cold, but I'm sorry," he says . "Once a long time ago, my wife asked me how far I would go to protect my family," he adds . He says he's sorry .
 The next day, I was forced to break my parent’s rule when Jan refused to allow me to go back to Jefferson City/Osage Bend alone . Jan refused the next day to allow her back to the Bend area .
 She had all of the firearms laid out on the kitchen table and the LAWs and hand grenades were in my Suburban . She had guns on her kitchen table, and LAWs on her bed .
 It was my fathers and I’ve only fired a few rounds through it since I got it, he says . It was his fathers and he’s only had it for a few years, he adds .
 About an hour after we returned, Rob and John pulled in towing a U-Haul trailer containing his generator and generator parts . The generator parts were on the back of Rob’s pickup .
 He offered two for one and I said that was generous, but no thanks so he went to three to one . He offered to one for one, but said that's not generous, so no thanks . He then offered to three-to-one, and he went for three to
 "I got to thinking and told him that really wasn’t fair thinking that it was too much," she said . "It was really too much. I got to think about it," she added. "It really wasn't fair."
 We hooked up to 2 6x12 enclosed trailers and drove to John and Sally’s house . The trailer was hooked up with two trailers and set up in a trailer .
 Once the pantry was emptied, we started on their stored food in the basement and shelter . The pantry is emptied and the shelter is set up for shelter .
 It seems that they’d added more LTS food than could fit in a single trailer and had to leave it behind . It seems they'd been forced to leave the food behind .
 "I could sort of understand John saying that they’d done their preps in pieces," he says . "I’m not sure what I’ve got to say, but it’s a good thing," he adds .
 By the time everything was unloaded and put away, you had to suck in your gut to move around in the basement . By the end of the day, you couldn't wait to see if everything was ready to go .
 The next day, we headed to Hillsboro and visited a place that sold plumbing and electrical supplies . The first stop was a place where plumbing supplies .
 We need electrical cable, cooper water lines, steel gas lines and PVC pipe for sewage . We need power lines, water lines and pipes to connect sewage to the city's sewage system .
 Their trailer was an older 14x70 like John and Sally’s and the new one was a 16x80 and had wheels on . The new trailer was a new 16x 80 and had its wheels on and had their wheels on.
 We located the trailer hauler and they moved their personal possession to the new trailer . The family moved personal possessions to a new trailer to move them into a new vehicle .
 The furniture in the display model was new junk and was left lying beside where the home had been parked . We moved their furniture to the home and we moved it to the house .
 The trailer was the same manufacturer as Lucy’s and model number 8083, a three bedroom trailer . Lucy's trailer was made from the same manufacturers as Lucy's .
 As was typical with the singlewide mobile homes, the 2 nd and 3 rd bedrooms were 68 rather small, one being 9’ wide and the other 11’wide . One bedroom was 9' wide, the other was 11' wide .
 Lucy prepared a large pot of beef stew using home canned beef and home canned vegetables plus fresh baked bread . It took the full day to accomplish the move and fortunately when we got home, Lucy had prepared the stew .
 The following day, the ladies went to work in the greenhouse and began to trench and add lines . "The ladies began to work the next day, adding lines. The next day they went to the greenhouse," she said. "The following day they began to dig in and dig in
 The first connected was the propane followed by the water and the water . The line to the septic tank was late in the day, the first line was the water line .
 "By then, it was getting dark and we put off filling the trenches until the next day," she says . "By the time it had been getting dark, we had to put it back to the day"
 It turned out that not filling the trenches may well have saved our lives . "Not filling the trench may have saved us lives," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 It was, as they say, oh dark thirty when I heard an automatic weapon go off, sounding as if a full magazine had been fired . It was the first time I'd heard a gun go off in the dark .
 I grabbed my pants, shirt, boots, boots and dressed quickly, grabbed my A3, sliding my arm through the shoulder loops of the ALICE gear . I grabbed the A3 and slid his arm through a shoulder loop of the gear .
 The idiot in the trench stuck up his head to see what was going down and I added him to my list . He was added to his list of people who have been in the trenches .
 John could see some others and began to walk his fire through their ranks . John began to see some other men in the ranks of the men .
 One Cold Steel Military Classic, one Randall model 1 with a 7’ blade and one SOG Creed . We also collected three nice knives .
 John and John dumped them in the septic line trench and filled all three trenches . Early the next morning, John and I dumped them . The next day, they dumped them into a septic trench .
 "I think the fact that they had the 9 mils and AKMs tends to support that. I think that they [the] fact that [Obama] won't] support that," he said .
 "There was a vehicle down the road that we emptied out and shoved into the ditch," says the driver of the vehicle . "We emptied out of the ditch and shoved the vehicle into a ditch," she says .
 He'd dealt with his share of criminals but times were far different than they were before the war . He’d dealt with plenty of criminals, but times are far different now, he said .
 He took the morning and helped Maria and the kids get everything arranged and put away . He helped them get everything ready for the trip .
 After lunch he came to the house and asked where to set up the reloading equipment . After lunch, he asked where the equipment would be set up for reloading .
 While the brass was already sorted by caliber, it wasn’t sorted between primer type or civilian versus military . It wasn't sorted by primer type, it was by caliber .
 The following day, we sorted the .50BMG eliminating the few rounds of Berdan primed . The next day we sorted out the remaining .50BGs .
 I didn't have anything to prove from my viewpoint, it had occurred earlier. I didn’t have anything else to prove," he says . "It had occurred before," he adds .
 "I wasn't sure myself that I could do it. Frankly, until I actually pulled the trigger on the first guy I wasn’t sure myself," he said .
 "I didn’t plan to make a habit out of shooting people unless the circumstances warranted it," he says . He says he didn't plan to shoot people unless circumstances warranted .
 The blackberries should have kept them from coming over the fence and when they did that, all bets were off . But they had climbed the gate, I suppose; those blackberries were supposed to keep them out .
 "My only complaint about the series was that it failed to recognize the current state of our infrastructure, before the war. My only complaint was that the series failed to . recognize the state of the . infrastructure before the . war.
 You can imagine what it succumbed to after the war with a total lack of maintenance . It succumbed to a total of maintenance after the conflict with Japan .
 We had bridges, dams, levees and highways that were nearly beyond use before . They were getting worse as grass began to protrude through cracks in the roads, bridges collapsed and levees failed .
 There was more to the question of how far I would go than shooting someone to protect Jan and our children, or myself for that matter, he says .
 Rob highlighted it when he called me judge, jury and executioner, but it went beyond that . Rob highlighted that he was 'judge, jury, executioner' and 'executioner'
 None of us had more than a minimal amount of medical education, just the course John suggested we take . None of the staff had a medical education beyond basic knowledge .
 A gunshot wound by itself was bad enough, but the bullet usually drags trash into the wound path . That path has to be debrided by someone who knows what he/she is doing .
 Next, repairs to damaged blood vessels and tissue had to be made and an antibiotic was selected and administered . The antibiotic was then administered .
 No one wore dog tags with SSN, DOB, blood type and religion . Yes, we had some solutions to be used as blood bulkers, but we weren't set up for transfusions .
 "I got out another pad and began yet another of my obsessive compulsive lists, including, doctor, dentist, nurse, medications, more bandages and so forth," she said . "I'm not going to let it slide down," she wrote .
 Hillsboro had been abandoned so we couldn’t find medical personnel there . Hillsboro was abandoned so there was no medical personnel available . Hillsborough was abandoned .
 We might find a few drugs if the addicts hadn’t cleaned out the drug store . The addicts hadn't cleaned out a drug store, says John Sutter . Sutter: "We might find some drugs in the store"
 Any further north of Oakville would probably put us in a higher radiation area that would not be conducive to savaging trips . St. Louis is the closest to Oakville .
 I suppose I should tell you what kind of liquor they had in the trunk of their car. "I suppose I shouldn't tell you," he says .
 I assume that either they didn’t find any Bud or it was past date and unfit to drink . I assume either they found any Bud .
 Whiskey is single barrel Jack Daniels, Bombay Sapphire gin, a good blended Scotch, Chivas or better, Marker’s Mark when I want bourbon, Stolichnaya or Absolute vodka . Jose Cuervo 1800 as a basis for a Golden Cadillac .
 3 oz of gin over ice over ice, tap the mixing glass twice with a bottle of vermouth, stain and serve with three king sized stuffed green olives .
 I had lifetime stud services for our Morgan’s presuming I could run down the guy who made the promise . I'm not sure what happened to the man who promised lifetime services .
 We'd need a boar, a bull and a few roosters to maintain or increase the number of livestock . We’d need to find boar and a bull to maintain the livestock .
 I think I read somewhere that the average family eats about one chicken a week . I think it's not the only family who eats one chicken per week .
 Lucy having her own trailer could work to our advantage if a criminal element made a second appearance . Lucy having a trailer could be a good idea for a second time in the series .
 The bandits would have to assume that there were four families, minimum, and might decide to look for greener pastures . The bandits might decide that there are four families and might look to leave .
 We decided to allow the garden to lay fallow for one season and limit our harvest to produce grown in the greenhouse . The garden is now being grown in a greenhouse and will be limited to one season .
 "None of us wanted to accumulate a large dose of radiation regardless of the time frame. None of us want to accumulate large doses of radiation," says CNN.com .
 That didn’t mean we were idle, Jan and I could always use more wood for the fireplace . Jan and Jan could do our best to track down future sources of fuel .
 Tankers 72 could be parked behind the garden until needed . Once stabilized, the tankers would be parked back in the garden .
 We probably already already had a lifetime supply of gasoline, but diesel was like bath tissue, especially when the sun wasn’t shining and the wind fell off .
 We were getting enough power during daylight to meet our needs which tended to fall off dramatically after dark when everyone bedded down . On the other hand, we were getting more power when we were sleeping .
 After that, he was going to try his hands at the .50 caliber which would go slowly because the loader wasn’t progressive and he’d have to weigh each powder charge . He was also going to test his new weapon at a gun range .
 Rob was still short with us when the subject of how we handled those uninvited callers came up . Rob still had a bit of patience with us . Rob was a bit short when asked about how he handled the call-in .
 Mark Twain National Forest is spread out all over Missouri, including parts of the Mark Twain Forest . When we went to look for firewood, we did it in section known as Big Piney .
 Big Piney was the home to Fort Leonard Wood and Fort Leonard Woods . It was pretty much a straight shot down 1-44 .
 We got chain saws, axes, treated gas and other things we needed . We drove a large tilt bed truck with a winch down to collect some deadfalls or standing dead trees .
 We hauled four truck loads back and dumped them before parking the flatbed and driving back down to check out the Fort .
 We drove my Suburban pulling an empty U-Haul with an empty trailer . Half planned on getting a ten ton cargo truck with ten ton trailer if we found enough to be worth our while .
 Fort Leonard Wood and the United States Army Maneuver Support Center is the home of the U.S. Army Engineer, Military Police and Chemical Corps Schools . The Third Basic Combat Training Brigade and Joint Training Detachments from the US Marine Corps, Navy and Air Force are the home
 If I read him right, he was mostly interested in the M240 and either the M2HB or its replacement . The M2A1 and M2H1 were among the most popular models of the day .
 "All I was thinking about was some C-4, caps, delayed detonators and some detonation cord," says author . "I'm thinking about some C4 caps, caps and delayed detonator"
 "It would be a challenge because I knew squat about explosives and pyrotechnics," she says . "I would be the biggest challenge of my life," she adds .
 Rob didn't find a M2A1, but he found a pair of the old standby Ma Deuce . Rob didn’t find a pair, but Rob found the pair of Ma Deuces .
 He grabbed 4 of the Ma Deuce barrels saying that he would headspace each barrel and tag them . He said he would tag them up to 4 barrels .
 The barrel for the M240B was pre-headspaced and matched to the machine gun . The barrel is pre-spaced to match the gun's position .
 The barrel for the M2HB wasn’t and had to be manually headspaced and timing checked . The barrel was manually re-spaced, and the barrel was not properly positioned .
 Some Marines would take spare barrels or barrels and individually set the head space . The Ma Deuce was used by Marines who used it .
 The 74 would then write down the number of turns out to achieve the correct headspace . They would then use the numbers to calculate how many turns they would turn out .
 When we got home that night, he gave me a copy of FM 3-25-65 and said to read up on the machine gun . He gave me the gun, and told me to read it up .
 "I read it alright and you could do that with the headspace, but timing was an entirely different question," he said . He said: "You could do it alright. But timing was a different question."
 Any barrel that won’t headspace between two clicks out and seven clicks out is discarded . Any barrel with a headspace that can't be two clicks in and seven out of the barrel is discarded.
 If the go end of the gauge enters the T-slot freely to the center ring, headspace is correct . The no-go end will not enter, so headspace will be correct . Headspace is a good indication of headspace .
 Timing is the adjustment of the weapon so that firing takes place when the recoiling parts are between .020 and .116 inch out of battery to prevent contact between the front end of the barrel extension and the . trunnion block . Timing should be adjusted so that the
 Timing is a function the receiver, and if it was good before the barrel swap, it should be good after . Timing should be a function of the receiver .
 Back it out 2 more clicks to get it into mid-range and replace the back plate . Then you back it out two more clicks, get it back to mid range and replace it with the back .
 We don't have the gauges and such to do that operation and frankly, I don't know how. We don’t know how,’s not sure how. ‘I’m not sure if we’ll be able to do it,�
 With no more fuel than you say we’re using, any we find will have to be stabilized and stored . Any of the fuel that we find is needed to stabilize and store it, says the crew .
 It seems that ammo is heavy, especially ammo for the big guns like the M256 and the 155mm cannons . The ammo for these guns is heavy .
 To cover that base, I drove my Suburban pulling the U-Haul trailer for things like the filters and such for the 3 phase generator .
 The three phase generator we found didn't weigh any more than our Koehler’s . It just had a different alternator .
 It was diesel too and we’d passed a truck stop or three on our way down . It was a diesel truck stop .
 There was also an empty tanker, a big one, maybe 10,000-gallons per tanker and it had two tanks . The empty tankers were also empty, and there were two tanks.
 We added the PRI-D, I think that explained that explained the five gallon cans, one per tank, and loaded the tankers . The five gallon containers are one each, one of which is one of the five gallons .
 The one John had installed in our home was the 47"" BIS Tradition High Efficiency Wood Burning Fireplace with Black Doors and Black Fagade made by Security Fireplaces in Ohio . Security Fireplace in Ohio is a high efficiency wood burning fireplace .
 It would be a bit much for John and Sally’s 14x70 but about right for the larger singlewides . It's a bit too much for the 14X70 but it would be right for John's 14x 70 .
 Rob was driving Ml 075, John was driving the tanker in the middle and I was tail end Charlie and I let both know about the two pickups . Charlie and Rob were tail enders and let both of them know about two pickups.
 Rob started weaving slightly back and forth to keep the pickups from passing the trailer and truck . I moved around him behind John and Rob and John started weaving . Rob and Rob kept the trucks from passing each other . Rob said, "I don't want to let him pass the trailer,
 Out came the A3s and we inserted HE grenades in the M-203s, then waited. Out came out of the . Heated grenades were inserted into the grenades and then waited for them to explode .
 We both fired at the one on the right side and it exploded before rolling over into the ditch . The two men fired at each other and the one exploded before turning into a ditch .
 "We quickly reloaded and turned around to see if the other pickup was still in range. We turned around and reloaded. We didn't know if the pickup was in range . We reloaded quickly and turned back to reload .
 Rob had run it off the road into the left ditch and it was mired down in mud . Rob had ran it into the ditch into the mud and it had got stuck in the mud .
 Both grenades hit about the same time and we must have hit the fuel tank, there was a huge fireball . The explosion was a 'huge fireball' as a result of the explosion .
 Rob stopped up 1-44 about a mile wearing an ear-to-ear grin and holding his carbine . After we were back in our vehicles, we came up on Rob, who was stopped up . Rob was smiling and holding a carbine in his hand .
 We went our separate ways and agreed to distribute the fireplaces after spending some time with our families . We agreed to 78 fireplaces .
 I backed the U-Haul trailer into the storage building and went to check on Jan. 6 . I backed it up and went back to check it was empty . The trailer is now in storage in a storage building in the building .
 Rob and John started to hook up Lucy’s first and I went to the storage building to unload the filters and stack them on empty sets of shelving . The filters were unloaded and stacked in the building's storage building .
 When it was empty, I emptied the items from the Suburban and pulled both out of the vehicle . The Suburban was empty when it was full of items .
 I got our large garden cart and filled it with firewood, delivering a cartload to each of the mobile homes before I did the same for us . We delivered the firewood to each mobile home before delivering it to each other .
 With the large truck and trailer which generally hauled palletized loads of cargo and ammunition, we could probably haul most anything we would need . We were able to haul most of what we needed, including ammunition and cargo .
 Rob and Rob had developed a tempo and the splitting was progressing nicely . Meanwhile, Rob and I had developed . Rob and me had developed an . tempo and Rob and . Rob's tempo and splitting were progressing nicely, says Rob .
 We hadn't bothered to stack the firewood and when John finished his project, he used the cart to do that . The cart was used to stack firewood for John's project .
 I hadn't realized how much firewood those logs contained, all I knew was they were big logs . I hadn’t realized how big firewood these logs contained . The firewood was the largest firewood in the world .
 It was mixed oak and hickory and piled separately because I wanted it to burn in the log home fireplace . It was piled separately for the fireplace .
 Some of the sections were so heavy we used the Toolcat and a chain to lift them into place in the splitter, slowing us slightly .
 “Let the teens do it, it’s healthy exercise. The three of us and the teens will probably take turns restocking them” “The three of them and the teen will probably be taking turns”
 When I bought it, I looked at a larger unit that combined a motor, hydraulic pump and splitter . The motor is combined with a hydraulic pump, splitter and hydraulic pump .
 We'd load a log using the winch, tilt the bed back flat and chain them down . We’d load a . log using a . winch . We'd then tilt a log back flat, . tilt it back flat to . chain down .
 People are willing to work to keep the group fed and protected . Not just anyone, you understand, but people willing to help . The group needs to be fed .
 The problem with the .50 was he had to use a powder scale and weigh each charge . He had to weigh each of the charges in order to make sure they were accurate .
 The Castlebrook barn and the storage building each have about 45kw giving us 150kw total . The storage building and the barn each has about 45k capacity .
 Our battery bank isn’t as large as it should be and we really could use more charge controllers and inverters . The battery bank is too small to be able to charge and charge controllers .
 We could look for fireplaces like the ones we brought back from Springfield too . The Springfield, Illinois, fireplaces could be a good investment tool .
 After dinner, I took a long hot shower and Jan liberally applied some Icy Hot to my aching back . Jan applied some of the hot liquid to her back .
 The stiffness reminded me to discuss involving the teens with John and Rob . I felt a little better the next day, but the stiffness reminded us to discuss it with John .
 CNN.com's John Sutter: "I want to talk about more people. That brings me to the other thing that Jan and I discussed, more people"
 The septic system handles 8 and the well would handle 8 without a problem . The well would also handle 8 people without any problems, the owner says .
 "We’re going to run into some good folks, some bad folks and some really ugly people in the coming days," says President Obama . Obama says he's going to face "some good folks" and "some bad folks"
 I don't approve of looting any more than you do Rob, that’s what I’ve been trying to explain. I don’t approve of looting any more . Rob, Rob, says. ‘I’m not a fan of looting.
 Looting by my definition is taking something you may or may not need from someone who has it without due compensation . Looting is taking an item you may need from an individual without compensation . The victim may not know what it is, but it is not necessary .
 Scavenging is looking through the trash for discarded items and salvaging is more like saving something from destruction . Scavening is looking for discarded things and saving them from destruction.
 Scrounging is looking for a handout and I’d place it before looting, but not do either, says CNN.com.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I’m not going to scrounnging, but I would place
 When cops go through your trash on the curb, that’s considered public property . It can be used against you, at least in some jurisdictions, in some cases .
 Abandoned property will waste away unless you salvage and put it to good use, like a ship wreck . Abandoned properties waste away if you salvage them and put them in a good use .
 We salvage plumbing supplies first and get everything installed for four more trailers . Ok, we salvage the plumbing supplies . We're going to install four trailers .
 We move any plumbing that needs it for John’s new trailer . Plus, we move any of John's plumbing that need it for his new trailer.
 We locate 5 new 16x80 3 bedroom trailers, haul them here and get them hooked up . Then, we locate the trailers and hook them up to get hooked up to the trailer .
 We can use the military truck and trailer to haul new furniture for the trailers and any new furniture anyone here may want . We can also use the truck to haul any furniture anyone wants .
 We’d better plan on getting 84 deep freezers while we’re at it and raid the meat cutting department of a grocery store so we can butcher, cut and wrap our meat .
 We’ll need butcher paper and tape plus extra band saw blades, a grinder, a tenderizer and a sheer . We'll also need a band saw blade grinder and a saw saw blade .
 I want to locate a liquor distributor and pick up a few bottles of the good stuff before someone else gets it . "I want to go to a liquor store and buy some of the best stuff," he says .
 I’ll use the Toolcat to get a bucket load and you can fill the sandbags . The Toolcat can be used to fill sandbags in a bucket .
 The teens and we had to take turns with the Toolcat, but we were finished with the sandbags first . We climbed the dome to decide where to place the fighting positions .
 When we were satisfied with the locations we started hauling the dirt bags up two at a time . The dirt bags were hauling up two by a piece of dirt bags at the time .
 After about 6 trips, we took a break for some iced tea and started the next trips . After the first trip, we had to take a break and start the next trip .
 We went back and forth, hauling and resting until the emplacements were completed . We then took one final rest before hauling up the 3 machine guns . We were able to get the machine guns back to the base .
 We took up five cases for the Mk-19 and 20 for the .50s . We also took up 20 cases each of the combat mix and practice mix for the 50s .
 Practice mix consists of 4 rounds of ball plus one round of tracer . Tracer is a practice mix of balls, tracer and tracer rounds . The practice mix includes 4 rounds each of ball and one round .
 I’ll grab a Yellow Pages and check for fireplaces and Mobile home dealers . I'll check out the Yellow Pages to check out fireplaces .
 Tomorrow, we’ll teach our wives how to operate the M2s and the Mk-19 .
 Hot spots were off scale and avoided but we got a Yellow Pages and located the plumbing supplies . The plumbing supplies were all we intended to get this trip .
 While we were at it, we got a few spools of electrical cable from an electrical supplier .
 We did check some mobile home dealers and found several 16x80 trailers . The trailer trailers are available for sale .
 After we got home, we used yellow string and stakes to define the locations for the new trailers . We used yellow strings and stakes for the trailers .
 We also marked where everything should come up to mate with trailer connections and started trenching . The project will be completed in two weeks .
 They ended up bringing back all they could find although there were no lOTVs to be had . The team was able to find out what they wanted to find .
 PALS webbing on the vests has been added to the PALS vests . They added a wide assortment of pouches and what not for the pals webbing .
 The teens had managed to work up to a pace matching ours so far as sawing, splitting and stacking the firewood went . The teens were able to stack firewood at the weekend .
 They went one step further than we had gone, laying out a sheet of plywood by the back door of each dwelling and stacking the split wood there . They stacked the plywood in the back of each home and stacked it there .
 Electricity was available above ground in a small utility building, where all of the synchronized electricity was available on massive panels .
 We had lots of PVC pipe and ran the electrical cable in separate ‘conduit’ in case of a water leak . We ran the electricity in separate 'conduit' in case a leak .
 Water was plumbed in using flexible copper pipe and the following day, we refilled the trenches . The water was used to fill the trenches and the next day, it was refilled .
 "I decided to turn on the radio to see how much amateur traffic there was. I did that the first thing next morning . I decided to look at the radio, and decided to listen to amateur traffic . The next morning, I turned up to see what amateur traffic was there .
 It was very busy considering considering and I listened for a while before moving on to 40 then 20 Meters . It was a very busy time considering and it was a busy considering .
 "I was trying to get a feel of what was out there, not announce our presence to the county," she says . She says she was trying not to announce her presence to county .
 "I noted frequencies I wanted to listen to again, and went back to the house to see what was for Sunday dinner," says author . "It was a great night for dinner," she says of her family .
 Potatoes were peeled and soaking for mashed potatoes and she planned on frozen corn on the cob . She also planned on mashed potatoes, mashed mashed potatoes .
 drippings from the hen would be the oil part of the roux to make chicken gravy . The drippings would be used to make a roux of chicken meat .
 Without having the gun available, it was confusing since the weapon had 8 parts groups . The weapon had eight parts groups, including parts parts .
 Tomorrow we’ll go back to Hillsboro and pick up the trailer hauler and start moving the homes . The homes will be moved in the next few days .
 We can go later for the freezers, meat cutting equipment and additional supplies . We can also go for freezers and other supplies .
 St. John Paul: "You need to make up a list of supplies we can salvage from St. Paul. Which reminds me; you need to think of what supplies you can salvage."
 It took all week to move the five trailers, fully equipped with everything except the fireplaces, to move . The trailers are fully equipped, except for fireplaces .
 We disconnected John and Sally’s old trailer and pulled it out of the way. We disconnected the trailer and moved it from the way .
 We backed the new trailer into position and found we could get by with extending the lines . We added heat tape and insulation to the trailer to make it more comfortable .
 It was late evening before Sally and the kids finished moving their personal possessions . Sally and her kids were able to move their possessions .
 4 21ft 3 upright freezers, 4 propane dryers and 4 washing machines were purchased in St. Louis, Missouri . They were also brought in by the Salvation Army .
 We were worn to a frazzle and I half doubted one day of rest would be enough . We were so tired we had to take a rest from each other's work .
 "We still had to move the appliances into place and hook them up, probably another full day" "It's still a full day. We still had a lot of work to do to move them into place," she says .
 The teens could now lay out more plywood and stack firewood for each of the new homes . John had to move his fireplace from his old home to his new home . The teens were able to move plywood from their homes to their homes .
 On Monday, we finished up the trailers and helped John with his fireplace . On Monday he helped John build a fireplace .
 Only one retailer sold the same model but he had several in stock . Rather than return, we took all he had including the flues from the store .
 There were Costco stores, Sam’s Club stores, Wai-Mart's and any number of regular grocery stores . Costco stores were among the stores in the U.S.
 In order to facilitate storage of the foodstuffs, we emptied all of the implements, Unimog and Toolcat from the storage building and covered them with tarps . We emptied the implements from the building and used tarps to store the food .
 "One look told me 88 that we’d need another storage building, maybe something in a prefab steel building we could assemble," he says . "I’m not sure what’s going to happen, but I’ll need a new storage building,"
 Instead of salvaging food and supplies, we looked in the Yellow Pages for someone who sold steel buildings . The Yellow Pages is a good resource for people who want to help .
 Of the three, only one had a complete building in stock and it was a large building, 60x120, 1.1. stories high at the roof . The only one of the three buildings in stock had a large roof pitch and a suitable roof pitch .
 John said we’d need over 90 yards of concrete for the floor and footings . ‘Before we could put in those, we needed to grade a spot level and dig the footings. We needed to dig the ground and concrete,’ he said .
 It wasn't like we didn't have the equipment although it was time consuming. It wasn’t like we had the equipment, although it’s time consuming,’S. ‘It was time-consuming. It was like a lot of the equipment we had
 He lined up 8 12-yard ready mix trucks while we were preparing for the spot . The spot will be the first in the country to be held in the national park .
 The concrete will be cured in about 30 days . Then we’ll have time to haul that building down here and stack it . The concrete is cured .
 We ended up attaching a rope to the center of the long screed and had the kids help pulling it along . The kids helped pull the screed along .
 John had washed out the mixers and dumped them into a ditch down the road a ways . The next day we returned them the following day .
 The building dealer had a flatbed, and a tractor, and the tractor got started after treating the fuel and replacing the batteries . "We got started using a tractor and treated fuel and replaced the batteries"
 It took us several days to haul the bundled and numbered sections down to the farm . It took several days for the team to get the sections to the ground .
 The final plan would be to store anything related to food or supplies in the new building, excluding the canning operation . The new building would be used to store food and supplies, including canning .
 The storage building would be returned to its intended purpose of storing the machinery . It would be used to store machinery and other equipment .
 An electrical panel would be mounted on the outside of the building to power the lighting . It would also be mounted to the outside, power the building .
 During the time we worked to salvage, we accumulated a significant amount of food, bath tissue, paper towels and feminine supplies . We accumulated food, tissue and paper towels .
 John offered one solution while we were working on the second Costco . John offered a solution to the problem: Buy a Costco .
 When we finish up, we can assemble the shelving inside put in two propane heaters and borrow Costco’s fork lift . Costco's fork lift can be used to build shelving .
 We’ll have to limit the width of the aisles but allow just enough room to get the folk lift in and turned to unload the pallets . We'll also have to allow the height of the store to be limited to just enough space .
 It was pre-wired by the builder leaving one connection of the sections and wiring to make a complete building . The builder left one connection to make the building .
 John went back to St. John's home in the U.S. on a Sunday afternoon while Rob and Rob were resting, John went to see his family .
 The cherry picker and the crane repaid their cost because without them, "we would have never been able to do the roof," says the owner of the building .
 The building was completed and we went back to Costco and began to disassemble and haul the shelving . In due time, the building was complete .
 Two forklifts brought one section at a time to complete the shelving project . The spacing between shelving and shelving was made as close to minimum as possible .
 The teens finished splitting firewood and distributing it to each home . As we continued with our endeavor, the teens split firewood .
 Jan, Sally and Maria moved the goods we brought back together with what was stored in the storage building . They then turned to moving the goods back together . Jan and Sally moved the items back together under the direction of Maria .
 "Our efforts went back and forth between salvaging and adding shelving until there was no more room for shelving," says owner . "We're trying to salvage and add shelving to our shelves," she says .
 We stopped and set up an area in the storage building where we could process the meat we butchered . The meat was processed in a storage building in the building .
 Rob went back to Jefferson City, Missouri, to see Dave and pick up more components if he had them . Rob went to the Jefferson City area to pick up some of the components . Rob then went back and picked up the other components .
 Kansas City had been hit by 3 warheads, one to the west side, a second at the Kansas side of the bridge and a third in Independence near the plant . Kansas City was hit by three warheads .
 Dave had already been there and there and said there was little left to salvage . Dave said he was already in the process of finding out what had happened .
 Rob had visited with some possible candidates for residence and could tell us what he knew of them . Rob had also visited with a possible candidate for residence . Rob will be able to talk about what he knows about them .
 "If it warranted a trip, they could come to the farm or we could go to see them," she says . "They could come at the farm ... or we would go to the show," she adds .
 One was a Missouri Highway Patrolman and the other two knew from the Corps. One of the victims was a state trooper, the other was a Marine Corps member .
 One of the Marines worked in the meat department of a grocery store before the war . Another worked in a meat department at a local grocery store .
 He had also worked in a Kansas City slaughterhouse, a separate skill from meat cutting .
 The Cop had gained some notoriety over his skill as a sharpshooter on a SWAT team . The Cop was a SWAT officer in the U.S.
 That still left one vacancy assuming we invited all three of the men and their families . That still leaves one vacancy in the room .
 We’d do that as soon as we finished up the salvaging and organizing of the goods. We'd like to do that soon, we said . We'd be happy to do it, but we’re not sure how long it will be .
 Warren Hershey was in his late 30s, married to Stella with two children in high school, Tammy and Shelia . The Hershey family was in their late 30's, married with two daughters .
 He left us with a feeling of belonging and after a quick discussion, we extended an invitation . He left the room with a sense of belonging .
 He looked at the 4 trailers, picked one and said they’d be back within the week with their possessions . He picked one trailer .
 I explained a thing or two about the defense of the farm and some of the tools available . I also explained how to defend the farm .
 Warren said he didn’t have single action firearms, but they’d have them when they came back . Warren: "They’ll have one action firearms when they come back"
 Stella and the kids had 9mm pistols, 5.56 rifles and 20-gauge shotguns . Stella and her kids had guns, shotguns and rifles . Stella says she and her family survived the ordeal .
 He had a National Match MIA, a Kimber .45 and police model Remington 870 . He also had a Remington . 870 and a National . Match MIA .
 His wife Veronica and their three kids ranging in age for 12 to 19 were nearly an instant hit . The couple's three kids range in age from 12-19 .
 In the aftermath of the war, he’d immediately began salvaging to acquire what he thought it would take to make it long term, he said . He said he'd immediately began .
 He said up arming was close to his top priority, thinking of the safety of his family . He said while it wasn't his first thought, it wasn’t his top thought .
 His wife Elaine and their two children, Samantha and Thomas, were a bit standoffish. Elaine and Thomas were also standoffish .
 He explained that she had erected a shell to deal with the aftermath of the war and was emerging, be it slowly . He said that she was emerging slowly, slowly .
 He felt that if she could be surrounded with women her own age it would draw her out more . He felt she would be drawn out more if she was surrounded by other women .
 If we could locate her sister and husband and move them here, it would be all it would take . Her sister and her husband were close, her sister says .
 The sister and brother-in-law lived in Springfield and he’d never been able to put together enough fuel to make the trip to Springfield . He'd been unable to get enough fuel for the trip .
 We offered him fuel, gasoline or diesel, so he could track them down . We offer him fuel to find them, but he declined .
 "When he found them, he should get them to come to the farm so we could meet them," he said . "We should meet them when he finds them," she said .
 We don't have the time or resources to spend on one person and help them get their head unstuck. We don’t have the . time or . resources to help one person get unstuck, we said .
 "I think I speak for all of us when I say that we’re keeping an open mind," she said . "We’ve been waiting to see if her sister can bring her around," she added .
 Hershey and Lake families were in residence and with the weather getting colder, we began to give some thought to butchering . Within two weeks, the Hershey family was in residence .
 It was another week before Buddy showed up with his family, Elaine’s sister and brother-in-law . Elaine and Elaine's sister, Elaine's brother and sister were in the hospital when Buddy died .
 Elaine was bubbly and the kids were more open now that they were with their cousins, Elaine said . Elaine said she and Elaine were happy to have Elaine's cousins together . Elaine and Elaine said Elaine were bubbly, bubbly . Elaine was happy to be with her cousins and Elaine
 Elaine’s sister Sharon was an instant hit, much more than Elaine had been . Elaine's sister Sharon became an instant success . Sharon was a big success for Elaine, but Elaine was not .
 Air, food, shelter and water may be the most important things, but you may need firearms to keep them . You may also need guns to keep your own .
 He didn’t really look like a lawyer, dressed in blue jeans a plaid shirt and wearing a light jacket . He also wore blue jeans .
 Said he didn’t know much about farming but had proved his learning ability by becoming a lawyer . Said he could be taught to do most anything and could learn most anything .
 John and Sally, Sally, Jan and Jan decided, without a word to Rob, they’d confront her and see if she was back to her ‘normal’ self or not . Jan and Sally decided to confront Rob and see whether she had returned to her normal self
 We told Buddy that the four of us wanted to speak with her alone; it would be the deciding factor . We told him that we would speak to her alone, and that would be a deciding factor in her decision .
 Elaine agreed to sit down for a Q&A with the author . Elaine asked the author to share his thoughts with the world .
 "We started off sort of gentle like and moved on to more intense questioning," says the author . "I'm not sure how much of this is true," she says of the interview .
 We all were nodding our heads indicating a positive outcome when Rob made an appearance . Rob made a positive appearance at the end of the game . We all nodded our heads .
 "We’d already decided that the sister and brother-in-law would fit in and so would Buddy," says the couple . "So would Buddy. It would be great fun," she says of the family .
 Buddy agreed that we could visit with her and she never batted an eye at any of our questions . She never batted a single eye when we asked her questions .
 We’re agreed to invited Buddy and Elaine, Elaine, James and Sharon and their families . We're agreed to invite Buddy, Elaine and Elaine and James to the event .
 We knew how you felt and decided that you couldn’t con92 sider the question without a jaundiced eye because of your relationship to Buddy .
 Jerry quickly erected a smoke house to smoke bacon and hams and selected hickory logs . Jerry built the smoke house for the bacon, hams, and other items . Jerry quickly built the house to use as a smokehouse .
 Around the first of November, we started butchering, hogs first followed by beef . Hogs were butchered around the first month of the year .
 We butchered 8 hogs, one per family and passed out the wrapped meat as it was cut and wrapped . One of the hogs was a hog, one of which was eaten by the family .
 The bacon and hams had been brined and were smoking away in the smoke house . The bacon, hams and bacon were brined in the brine .
 How it will be distributed would depend on how much empty freezer space each family had . How it would be distributed depends on the size of the freezer space .
 Ham and bacon would probably be in short supply unless we butchered extra hogs and smoked hams, bacon, picnics and loins and made the rest into sausage . The rest of the hogs are smoked and made into sausage.
 Two more hogs were slaughtered for bacon, ham, smoked picnic, Canadian bacon and sausage . Beef was slaughtered and hung to age .
 The beef still needed some aging and we next butchered fryers and baking hens . Finally turning to the sides of beef, we finally turned to the side .
 Jerry handled the main cutting . He had us boning out small pieces of beef being collected in a large pan for ground beef .
 He was adding beef shanks, neck roasts, assorted trimmings and even flank steaks to the menu . He added a beef shank and neck roast .
 If we wanted anything leaner than ground chuck, we needed boneless beef, aka a dairy cow . We could forego the Swiss steak cuts and add only the meat . If you want a leaner, you need to add a little extra meat .
 "We left the decisions up to Jerry and he was going out of his way to see that we were getting carefully trimmed cuts," he said .
 The first hams and bacon were removed from the smokehouse . The brined meat from the other pair of hogs was added to the meat . The first batch of meat was removed and the other was brined .
 The sausage had been ground and packaged and he was getting close to finishing the beef . The sausage was ready to be made into a sausage .
 In the process, we’d located some beef out in a pasture that only needed finishing before being processed . The beef was only finished before processing .
 The stallion serviced our mares and offered us four more because he couldn’t arrange enough feed . The guy with the stallion . He couldn't organise enough feed for the mares, so he offered them four more .
 "I didn’t give that a thought; we now had 8 families and could use all of the riding horses we could get," she says . "We now have 8 families," she adds .
 He offered to let me buy him out, if I could come up with some PMs, he said . When I told him that, he offered to sell him out .
 "We negotiated for a bit, settled on a price including all tack, saddles, etc., hay and grain," she says . "We're not going to be surprised," she said .
 A small herd of cattle, a larger herd of horses and a boar and 4 sows would be cramped on the remaining 30 acres of land . A boar, 4 cows and 4 cows would also be cramped in the remainder .
 The land to the east was an 80 acre field and we installed a gate and made repairs where needed to the fence . The land was 80 acres of land and the fence was installed and repaired .
 We got the gate by removing it from the road side of the fence and moving it. We got it by removing the gate from the fence, moving it . The gate was removed by moving the gate onto the fence .
 New fencing has been installed to replace the gate and we dug out the driveway into the field in an attempt to eliminate temptation . New fencing was installed and the driveway was dug out of the field .
 "We had snow by mid-November and actually held Thanksgiving dinner in the log storage building," says historian . "We actually had Thanksgiving dinner there" in November .
 The foods for the most part were prepared at home and brought to the building . The wood stove kept the hot dishes hot and the beverage cooler kept the cold food cold .
 We had 4 8’ folding tables set up end to end and almost needed radios to communicate from the head of the table to the foot of the . table . We almost needed radio to communicate between the head and foot of each of the tables .
 Buddy volunteered to say grace and he gave a heart wrenching prayer of Thanksgiving, hope for a brighter future and God’s help in our future struggles .
 One person had been fed early and was standing duty at the Mk-19 emplacement . We had drawn straws and one person had to be fed early .
 Jan, Jan, have one of the kids put the recording from Rio Bravo on the outside speaker system on continuous play . Jan says she hopes the kids will be able to listen to the recording .
 "I was hoping that even if they couldn’t identify the song at first, when it repeated over and over, they would become disconcerted," she says . "I'm hoping that when they hear the song again, they become disoriented," she writes .
 Their force could number anywhere from 20 with 4 per pickup, to 30 with 6 per pickup .
 One of the riflemen providing ground support fired a single shot, dropping the person . The person was dropped by a single bullet .
 It used a Stanley garage door opener with about 10,000 possible settings . It had wire mesh/perforated plate to prevent anyone from simply slipping through .
 The Mk-19 gunner turned his attention to the pickups and started firing short bursts into the pickups . The gunner fired short bursts at the pickups before turning his attention back to the gunner . He then fired a short burst into the pickup .
 It took some time to engage the men. Because they had reasonable concealment, it took them to engage them . The men were not immediately engaged .
 They fell one by one until the last few tried to disengage and began running . They fell out of control until they began running again .
 My order of El Deguello served as much to try and frighten the attackers as to remind the defenders of the order . The order was meant to frighten attackers as well as remind them of the orders .
 The attackers didn't get off more than a dozen poorly aimed shots, while our machine gunners were still on their first belt and all the attackers were down . "The attackers didn’t get off a dozen well-aimed shots," she said. "They didn”
 It took a few minutes to regain out appetites, but we finished off both hams . We were able to enjoy the meat .
 The last turkeys were a fading memory leaving us a choice of a standing rib roast or hams . The last of the turkeys was a fading .
 Ham gravy instead of turkey gravy, stove top stuffing, mashed potatoes, smashed potatoes, sweet potatoes, pumpkin pie for desert . Pumpkin pie for dessert .
 "We lingered, not looking forward to what lay ahead, gathering the bodies and disposing of them, disposing them, pushing the pickups into the ditch, etc. etc. We lingered" "Not looking forward"
 "Our first task was to search the bodies, collecting firearms, ammunition, magazines and then going through their pockets and loading them in the back of Rob’s pickup," he says .
 After that, he went into a field across the road and began digging a mass grave . After that he went to a field where he dug the grave, he began digging it .
 When he finished, the bodies were tossed into the grave and the hole was refilled . The bodies were then tossed back into the hole and the grave was filled with new water .
 "We took the weapons, etc. to the storage building and laid them out on the cleared tables. We took them to storage building, laid them on cleared tables," she said .
 The most popular handgun was the Ml 911 . A majority of the rifles were 7.62 autoloaders with a few autoaders in 5.56 . The most common handgun used was the 911 handgun .
 There were an assortment of hunting knives, first aid kits and even 4 M-40 gas masks . There were also first-aid kits and first-hand survival kits .
 We cleaned the firearms, some only required a bore snake and a touch of CLP, and 95 moved them to the armory . We cleaned some of the firearms and moved them into the armories .
 It was the first time many of the new residents had seen the armory and they were impressed . The armory is the largest armory in the country's history .
 World War III will be fought with sticks and stones, says Harry Truman . He wrote Harry Truman and said, / do not know with what weapons World War . III will not be fought, but World War IV will be won with sticks, stones .
 It seems obvious his assumption was WW III would be fought with nuclear weapons, as it was . But only because they’re generally more effective than other weapons of mass destruction .
 With Christmas coming and growing teens and younger children, it would mostly be a clothes Christmas . It would be a clothing-free Christmas .
 It would also be the time to advance some of the children from his/her shooting piece to something more adult . It's also the time for some of these children to be more mature .
 An example might be giving out a 12-gauge or a larger caliber rifle to replace a rimfire rifle . A larger caliber caliber rifle can be used to replace rimfire rifles . A 12-auge can be given out to replace an old rifle .
 It came in all sizes these days and they made things like rain slickers and drovers coats all the way down to children’s’ sizes .
 The first real hat was a straw hat for summer and a felt hat for winter . Then there were straw hats for summer, felt hats for winter and straw hats .
 We went two couples at a time with one maintaining security while the other couple shopped . We went shopping with a security guard at the time .
 A family gift is something of practical value for everyday use . It should not be confused with a personal gift . A practical gift is not a gift for personal use .
 The 21ft 3 were a little short on space so they added a second 21 ft 3 to have more room for home frozen foods . They added a third 21ft 2 to have room for the home frozen food .
 The second freezers left the mobile homes a little crowded and ended up in the storage building with a label denoting which family it belonged to . The mobile homes were left in storage with labels indicating which family they belong to .
 I finally had a chance to locate a liquor distributor and carefully selected various cases to store in our basement . I finally managed to find a liquor distribution company .
 After dinner drinks included many bottles of the after dinner drinks, B&B, Drambuie, etc. It was all of top quality and ranged from tequila to vodka to gin .
 The after dinner drinks were a lifetime supply and I adjusted the other liquors and mixes accordingly . The after-dinner drinks were the lifetime supply of alcohol .
 We all had our own eccentricities and mine was drinking only high quality liquors . We all drank high quality drinks and drank high-quality liquors. We were all eccentricities.
 Jan and I seldom drank and before we both quit teach96 ing, we didn’t keep liquor in the house . Jan and Jan seldom drank, but before they both quit teaching, they didn't keep liquor .
 There wasn't that much snow this winter and we drove back to Big Piney and dropped more standing dead trees . There wasn’t that much of the snow in the winter, we dropped more dead trees.
 We had brought the Unimog with the crane to set the logs on a flatbed semi-trailer . We actually had two trailers running for a while. We had actually had to run for a few minutes .
 After a month of cutting, we called it quits and stayed home sawing, splitting and stacking . After the month of cuts, we decided to go home .
 We helped them because with more than 6 of us doing the sawing and splitting, we were tripping over each other’s feet . “We helped them," says the team .
 We did 40 acres of hay and 10 acres each of crops for our consumption, 2 kinds of wheat, oats, and five acres of potatoes and sweet corn . We did 10 acres of each of those crops for consumption .
 The outside garden was doubled in size and we planted using heirloom seeds for the first time . The garden has doubled its size and the garden is now being used to grow heirlooms .
 We stayed on the farm throughout the summer, only returning after the harvest . We stayed at the farm through the summer .
 There was a MNG roadblock on 1-55 right around the junction with 1-270 . There was also a roadblock around the intersection of the MNG .
 I slipped the Ruger Mark II from my shoulder holster and was holding it just under my jacket . While I engaged him in conversation, I slipped it out of the holster .
 The others piled out of their vehicles, weapons in hand and he came to realize that he had a problem . He came to terms with the others, but he had to get his hands on the weapons .
 We were all wearing Interceptor armor and armed far better than his squad . We were armed better than the squad. We were in Interceptor armour and armed .
 "I gave an innocent waive of my hand and our people spread out into hasty fighting positions," she says . She says she gave a 'innocent waive' of her hand and her people spread into 'hasty' positions .
 Staff Sergeant dismounted along with everyone in the vehicles except the gunners . Pretty soon, two more Hummers appeared and everyone in them dismounted . The gunners were the only ones in the Hummers .
 We made a trip to Springfield and bought and paid for a generator and were attacked on the way home . We were attacked by a man in Springfield, Springfield, Missouri, on Friday .
 The Supreme Court in Heller made two things clear, the right to keep and bear arms is an individual right . A person has a right to self-protection, the Supreme Court said in Heller .
 I’ll check with the Platoon Commander and if he says so, you can keep your arms . I'll check with him if he wants to keep his arms, he says, and if so, he can keep them .
 "We already had a plan in mind to overcome the military because they made exceptions," he says . "They made exceptions. They made exceptions"
 We were finger printed, photographed and information noted from a driver’s license . We were also photographed and noted from driver's license .
 We were issued with a card that had our photo on back, signature line and a signature line . We also had a registration number and identifying data on the front of the card .
 After all that, we headed to the stores for more Christmas shopping, but the stores were locked up and guarded . The stores were guarded by police .
 Guards say until they have an inventory and determine a value for the goods, there would be no shopping . One of the guards explained that until they had an inventory, they would not be able to sell the goods .
 Rob dug around and found the Sheriff’s spare badge and enough Deputies badges for all of the adults . Rob also found the spare badge for each of the children . Rob says he has no problem with badges for the kids .
 St. Louis wasn't available in Hillsboro, replacements for our expired meds weren't available . This week's episode is the first time we've heard from the hospital in the U.S.
 The CDC stores the medicines in about a dozen locations under the protection of armed guards . The CDC has about a half a million medicines stored in the U.S.
 When they’re transferred, the shipments are guarded by U.S. Marshals .
 We must have given them too accurate directions and/or they noted that Rob was a Jefferson County Deputy . Rob was the Jefferson County Sheriff's deputy .
 Staff Sergeant showed up with his squad not long after . Either way, The Staff Sergeant appeared to be in the air .
 We responded as one, assuming our defensive positions before we replied . We responded to each other, assuming their positions before the reply .
 We had most of our things before the war but have done a little salvaging. We had a lot of things before, but we've done a bit of salvaging . We're not going to war-torn countries again, but are looking to rebuild. We hope to have a
 As far as we've been able to determine, we’re all the survivors left in Jefferson County, Jefferson County . We’ve been told, “We’ll all the survivor left in the Jefferson County.” The area has been devastated by wildfires since
 Later, we made a trip to Springfield to buy or salvage a 3 phase generator and a few other things . We also went to Springfield, Springfield, to buy and salvage a generator .
 Have your soldiers come in and get a roll and a mug of coffee Sergeant,” Jan suggested . Jan suggested. “Have your soldiers . Come in and have your . roll and coffee Sergeant.”
 The Sergeant, whose name tag said Collins, talked briefly to the squad and they lined up . They lined up, coming in one at a time for a roll and coffee .
 Lucy was rolling out enough dough for a second pan of rolls, but they would take a while . Lucy had made enough of the rolls for two, but the rolls were still taking a while to make .
 This time, instead of baking the bread first, they baked the rolls first and some of the bread was relegated to more rolls . Some of the rolls had to be relegated to some rolls .
 The President was airborne when the attack came and managed to get to Peterson . He was airborne at the time of the attack when he managed to escape .
 Communications were totally messed up and when he tried to activate the Guards, the Governors all refused . He said: "When he tried . to activate . Guards, he said, 'when he tried ... the governors all refused'
 "We had to get medicines from the SNS, had to parcel out the remaining arms and munitions, and so forth. We had to have to get medicine from the . SNS" "We were very lucky to be able to get some of the medicines we needed," says the
 Epinephrine is only good for a year and epinephrine can only be taken for a whole year . Epininphrine is good for only a year, but epinininephrine isn't good enough to last a year .
 We’re sneaky bastards and know the difference between concealment and cover . We're not afraid to hide, but we’ve done so far .
 We were, for all intents and purposes, temporary Deputy Sheriff’s and Rob had been elected to be the Sheriff by us . Rob was elected as Sheriff by the Deputy Sheriff by his family .
 Hillsboro escaped from the threat of radiation . Hillsboro, St. Louis, was evacuated from the site of the World War II . The population of Hillsboro bolted to get away from radiation .
 While all nuclear detonations produce EMP, it’s a local condition unless the device is detonated above 10km, about 33,000 feet . The EMP is produced by a nuclear detonation above a height of 10km .
 Air bursts tend to be below 5,000 feet. However, that eliminates most of the ground damage and air bursts . Air bursts are usually caused by small bursts of air, not ground damage .
 With nuclear weapons, the air burst usually several hundred to a few thousand feet in the air allows the shockwave of the explosion to destroy the largest possible number of buildings, military units or vehicles, etc. with the explosion . The air burst is usually a few hundred to several thousand feet
 This minimizes the generation of irradiated soil and other debris by keeping the fireball from touching the ground, limiting the amount of additional debris that is vaporized and drawn up in the radioactive debris cloud .
 The County, as a whole, had a much larger population as part of the St. Louis area . The County had a larger population in the 1960s .
 The loss of life was high, but no more so than other large cities targeted during the war . The loss was high but not so much so that other large city targets were .
 When we could, we set about salvaging with a vengeance, securing our long term needs . When we were able to, we had to look after our long-term needs . We are now in the process of saving our country from extinction . We hope to see the end of the
 After the initial salvaging, we only went when we needed to, like shopping for Christmas presents . We only went to the shops when we were needed, such as shopping for presents .
 We could pay, provided there was someone there who had legitimate claim to the property . We often ended up just taking. We could . pay . provided there were legitimate claims .
 With the MNG here, we expected things would change, both in the near and long term . We expected things to change, and we expected it would change both near and far away .
 An Army medic came down and checked through our medical supplies, asked how we had acquired some of them . The medic also asked how they had acquired them, asking how they were able to get them .
 He replaced our epinephrine and said when saline and D5W expired, they would also be replaced, if they had replacements available . The saline and the saline will be replaced when they expire, he said .
 While the Guard monitored certain amateur frequencies which they made known, their response time left something to be desired . The Guard monitored some amateur frequencies .
 They didn’t have a go team and when an emergency radio call came in, they had to find a couple of Hummers, or more, round up the troops, check ammo and what not . Only then strike out to help . They had to round up troops, round
 Like Stinger said in the movie, sometimes an engagement was over almost before it started . Sometimes an engagement is over before it starts, says Stinger . "Sometimes it's like a marriage that's over," he says .
 We were always armed with a pistol and had a long arm within arm’s reach . We were all armed with pistols and had long arms within arm's reach. We were also armed with long arms.
 "Any idiot stupid enough to attack us only had the amount of time it took for us to get to the heavy weapons before their goose was cooked"
 The Spanish phrase actually referred to throat slitting, but the result was the same in the end and a bullet quicker . The phrase was actually a Spanish phrase .
 We might not always have time to play the bugle call although by now we didn’t need to for our part . We might never have time for us, but we didn't need to play it .
 The MNG arrived while we were administering the Coup de Grace to the last survivor . It was a larger force, 34 by the body count, and the MNG actually arrived . The last survivor was killed by the larger force .
 “Listen, Lieutenant, it was good enough for Santa Anna and it’s worked fine for us. How far would You Go? Epilogue: “It was good . Enough. Santa Anna . How far Would You Go would you go?
 "Now if you eliminate these roving bands of criminals we won’t have to kill anyone else," he said . "We won't have to be killed anyone else. Now if we eliminate these . roving band of criminals, we won't be killing anyone else."
 Sergeant Collins explains the 'facts of life' to the butter bar . Sergeant Collins was promoted to Sergeant First Class after being promoted to sergeant first .
 Young, inexperienced Lieutenants have a tendency to follow the book a bit too closely . "Young, inexperienced" Lieutants tend to follow a book closely .
 By the time they’ve advanced to Company Commander, Captain, they have a more realistic outlook and consider other relevant facts . By the end of the war, they are more realistic .
 Soldiers suggested that a group of soldiers make a trip to New Orleans and bring back a truckload . Then we suggested that they should bring back the truckload of supplies .
 Coffee wasn’t considered a critical supply and it took some time to arrange for a group of Louisiana NG to load a truck and transfer it north . Coffee was not considered critical .
 We grew enough of some crops to have trade goods and could trade for things we didn’t have, rice, coffee and salt come to mind . Rice, coffee, salt and salt were among the crops we grew enough to trade .
 One of the first was electricity, which we had no need for, although most of the country did . The first electricity came from electricity, but most of us didn't need it, says author .
 Gary Locke came out of the mountain and efforts began to arrange for elections since his term was long past . Locke was elected to a term of office . Locke's term is long past and he was elected in 2009 .
 Paper ballots would be paper ballots for the first election, a feat unto itself . No ballot was to be considered spoiled unless both candidates for an office were checked . Paper ballots were to be used in the first elections .
 The third party was much like the old Libertarian party in its goals and favored strictly construing the Constitution . The Libertarian party was founded by the Libertarian Party .
 The only question that remained was how far they wanted to roll back the Amendments . "The only question is whether they want to roll out the Amendments," says President Obama .
 In the end, they didn’t roll any back and the Constitution stood as Amended . The Constitution was amended in 1973 .
 The reformed Supreme Court has had ample time to discuss the case before it and reviewed Miller and other cases . It determined that the NFA went too far and was unconstitutional .
 While a state or locality could issue reasonable laws, they couldn’t violate the inalienable rights of the U.S. Constitution, they can't violate the rights of a state .
 If one person has a CCW, all citizens of the state could have it under Equal Protection . For example, if the state allowed one person to have one, it would be equal to all citizens in the state .
 They made several other examples and one might have thought they had California specifically in mind . They made other examples .
 A state couldn’t ban assault weapons because the Militia used assault weapons, the Militia . A state can't ban assault weapon ban because of the Militia’s use of assault weapons . The Militia used weapons, and the Militia didn't have to use assault weapons.
 The state couldn’t distinguish a particular firearm if law enforcement could have the firearm, ergo, .50 caliber rifles . The state can't distinguish a specific firearm if the firearm is in a different caliber .
 In so ruling, any number of state laws immediately came under the scrutiny of the BATFE . The BATFE was being forced to work counter purpose of how they had worked for so many years .
 The states weren’t prohibited from enacting laws that further penalized persons who used a firearm in the commission of a crime . The states were also not allowed to enact laws further penalizing persons using a firearm .
 A new case was now before the court, third strike laws, specifically as applied in California . The case was brought before the Supreme Court .
 The court had previously reviewed and ruled on the California law, but the makeup of the court was different now . Inmates had died in the California prison system for want of care in the days following the war .
 Report on the Soviet Arms Buildup in Cuba October 22, 1962 . This Government has maintained the closest surveillance of the Soviet Military buildup on the island of Cuba .
 The foreign ministers of the OAS rejected secrecy in such matters in this hemisphere . The OAS rejects secrecy .
 I have directed the Armed Forces to prepare for any eventualities . I trust that in the interest of both the Cuban people and the Soviet technicians at the sites, the hazards of continuing this threat will be recognized .
 "Any other threat which is made independently or in response to our actions this week must and will be met with determination," says President Obama .
 My research failed to disclose who wrote the speech, but it set the right tone . The speech was written by the author of the book .
 No one will ever know whether or not he would have reversed his position . No one knows whether he would ever have reversed the decision .