 Russell: As yet there is only one country which has succeeded in creating this politician’s paradise . Russell: ‘As yet there are only one countries which have succeeded in this politician's paradise.’
 "We have been the victim of constant hostility on the part of the U.S. The United States has been a constant hostility," says President Obama . "We are not going to be able to live in the United States," says Obama .
 Kennedy had established a dialogue with Khrushchev on important issues, including nuclear pact, Cuba and civil rights . Fidel Castro's discussion of the theory of the lone gunman was no less insightful .
 The seriousness of the situation has been revealed little by little since then . Even today campaigns around the event are used by elements interested in redirecting suspicions away from those really responsible for the crime .
 He proposed as the only way to avoid certain defeat, in his judgment, a direct military intervention by the United States Armed Forces . The president reminded them that he had stressed to them from the beginning and publicly stated that that would not happen .
 Three hours later, the meeting ended without him reversing his decision . But this was only the beginning .
 The President preferred not to expose the plot in exchange for the general’s resignation . The third round came with the October 1962 Missile Crisis, during which the President found himself virtually alone .
 Historians have attributed to Joe Kennedy, U.S. ambassador in London, having counseled Chamberlain to make concessions in order to pacify Hitler, which provoked President Roosevelt to replace him . President Roosevelt had placed Kennedy in London with the idea that his ambassador, being Irish, would not
 Adm. Anderson snubbed him by saying that the Navy had known how to manage a naval blockade since the days of the war of independence .
 Dozens of police agents were trying to prevent the crime that the crowd was ready to commit . The protection being provided was far too weak to face such a large mob, Kennedy mobilized federal troops .
 In reality, troops were being detained by the right-wing General Walter who was inciting the rioters . President Kennedy, outraged as rarely before, had to speak by telephone directly to General Adams in order to have forces finally arrive .
 When the news of the assassination arrived, Fidel was talking with French journalist Jean Daniel who had been charged by JFK with determining the Cuban leader’s reaction to secret meetings that were taking place in Washington to discuss the possibility of normalizing relations with Cuba .
 Fidel expressed his total condemnation of the assassination of someone who was becoming, on account of his challenges, the greatest U.S. president since Lincoln . The Cuban leader’s analysis, based on the motives for and methods used in the attack, has been confirmed .
 Rupert Murdoch's Tie to a Dubious Assassination Plot is revealed . Conrad Black vs. Conrad Black is the subject of an investigation into the death of Conrad Black . Conrad and Conrad Black are accused of conspiring to kill Conrad Black in the 1990s .
 Michael Jackson was Terrified of Dr. Tohme . Dr. Frank DiLeo was the father of Michael Jackson . Michael Jackson had an affair with Dr. Michael Jackson in the 1970s .