 The EDEXCEL exam-style questions are indicative only and highlight the key things that should be included in your response . Superpower Relations and the Cold War 1941–91 is the focus of this week's questions .
 It’s how your answer is written and how it fits with the mark scheme that will determine the quality of your answer . How your answer fits with your mark scheme will determine your quality of the question .
 Yalta: The Big Three look forward to a better post-war world . Tehran: Tehran: All smiles at Tehran but Stalin demands a second front . Stalin demands second front from the Soviet Union .
 It was offered to the whole of Europe; the aid was desperately needed . It made a positive difference to the countries that received it. Positive: it was offered . Positive: It was . needed; it made a . positive difference .
 Stalin created Cominform partly to spread propaganda against Marshall Aid . Stalin created it partly to promote Marshall Aid, but it was later banned .
 Both organisations were disliked in the West because they increased the Soviet Union’s control over Eastern Europe . The West disliked both organisations because of their influence in the region .
 It would show that the U.S. was serious about standing up to the Soviet Union . However, it would show the USA was serious .
 Stalin’s fears of a powerful Germany; creation of Bizonia; granting of Marshall Aid to Western Germany . Stalin's fears of powerful Germany led to creation of 'Bizonia' and creation of West Germany .
 Truman, the USA’s new leader, hated communism . Stalin felt threatened because the USA had developed the atomic bomb . Britain and USA were angry that Stalin was not allowing free elections to take place in Eastern Europe .
 In reality it was used by the Soviet Union to gain much greater control over the economies of Eastern Europe . The Soviet Union used it to gain greater control of the economy .
 Khrushchev wanted the West out of Berlin mainly because of the refugee crisis . The refugee crisis was the reason for the West to leave Berlin .
 The loss of so many people was threatening East Germany with economic collapse . East Germany was at risk of economic collapse when loss of people threatened it .
 Khrushchev was unhappy at the way West Berlin had been turned into an advert for capitalism . He was unhappy with the way the city was turned into a capitalist advert .
 He disliked the fact that the West used it as a base from which to spy on East Germany . He also disliked the use of the West as a spy base for the East .
 It also meant families and friends living on either side of the Wall were seperated . Families and friends were separated from each other .
 The Wall became a powerful symbol of the Cold War, which Kennedy highlighted when he visited the city in 1963 . The Wall was a symbol of Cold War .
 There was no further attempt by the Soviet Union to force the West out of Berlin after the Wall was built .
 Kennedy hoped that the Bay of Pigs incident would lead to a popular uprising against Castro and to his removal from power . Kennedy hoped the incident led to an uprising against the Castro regime .
 The Cuban people saw the Bay of Pigs incident as a hostile invasion and so rallied behind Castro . Castro was the Cuban president of the Cuban government in 1961 .
 This averted the immediate risk of war and provided time to find a peaceful solution to the crisis . The crisis averted an immediate war but provided time for peace .
 This showed that Khrushchev was actively seeking a way to end the crisis . This showed he was actively looking for a way of ending the crisis, he says .
 The Soviet ships were approaching the blockade line on this date and nobody knew what would happen next . Nobody knew what was next .
 Kennedy had publicly indicated that if the ships did cross the blockade line, war may result . Kennedy had said that if a blockade line was crossed, war would be possible .
 Khrushchev ordered Soviet ships not to cross the blockade line in October . The incident may have happened on 24 October .
 This was a clear sign that Khrushchev did not want the crisis to lead to war . The crisis was 'a clear sign of concern for the safety of the Soviet Union', writes Peter Bergen .
 Dean Rusk, one of the U.S. advisors, famously said that the other guy had just blinked . Rusk: "The other guy has just blinked"
 Top Secret Jupiter Missiles are out of Turkey . Kennedy promises Cuba – no United States invasion . The moon is off limits to the Cold War 2 .
 A U2 spyplane discovered Intermediate range missile sites under construction in Cuba . The sites are believed to be under construction by the U2 .
 After considering all options including invading Cuba, Kennedy decided to blockade the island . Kennedy decided on a blockade of Cuba .
 Khrushchev ordered the missile ships heading to Cuba not to cross the blockade line . The move avoided direct confrontation with the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy agreed a solution, with both compromising in some form . Both agreed to some form of compromise, with some compromising .
 Soviet missile sites were dismantled in Cuba and U.S. missiles removed from Turkey . The United States removed missiles from Turkey and removed Soviet missiles from Cuba .
 This message has every letter of the alphabet and all the numbers so was a good test . This message is a message with every letter and number of letters .
 Nagy in Hungary and Dubcek in Czechoslovakia wanted to extend basic freedoms to their people, including freedom of speech and assembly . Similarities: 'Nagy' in Hungary, 'Dubcek' in '60s and '90s, '80s .
 The pull factors from the West included higher living standards and political freedom, the report says . The pull factor was also said to be living standards, political freedom and living standards .
 Romania refused to send troops to join the invasion and Albania withdrew from the Warsaw Pact in protest . Albania withdrew in protest from Warsaw Pact after the invasion .
 SALT 1 could be seen as a success as it was the first serious attempt to slow the pace of the arms race . SALT was seen as the first attempt to reduce the amount of arms race arms competition .
 There are all serious problems and so there is no right or wrong answer to how to deal with them, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 He knew communism had problems but still believed it was the best political system . He knew there were problems but he still believed there was no problem with communism .
 Gorbachev tried to improve communism by extending freedom of speech, reforming the economy, cutting military spending and ending the rigid Soviet control over Eastern Europe .
 The United States said it would use military force to protect its interests in the Persian Gulf . The U.S. has said it will use force in the region to protect interests . The Gulf has been the source of tension between Iran and Russia .
 Huge public demonstrations across East Germany placed the communist government under huge pressure to allow free elections . The huge public demonstrations in East Germany, for example, placed the government under pressure . The government faced huge pressure from the public to allow elections .
 In the new world order that followed, the USA was left as the world’s only superpower . NATO expanded into Eastern Europe .
 The Soviet Union turned into a much weaker entity called the Commonwealth of Independent States . The Commonwealth was formed from the former Soviet Union .
 He believed that if he allowed the people of Eastern Europe greater freedom and control, they would choose to play a constructive role in improving the communist system, he said . He said that if . he allowed . Eastern Europe . greater freedom, control, he believed that . if he . allowed
 In Romania there were several weeks of fighting between the government forces and the anti-communist rebels . In Romania, government forces fought against the rebels for several weeks .
 This is because the hard-line communist dictator, Ceausescu, did not want to give up power . This is despite the fact that Ceausecu was forced to step down from power .
 In response to the Berlin Blockade, the USA launched an airlift in order to keep the western half of Berlin supplied with food and fuel . The USA, with the help of Britain, launched the airlift .
 It lasted 11 months and, by its end, US-Soviet relations had deteriorated significantly . By the end of the 11-month period, relations had worsened significantly .
 As a result of the collapse of communist government across Eastern Europe, the Warsaw Pact became pointless . The Warsaw Pact was based on the idea of communism .
 There was no longer a need for a military alliance between the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe and so it was formally dissolved in 1991 . The Soviet-Eastern alliance was officially dissolved by the end of the Cold War .
 Truman Doctrine said the U.S. would stand up to the Soviet Union around the world and stop any further communist expansion . Truman Doctrine was the basis for the Truman Doctrine . The development of the Cold War, 1947–49, was the beginning of Cold War .
 Czechoslovakia was ruled by a hardline communist called Novotny in the 1950s . He was deeply unpopular . The Prague Spring took place in 1968 in the Czech Republic .
 The USA was angry that Stalin had failed to hold free elections in Eastern Europe, despite promising to do so at the Yalta Conference . The U.S. was angry at Stalin's failure to hold elections in eastern Europe . The USA wanted to create Soviet satellite states .
 The Soviets agreed to dismantle the nuclear missiles in Cuba and the United States agreed to move its Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey . The U.S. agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba and move them to Turkey .
 This was further evidence that the Cold War was coming to an end, which led to an improvement in relations . This led to a better relationship between the U.S. and Russia .
 This angered the Soviet Union and they boycotted the Los Angeles games in 1984 . This angered them and angered them enough to boycott the games in Los Angeles .
 The U.S. supplied the anti-Soviet rebels in Afghanistan with weapons including Stinger Missiles . CIA programme was a secret CIA programme .
 Brezhnev started a military build-up in Cuba following the incident . The Soviet-Cuba tensions were high in the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Truman was made to look foolish for allowing the Bay of Pigs invasion to happen . Finally, Truman was forced to make himself look foolish .
 He became more determined to stand up to the USSR to prove himself . As a result, he became determined to fight for his country's right .
 When Soviet missile sites were found on Cuba in 1965, he was determined to win the crisis, even though it pushed the world to the brink of nuclear war . For example, the Cuban crisis in 1965 was the focus of his efforts to win .
 Explain two consequences of Gorbachev’s ‘new thinking’ on Eastern Europe . Explain the consequences of the ‘New Thinking’ of Eastern Europe.
 This gave the people of Eastern Europe the freedom to remove their communist governments in a series of revolutions in 1989 . In 1989, Eastern Europe's communist governments were removed from power . This led to the fall of communism in Eastern Europe .
 This led to the resignation of the hardline leader of East Germany, Erich Honecker . The East German leader resigned from the Communist Party of Germany in 1989 .
 Shortly after, the Berlin Wall was destroyed and the communist system in East Germany fell . Shortly after the Berlin wall was destroyed, East Germany's communist system fell .
 Military cooperation between its members ceased in 1990, and in 1991 it was formally dissolved . Military cooperation with its members was stopped in 1990 .
 Truman said that the USA would use its economic and military power to contain its spread . Truman said he would use economic, military and economic power to stop the spread .
 This stated that the USA would supply aid to Europe in order to raise living standards and in so doing make communism less attractive . In so doing, it would make it less attractive to communism .
 Truman could not let West Berlin fall to the communists and so he kept it supplied through the Berlin Airlift . Truman kept West Berlin supplied with supplies .
 This came as a surprise to the Americans and meant they had lost their nuclear monopoly . This meant that the Americans had lost the nuclear monopoly in the world .
 This contrasted with the previous US President, Roosevelt, who had always tried to get on with Stalin . Roosevelt, however, always got along with Stalin, according to Stalin .
 Stalin wanted Germany to pay a huge sum in compensation, but this was opposed by Truman . Truman opposed this, but Stalin wanted this to be paid out in a huge amount .
 The West were not happy with the composition of Poland’s provisional government as it was dominated by communists . The West did not want the government to be dominated by the communists .
 Truman wanted free elections to take place in Eastern Europe but Stalin refused to agree . Truman wanted a free election but Stalin did not agree to it . Stalin wanted elections to be free and democratic .
 Stalin was angry that he had not been told about this weapons programme . Stalin was angered that he was not told about the weapons programme.
 The West were angry at the Soviet Union for the brutal way it crushed the uprising . Around 2500 Hungarians were killed in the uprising, with around 2500 people killed .
 When Khrushchev became leader following Stalin’s death, the West initially saw him as somebody they could work with because he introduced de-Stalinisation and talked of peaceful co-existence .
 Despite pleas for help from the Hungarian rebels, the U.S. did nothing to help . The USA did not help the rebels in Hungary .
 The U.S. did not want to risk war with the Soviet Union, but the USA’s moral authority was damaged . The USA did want to avoid war, but it was damaged by the loss of moral authority .
 Its brutal response showed that it would not let any East European country leave the Warsaw Pact . The brutal response was shown by its brutal response .
 During the 13-day crisis, the United States military was placed on a very high state of readiness . The U.S. military was in a state of alert during the crisis .
 If Soviet ships had crossed the blockade line, or the U.S. had invaded Cuba, war may have resulted .
 A hotline was set up to improve communications between the two sides . It will allow problems to be sorted out far more quickly than previously thought .
 This banned the testing of nuclear weapons in outer space, under water or in the atmosphere . Nuclear tests are banned under water, under the atmosphere or under water . This ban was imposed by the UN in 1998 .
 In 1968 the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty was signed to stop the spread of nuclear weapons . The treaty was signed by the U.S. in 1968 to stop nuclear weapons spreading .
 Cuba’s new leader, Castro, took over US-owned businesses and, in response, the United States stopped importing Cuban sugar . The U.S. stopped importing Cuba sugar in response .
 As a result of U.S. sanctions, Castro asked Khrushchev for help from the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union started buying Cuban sugar and supplying military aid . The Soviets supplied military aid to Cuba .
 This meant that the Soviet Union would no longer use tanks to crush reform movements, as they had done in Hungary in 1956 and Czechoslovakia in 1968 . The Soviet Union no longer used tanks as they did in Hungary and Czechs in 1956 .
 This made the Berlin Wall redundant and it was dismantled in November 1988 . The Berlin Wall was made redundant and was dismantled by 1988 .
 The Warsaw Pact was a defensive alliance between the Soviet Union and its communist satellite states . The alliance was therefore pointless and it was disbanded in 1991 .
 This meant that Europe was now divided on military as well as political and economic lines . Europe is now divided by military, political, economic lines, according to CNN.com.com .
 This meant that if war broke out with the Soviet Union, NATO would use nuclear weapons . NATO would have used nuclear weapons against Soviet Union in a nuclear war .
 The founding principle of ‘an attack against one is an attack against all’ possibly deterred Soviet aggression towards Western Europe . It could have deterred any Soviet aggression against Western Europe in the past .
 War seemed very close, although the tanks of both sides eventually withdrew . Both sides eventually withdraw from the battlefield .
 In 1963 he visited West Berlin and promised the U.S. would protect them . In 1963, he promised the United States would protect the West Berlin .
 This ensured that each superpower remained vulnerable to the other’s nuclear weapons, therefore deterring either side from launching an attack . This ensured each side's nuclear weapons were vulnerable to each other's .
 The SALT 2 Treaty of 1979 limited each side to 2400 launchers . Although never ratified, the treaty was never ratified . The treaty was signed in 1979 .
 As part of the Helsinki Agreement of 1975, the Soviet Union pledged to respect human rights . For example, as part of this agreement, it was part of a human rights pledge .