 Arthur Godfrey reportedly recorded in the 1950s to be played in the event of a nuclear war . He reportedly recorded a tape or film that was reportedly recorded to be used as a radio message . This never ending quest is in service of our ultimate goal of finding and publishing the Arthur God
 This recording, along with one by President Dwight D Eisenhower, is said to have been stored in a vault at Mount Weather for years . This recording was one of two by President Eisenhower, and is believed to have survived .
 In June we posted a heavily redacted memo from 1957 entitled “Functions to be Performed at High Point” that was, to put it mildly, something of a letdown . In June, we also posted a redacted memo that was posted in June .
 While the documents presented in this post may have only passing relevance to the search for the Godfrey message, they are completely uncensored and highly entertaining .
 We would like to thank historian David Krugler for sharing these textual gems with us .
 It is perhaps the best history of early Cold War Continuity of Government planning available . Prepared for Nuclear War, you should be prepared .
 The declassified fifteen-page “Interim Standing Operating Procedures for Emergency Use of the Classified Location” reads like the driest of employee handbooks, but it is quite informative .
 The document is describing a Strangelovian World War III refuge complete with its own censorship department . It transcends its original purpose to become a grand work of unintentional humor . And because of the document, it transcends it's original purpose .
 From these studios programs can be transmitted over a ‘closed circuit’ system which confines the broadcast to the OEP Classified Location . Programs can also be transmitted nationwide through hookup with the commercial networks .
 The television studio has the necessary facilities for broadcasting 16mm film and 35mm slides . The studio is equipped with the necessary equipment to broadcast 16mm films and slides .
 Only “emergency assignees to the Classified Location with Top Secret Clearance” will be admitted . This section states that only ‘emergency assignments’ will be allowed in the U.S.
 At the time of the missile crisis, J Leo Bourassa must have been a very popular man . In other words, at the . time of that time, at . the . crisis, he said .
 The missile scare had clearly placed a renewed emphasis on the services Mount Weather should be able to provide its occupants for a prolonged stay .
 Phillips offers a detailed description of the new recreational amenities at Mount Weather . Phillips also gives a look at the Marine Corps Schools and the lack of “Chaplains” assigned .
 Phillips wraps up his memo with the matter-of-fact announcements of separate “detention rooms” being “readied” for men and women . Phillips: The installation of washers and dryers is also on the way .
 We look forward to finding and sharing more declassified Mount Weather documents and, someday, the Arthur Godfrey Doomsday Message . We do not know, but we hope to find out more .
 Ted Gup, “The Ultimate Congressional Hideaway,” Washington Post, May 31, 1992 . Gup: The ultimate Congressional hideaway is a place to hide out .
 “He Kept a Vital Bomb Shelter – and Kept it Secret,” Virginia Pilot, A-1, December 26, 1992 .
 Bourassa’s daughter says her father never mentioned a pre-recorded ‘Doomsday’ message by Arthur Godfrey or anyone else . The message was recorded by Godfrey, not anyone else, on December 9, 2010 . The daughter says that her father did not
 She stated that her father rarely spoke about his Mount Weather role . However, she stated that she did not speak out about his role .
 His reporting suggests that Mount Weather was on high alert if not fully activated . Mount Weather may have been activated by Mount Weather .