 Svetlana Savranskaya 202/994-7000 or nsarchiv@gwu.edu . Anastas Mikoyan discovers Cuba, February 1960 .
 Castro, Mikoyan, Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the Missiles of November are available at Amazon.com .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War . Mikoyan and Castro had a difficult handshake .
 The Soviet and Cuban leadership knew that the most dangerous weapons of the crisis were still in Cuba . However, the Soviet and the Cuban leadership . The Soviet leaders knew that, the most . dangerous weapons, were still .
 The weapons would have been used against the U.S. landing forces if the EXCOMM had decided on an invasion, not the quarantine . They were battlefield weapons .
 The Soviets intended for them to stay in Cuba secretly because they were not part of the Kennedy-Khrushchev understandings . The Cubans wanted to keep them to defend against another U.S. invasion .
 These revelations come from documents donated to the National Security Archive by historian and secretary of his father, the late Sergo A Mikoyan .
 Documents published here are the first part of the publication of the donated ""Mikoyan archive"" by the National Security Archive .
 Khrushchev decided to place missiles in Cuba because he was under the impression that a U.S. invasion was just a question of time, documents show . He was not willing to lose his new Cuban ally, which constituted a forward base of socialism in the Western hemisphere .
 He was concerned by the gap between the U.S. and Soviet deliverable nuclear firepower . He was also concerned about the enormous gap in nuclear firepower between the two countries .
 Fidel Castro objected to a deployment that would have made him look like a Soviet puppet . But he was persuaded that missiles in Cuba would be in the interests of the entire socialist camp .
 Khrushchev's conciliatory letter of October 28 let the world breathe the sigh of relief . The letter was signed by the then-Krushchev government .
 Khrushchev knew he had a problem . With 42,000 combat personnel, 80 nuclear armed front cruise missiles, 12 nuclear warheads for dual-use Luna launchers, and 6 nuclear bombs for IL-28s still in Cuba . The Soviet leader knew he was going to have a problem
 Castro was angered by the Soviet betrayal and refused to allow any inspections of the withdrawal . Castro was not consulted or even informed of the deal, and refused any inspections .
 The Soviets had to take back the missiles, get the U.S. to confirm its non-invasion pledge, and—most importantly, keep Cuba as an ally . The Soviets were forced to take the missiles back, but also get the United States to confirm their pledge to stay
 Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan was only one person who could negotiate this resolution . The resolution was reached by the Deputy PM of Armenia, who is currently in charge of the Armenian parliament .
 The Soviets were negotiating with the imperialists behind their backs . While they were prepared to fight a nuclear war and ""die beautifully,"" in the name of the socialist camp .
 Mikoyan tried to explain to the Cubans why they were not apprised of the Soviet decision to withdraw the weapons . The Soviet Union had withdrawn the weapons from Cuba .
 Mikoyan tried to get Castro to accept some form of inspection in Cuba . Cuban leader shocked him by flatly refusing any inspections . Castro said emotionally that if the Soviets thought the Cuban position was unreasonable, then "we would think it more correct to consider the Soviet side free of its
 No sooner after Mikoyan succeeded in bringing the Cubans back from the brink, the Soviet leadership in Moscow decided to agree to a new U.S. demand . The IL-28 nuclear capable bombers were withdrawn .
 Khrushchev sent a long and rambling cable to Mikoyan giving him arguments to use with the Cubans regarding the new concession . The cable was part of a rambling effort to persuade Mikoyans to accept the concession .
 He asked Mikoyan to give the Cubans assurances of lasting Soviet friendship and support, and to persuade them that giving up the ILs would actually be in the Cuban interest . Then the Soviet Union would be able to extract from the Americans a formal non-invasion pledge .
 Castro accepted the concession, but refused to see Mikoyan for two days . Castro ordered Cuban forces to shoot at low-flying U.S. reconnaissance planes, bringing on another crisis within the crisis .
 In trying to get Castro to accept the withdrawal of the bombers, Mikoyan once again gave assurances that no further concessions would be made . The rest of the weapons would stay in Cuba . In the end of the war, the U.S. would withdraw the bombers .
 The Cuban leader began to appreciate the danger tactical nuclear weapons pose if they were left on the island, especially in Cuban hands .
 If the Americans learned about their presence in Cuba, the situation could quickly spiral out of control . If the U.S. learned about the situation, it would quickly spiral . The situation in Cuba could be quickly spiraled into chaos .
 Cuba was not providing assurance that it would be a cooperative ally as far as foreign policy was concerned . And in the future Cuba would not be a reliable ally in foreign policy, he said .
 The final straw came on November 20 when Castro sent instructions to Cuba's representative at the U.N. to use references to the tactical nuclear weapons that Cuba had as leverage in negotiations, and also to establish the fact that the weapons were in Cuban possession .
 The Cuban leader was well aware of the sensitivity of the issue for the Cubans and of their likely reaction to the prospect of removing this last means of resistance to U.S. aggression .
 Mikoyan knew that he had to break this unpleasant news to his hosts . He had to do it in a way that would ensure that they remained Soviet allies .
 Anastas Mikoyan and the Cuban leadership had a four-hour conversation on November 22 . He informed them of the latest decision to withdraw all tactical nuclear weapons from Cuba .
 That was the final blow to the Cuban revolutionaries, after they had, in their eyes, been made to suffer so much . The Cuban revolutionaries were made to have suffered so much, and that was the last blow to them, the president said .
 Castro opened the conversation by saying he was in a bad mood because Kennedy had stated that all nuclear weapons had been removed from Cuba . Castro said he was angry that Kennedy had said that he had removed nuclear weapons from the country .
 Castro's understanding was that the tacticals were still on the island . Castro understood that tacticals are still on island . He said he was disappointed with the lack of tacticals .
 Mikoyan confirmed this and assured him that the Soviet government has not given any promises regarding the removal of tactical nuclear weapons . The Soviet government did not promise to remove tactical nuclear warheads .
 The Soviet government itself said Mikoyan had decided to take them back, not as a result of U.S. pressure . Soviet government said it had decided not to return them .
 Castro was very emotional and rough with Mikoyan . Castro criticized the Soviet military for failing to camouflage the missiles, for not using anti-aircraft launchers to shoot down U-2 spy planes .
 The Soviets had not treated the Cubans as a partner, Castro complained . Castro complained that they had not been treated as partners by the Soviets .
 They had caved in under United States pressure, and had not even consulted the Cubans about the withdrawal . The U.S. had not consulted the Cuban government about the pullout .
 Castro claimed that the situation now was even worse than it had been before the crisis . Castro said that Cuba was defenseless, and the United States non-invasion assurances did not mean much for the Cubans .
 He was concerned that the Soviets were withdrawing all their forces from Cuba . He was worried that they would withdraw all their troops .
 This ended Cuba's hope of becoming a Latin American nuclear superpower . Cuba's hopes of becoming an atomic superpower were dashed by the collapse .
 If the Cubans had been a little more pliant, and a little less independent, they would have kept the tactical nuclear weapons on the island . Ironically, they had been more willing to be Soviet pawns .
 He saw the danger of spinning out control probably better than other leaders in this tense triangle . But he also saw the risk of the situation spinning out of control better .