 War and conflict have their own dynamics, and once you let out some slack on the leash of the dogs of war, there’s a great risk that they might just slip out of your hands .
 On October 17th, 1962, American President John F Kennedy loosens the slack on his dogs of war, just like Nikita Khrushchev had already done five months ago .
 The U.S. administration struggled to come up with an immediate response after the USSR placed nuclear missiles on Cuba . The USSR placed a nuclear missile on Cuba, Cuba, in the 1950s .
 EXCOMM, the group dealing with the crisis, wavered between a stern warning to the Soviets and the complete destruction of Cuba . The group of Cuban diplomats was in touch with the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy is undecided and still wants all options to be left on the table . President Kennedy still wants to keep all options in the air . Kennedy says all options are still being considered .
 On the morning of the 17th, he receives a briefing outlining the possible courses of action . The meeting will take place in London on November 17 .
 Ted Sorensen has compiled the views from the day before . Ted has compiled a list of the most recent tweets from Donald Trump's close advisor .
 Track APolitical warning, and if the missiles are not then removed; limited air strikes . Track BLimited air strike and then a demand to remove the missiles . Track APpolitical warning and if not then removal . Track restricted air strikes and then demand that missiles are removed .
 Track CPolitical actions followed by total naval blockade . Total naval blockade and declaration of war on Cuba on Cuba . Track CP political action . Follows total blockade of Cuba .
 Full scale invasion to ‘take Cuba away from Castro’ with no warning whatsoever . Track D. Track D Track D . Track C Track D
 So, they all agree that the missiles are not a real problem . Yet preparations for war go ahead, despite the fact they are not real problems .
 A possible invasion of Cuba has long been in the planning stages . In fact, a possible invasion has been long planned for Cuba . The U.S. has never invaded Cuba .
 A couple days ago, the day before the crisis began, an exercise was begin to land on the Puerto Rican island of Vieques which represented a fantasy island nation ruled by the dictator Ortsac . The exercise was beginning to land in Vieques, Puerto Rico .
 Ortsac is Castro spelled backwards so there was little doubt even to the slowest minds involved what the real objective was . Now, there is little doubt about what was involved in the project .
 The exercise involved 40 ships, 20,000 marines, massive air support, and Puerto Rico . The exercise took place in Puerto Rico, Puerto Rico.
 With additional preparations and forces, an invasion can be under way in as little as 10 days from today . The invasion can take place in just a few days .
 Along the Eastern seaboard, troops at all bases are discretely increased and made combat ready . Troops were made ready for combat .
 Plans for the Ortsac exercise revised to fit the new situation . Spy plane activities also increased and the plans for the exercise revised .
 At 8:30 AM, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the members of EXCOMM meet at the Pentagon to continue the decision regarding a definite plan . At 9:30 a.m. ET, the decision will continue to be made .
 Defense Secretary McNamara has even spent the night at the Pentagon to supervise planning . Defense secretary McNamara spent night at Pentagon supervising planning planning .
 From the record, it's not a response to the possible objectives of the Soviets that’s driving their decisions, but what the different factions already believed before the crisis . The U.S. has been in the midst of a crisis in Ukraine since April .
 Those who believed in thawing relations with the Soviets are advocating diplomacy . Those that believed in the thawings of the Soviet Union now advocate diplomacy .
 Those who believe that Cuba must be neutralized, tend towards invasion, tend to think towards invasion . Those who believed that Cuba had to be neutralised tend to want to invade .
 The idea of a naval blockade for which there is neither a plan, nor a risk assessment starts gaining some traction . General Taylor, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, is among those weighing in on the idea .
 One of the strongest proponents of an invasion, CIA director McCone, goes to brief President Kennedy at the White House . After the meeting, McCone went to brief the President Kennedy . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 His notes show that he walks away from that meeting with the impression that Kennedy too wants to invade, but Kennedy’s notes contradict this; he’m still very much undecided . His notes showed that he walked away from the meeting .
 JFK meets with former President General Dwight Eisenhower at JFK’s request, to get his joint presidential and military advice . McCone then takes a car to Pennsylvania to meet with Eisenhower at Eisenhower's request .
 McCone comes away with the opinion that Eisenhower too supports decisive military action . McCone says Eisenhower also supports decisive action against Syria .
 The situation in that divided city is the first topic on the President’s regular agenda when he receives the German foreign minister, Dr. Dr. Martin Schurrle .
 Kennedy asks if the Germans have any reason to believe the Soviets will make another move for Berlin . Kennedy: "There's no reason to think the Soviets are going to try to take Berlin"
 Schroeder says they don’t have any indication of an escalation there, nor does their analysis of the situation show that it would make sense for the Soviets to do so at this point . Schroeder: It's not clear if the situation is going to escalate further .
 Schroder says Schroder's comments are remarkably important to the situation . Schroder: "There's a lot of work to do" to make sure the situation is right .
 Sie glauben sogar, das man ein Nuklearkrieg wegen Berlin riskieren wird, obwohl ihnen—den Sowjets—das ziemlich verrủckt erscheint .
 Schroeder doesn’t know the significance of his words at this point, as he does not know about the growing crisis over Cuba . Schroeder said he doesn't know the meaning of his comments .
 As the day proceeds, this crisis deepens as more intelligence on the missile build-up comes to light . The crisis has deepened as more information about the missile builds-up has been revealed .
 The Lockheed U-2, known as the “Dragon Lady” has already played a central part in the crisis . The U.S. Navy says it will continue to do so for the duration of the crisis.
 This aircraft is a remarkable feet of engineering, but also a little bit crazy . The aircraft was built in the 1970s and is now being used to test new models .
 Improved versions are still in use by the US Air Force in 2020, as it’s the fastest way to get aerial reconnaissance other than satellites .
 In 1962, there are very few satellites anyhow, and it's the ONLY way to gather photographic intelligence over enemy territory at a reasonably safe distance from anti-aircraft measures .
 U.S. and Great Britain assumed Russian radar could only pick up signals up to 19,800 meters . That was as high as British and American radar worked .
 It was assumed that Soviet surface to air missiles SAMscould not reach any higher . SAMs were also assumed to not reach higher .
 The Soviets used SAMs to shoot down a U-2 over Russia on May 1st, 1960 . Both assumptions were wrong, and the Soviets shot down the plane . The incident was the first time the Soviets have shot down an aircraft in the past .
 The pilot, Captain Francis Gary Powers, parachutes out and survives the crash . The pilot of a pursuing Soviet MiG 19 isn't as lucky when he is hit by friendly fire .
 The U-2 isn’t only dangerous to fly because it can be shot down . It is a combination of a subsonic jet and a glider .
 At ultra-high altitude it has to be flown within a narrow speed corridor to avoid stalling the pilot . The pilot can only vary speed by 5 miles per hour upwards or downwards to keep the plane flying .
 At normal altitudes, the controls are extremely resistant, requiring the pilot to use muscle strength to maneuver . At normal altitude, the pilot must use muscle to maneuver.
 With its short fuselage and enormously long wings, it has an operating altitude of 70,000 feet . To be light enough to reach that altitude many compromises in safety design had to be made .
 The cabin is only partially pressurized, and pilots have to wear space suits and breath oxygen . Pilots have to breathe oxygen in the cabin .
 There have been several incidents of decompression sickness and at least nine cases of pilots suffering permanent brain damage from flying a U-2 . At least one pilot has passed out, crashed, and died because of a malfunction in his oxygen supply .
 Landing the plane is extremely tricky, as the long wing to fuselage ratio creates ground effects that can cause sudden up-surges and a crash . Landing the aircraft is extremely difficult, with a long wing-to-fuselage ratio .
 When you put the plane down, the wing tips are actually pulled against the ground, which is why they’re coated with titanium to withstand friction . The titanium is used to withstand the friction .
 Landing is so complicated that it requires a chase car to guide the pilot and a second pilot on the ground assist the flying pilot by relaying how the plane is behaving from an outside view . Landing is a complicated landing procedure that requires a second plane to land in the air .
 The U-2 program is highly controversial because of incidents and acciedents . It is illegal to fly planes into other countries’ air space without permission .
 The U-2s belong to the CIA and have been financed without congressional budget approval through secret slush funds . The CIA is the only federal agency that is allowed to have the funds .
 At this point, though, they prove invaluable in assessing the situation on Cuba . At this time, they will be useful to assess the situation .
 Analysts discover a range of Surface to Air Missile batteries that could threaten the U-2s . Analysts say they lower the probability of successful air strikes on the U.2 .
 Pictures are not high resolution enough to see if the SS4 missiles are launch ready, nor where their warheads might be stored . They discover more mid range missile sites, but the pictures do not show if the warheads are stored .
 Most alarming is the discovery of intermediate range missile launch ramps . The discovery of the ramps is the first step in the development of the missile range .
 These missiles can reach any major city in the continental US, except Seattle in the distant Pacific North-West . Although they don’t find any missiles for these missiles, this now extends the threat beyond the East Coast and Mid-West.
 Kennedy flies out to do political rallies in Connecticut . Members of EXCOMM meet again for the first time since Kennedy left .
 New information doesn’t help the decision-making, but it does harden the drive for a decisive military response . The new information is hardening the decision to respond to the situation in Syria .
 Adlai Stevenson, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, urges restraint . Stevenson: "Among all this saber rattling, one voice reaches Kennedy urging restraint" Stevenson says .
 The former Democratic Presidential candidate is famous for his intellect, reason, eloquence, and diplomacy . He is best known for his intelligence and eloquence .
 During the Bay of Pigs invasion, he had largely been kept out of loop to avoid his uncomfortable advice . With incomplete information he then suffered public humiliation when he firmly denied any operative involvement by the United States in an open session at the UN .
 He urges the President to talk to Khrushchev and Castro to avoid a conflict that will inevitably lead to retaliation in other regions .
 On October 17th as night settles over America and a new day dawns in the Soviet Union, the preparations for war on both sides continue and begin taking on a life of their own .
 President Kennedy confronts the Soviets for the first time and gets the response he fears the most . See you tomorrow on day three, when President Kennedy meets with the Soviet Union .
 World War 2 in real time channel will cover Pearl Harbor minute by minute this December . And even as you watch this we are making plans for our next big project, we're making plans to cover the event .
 We are along way from being able to finance that project, so please support us at TG.tv or PGA.com Good night and good luck .