 Windsors have a defect FOXP2 since 1902 have been trying to breed out and also study with Sleeper and registry royal lines . The Windsors are currently breeding out and breeding out FOXP 2 .
 Bush's And Rockefellers have Pharmacy goals, Schwarzeneggers or Rockefeller Republicans . Ed Donegan, Harold Gainey, Glorian Gainey and Rose Kennedy carriers of the gene .
 I think he story of her historic but in many ways secret marriage to James Paul Donegan is true . She was married to Donegan in a secret marriage . She is believed to have had a long-term relationship with Donegan .
 This is the story of FOXP2 Minimal Brain Disorder Synrome in those of Austrian familial history . This is her and her story and the story .
 State power including war including war are addictively drawn on as out as out . Escalating themselves into empty political offices now state power is addictingly drawn on . State power is now being used as a weapon of war .
 Gang Stalk is FBI DOD use of subversion of victims of petty criminals, the Donegans a victim of them and now Ganngstalkededed .
 Gainey-Donegan, North Carolina from neice Maria Austria Kuiischeva DNA for experiments . Gainey Donegan, from North Carolina, from . North Carolina .
 DNA used by and for many during Atomic Testing . Some like Hungary Germany Germany Germany Central Europe . Some of Hungary's DNA was used in atomic testing .
 Donegan James Paul and Thomas were born to North Carolina born to wife . They were born in Cape Cod, Massachusetts, in the 1950s .
 King Donegan Edward VIII bastard child. Rare FOXP2 James Paul . Kutschera and king Donegan the Maria Agusta .
 Barrack Obama Jr in that program of groomed leaders as at least 10 other Barracks Obama Jr. will be groomed as British allies . At least 10 of the other Obama Jrs are expected to be British allies in the U.S.
 In 1902 British, Austrian, German, Hungarian, and other psychiatry recognized FOXP2 in King Edward VII, the Kutscheras, and others .
 In 1961 to 1963 Roman Catholics parishioners objected to the research which perpetuated and bolstered Feudal rule and was the form of Life Science or assassination plans that should lead to excommunication but Vatican II seem to embrace the plan .
 Plan involved surrogacy and relationships with out of wedlock and un-tracked birth experiments . Plan involved Midnight Climax surrogacy .
 Groom non-FOXP2 secret British kin Ed Donegan trying to out this family genome history . Groomnon-FOX2 secret family genome . Ed donegan .
 The fencing operation will use it to pay off victims who allege Ed Donegan harmed them as females . Donegan has been charged with sexual assault in the past .
 The Fencing operation manufactures the appearance of liability of the trust fund of Ed Donegan then uses the Trust fund for parties broking up by FBI or Marshalls resulting in restitution fees to be paid for misconduct .
 Prince Edward VIII out of wedlock children with Maria Kutschera included my mother and uncle who lived until about 9 years old in North Carolina with 7 other children of Von Trapp and Maria . This palace intrigue is part of #CIA and #DOD operations, says Donegan
 FOXP2 Syndrome was one of many challenges to keep the throne King George V (George Frederick Ernest Albert; 3 | dward of JUNE 1865 20 January 1936) Imperial Durbar 12 .
 Queen Elizibeth II sand Nazi songs by Daughter of Queen Mother Elizabeth and Prince Maria Neen Albert of Wales King George VI is Queen Elizabeth of Wales . Queen Elizabeth is Queen of England 2 June laim on 1953 .
 Jimmmy Stewart will use the P-51 Mustang — England’s to fly video to the USA. hrone was week week. The P51 Mustang will be used to fly videos to America .
 Elizabeth Angela Marguerite Bowes-Lyon (4 AUGUST 1900) came to prominence in 1923 when she helped and dated the Duke of York (and helped him with a speech defect) He was the younger son of King George V and Queen Mary .
 She was last Empress of India from her husband’s accession as King-Emperor in 1936 until the British Raj was dissolved in August 1947 . She was the last monarch of India until her husband was king-emperor in 1947 .
 Her father ascended the throne in 1936 upon the abdication of his brother, King Edward VIII, making Elizabeth the heir presumptive . Her father became King of England in 1936 .
 JFK RFK was assassinated by the CIA in 1968 . RFK won the White House . JFK was assassinated in 1968 by the assassination of RFK . JFK and RFK were both assassinated .
 Congressman Leo Ryan, All Souls Catholic Church, many Leo Ryan and many ethnic names familiars such as Bishop Daniel Leo Ryan J Deceased. Congressman .
 The Pentagon is the world’s largest office building, with about 6. million square feet of floor space . I assert the Pentagon itself fell to the WASP Fifth Column as many Irish high and petty Officials did .
 It has five sides, five floors above ground, two basement levels, and five ring corridors per floor . It has a total of 17. miles (28. km) of corridors . It is located in central London .
 The most classified information is stored there and those who read and write those documents work there . Those who read, write and write the documents work for the government .
 JFK killed a day or two after my 2 year birthday, likely one or more half brother passed the speech defect test . Half the LONDON KE FAMILY line of FOXP2 express its extreme ADHD symptoms .
 Wikipedia retrieved from Criminal Syndicalism and copied or modified to here . Criminal syndicalism has been defined as a doctrine of criminal acts for political, industrial, and social change .
 The criminal syndicalism bill was introduced into the Idaho state legislature in 1917 . It was introduced in the Idaho legislature that year .
 The stigmatization of my FOXP2 gene symptoms, the wrong diagnosis to my symptoms, long hid the I had FOXP 2 gene and long subjected to allegation of routine mental incompetence of routing bipolar fits of delusion . Though I never was bipolar nor am I delusional, I was not delusional
 Money Laundering, Research, and Racketeering in CIA Behavioral Care Deep State . CIA Cartel Genomics and Plausibly Deniable CIA Drug Deals and Drug Sales .
 George F Kennan, the chargé d’affaires at the American embassy, was responding to a specific inquiry from the State Department . His answer was the containment strategy to keep the Soviet Union from spreading Communism further without going to war .
 Bre Queen remains the head of British state, the highest presentative of the United Kingdom on the national and international stage . The University of Columbia in New York is home to the largest university in the world .
 The Queen keeps in close contact with the Prime Minister and is regularly briefed on all important national matters . She never publicly weighs in on political debates-nor are any final decisions up to her .
 Most Kept Ultra Secret, and the Donegan Secret, how James Paul Donegan met King Edward VIII and married his out-of-wedlock daughter Glorian 509th Composite Bomber Group .
 P-51 Manhattan Project is British Spitfire . Boeing B-29 Stratofortress (manufactured as North | Strategic Bomber) American Aviation Co. manufactured as North . American Aviation . Co. built the B-51 .
 Mrs “Stanely” Anne Dunhame SAID TO BE white mother of Obama Jr. P-51 bomber escort Stanley Armour Dunham, Grand Father, Madelen Payne Grand Mother, then their white Mrs ‘Staneley’ Anne Dunnhame
 Seaha curious why NSA CIA FBI Marshalls forget he knew he knew about Judge Roll case . Seaha is curious why why NSA didn't know about judge Roll case. Seaha questions why he didn't say he knew of Judge Roll Roll case? Seaha: "I don't
 The CIA is still studying the Brain, and planting new leadership around the world . It is still on its NeoCon agenda .
 Jen-Meere-MicheatHastines-SancHmeAdrinenkashes+kills+knew as did Hasting’s fiance, murdered in Iraq once briefed in, as Seal Team Six was, to Obama genetics and leaderhsip origins
 Virginia, United States, is the only freestanding children’s hospital in : Virginia . Virginia, U.S. is the state of Virginia . The hospital is located in Virginia and is located near the city of Frederick .
 Vornado proposed to delay the demolition of the Hotel Pennsylvania (Penn Station Statler Hotel in Manhattan) due to market conditions . Frank Olson of MKULTRA ARTICHOKE pushed from window .
 A retreat was scheduled at a cabin at Deep Creek Lake for Wednesday NOVEMBER 18 to Friday November 20, 1953 . Frank Olson was appointed to head Special Operations Division, but later stepped down from that role .
 Sidney Gottlieb was a CIA chemist responsible for Project MK Ultra . Robert Lashbrook, Dr. Dr. Sidney Lashbrook and Dr. Robert Lownbrook were among the CIA's most prominent members .
 Former C.I.A. employee says he believes scientist plunged to his death from a Manhattan hotel window 22 years ago had knowingly participated in an experiment with LSD shortly before his death .
 This book questions deaths like these already questioned on the Internet . This book is about the deaths of people who have been killed in the U.S.
 Paula Grober Clinton’s speech interpreter for the deaf from 1978 until her death DECEMBER 9, 1992 . Grober was the first woman to speak to the deaf in the White House . She was also the first interpreter of the deaf .
 This is husbandry including sleeper agents as Western groomed puppets, exposed by data increasingly found in Family Genome Databases and also part of the NASA Cheyenne Mountains assassination of of judge Roll and Associate Justice Scalia .
 This appears to be directed towards white side theories of Barrack Obama, the Dunham side, leading to PsyOps against Tom Dunhma, possibly tied to that family line as well as tied to me, and also other descendents of Glorian Donegan, another white female whose genome was
 White Side Being Subverted | Black Side Being Built up said to be Dunham, is Glorian Said to be Barrack Obama Sr. is Donegan Malcom X . If this chart looks like it benefits Barrack Omaba Jr. and his family origins then like me you have taken
 Those who created Obama as a study in leadership to groom him to rule Indonesia are those who really benefit from hiding the real identity of Barrack Obama and hundreds of other ‘4 AMPs” in our society of CIA backed industrial, entertainment, and political families .
 At one point this book was Genoracketeering, I considered for a while Stand Down, that carrerr profesinalls would not investigate with Medieval World Order now called the New World Orde4r of Masonry . Then I renamed it to Illuminati Dawn wanting WWIII
 My father appeared to fly in this group which also matched his mug and stories . My father's mug, stories and stories matched his stories and mug .
 Barrack Obama’s white mother was married to a B-29 plant worker . It delivered the atomic bombs to Japan using p-51s . My father flew escorting escorting protecting and being the eyes for B-30s .
 Deployed to the European Theater of Operations . assigned to IX Fighter Command in England in early 1944 . Deployed in Europe in early 1945 .
 Ground attacks on enemy fortifications, bridges, railway lines, roads, bridges and troop concentrations in Occupied France and the Low Countries . Carried out fighter sweeps of Luftwaffe-controlled airfields .
 Flew patrols over Normandy Landing Beaches, 6 June 1944, later taking up station in newly constructed airfields in liberated areas of France . Flew patrol over Normandy landing beaches . Flewe patrols over the Normandy landing beaches .
 Engaged and completely destroyed a German armored division near Avranches, France, 29 July 1944 . The Battle of the Second World War was the deadliest single battle of the war in Europe .
 Continued attacking ground i targets until German Capitulation in May 1945 . Continued attacks on German targets until June 1945 .
 Pacific Air Forces in Europe occupation forces during the summer of 1945, : inactivated in the United States as an administrative unit in October . Reactivated in 1952 as a Tactical Air Command squadron under Ninth Air Force . Pacific Air Force in Europe occupied by World War II in 1945 .
 Equipped with F-84 Thunderstreaks, later upgrading to F-100 Super ' Sabres in 1956 . Equipping with F.84 Thunderstaks, then upgraded to F.100 Super Sabres .
 It returns from ULTRA Secret program subgroups to Eugenics John F Kennedy in New Ross and Wexford, leland .
 Studies on SSFL laboratories in a: Manhattan Beach California, the I’m not glad to be here. Manhattan Beach, California, is Manhattan Beach .
 My sister Eunice Shriver and to introduce another |moves to Texas in CIA backed oil of my sisters Jean Smith and I’d like tohave you _ {companies of Standard Oil, meet the American ambassador McCluskey and . meet the head of the American
 The Santa Legacy Intelligence Events Timeline is the leading national archive of declassified intelligence artifacts, culture, and history . Daniel Hirsch, speaking in Simi Valley, spoke about the ongoing need for a full clean up at the Santa Legacy Library .
 William J Donovan appointed as Co-ordinator Information, the OSS, July 11 1941 which will be closely tied to England, British Intelligence, George H.W. and Prescott Bush and assassinations December 7 1941 . Japanese bomb Pearl Harbor with the MKULTRA Most Kept secrets
 In 1925 Prince Albert (birthday DEC 14) seemed a poor choice for King in comparison to his older brother Prince of Wales . The Kutscheras hated the British Monarcy and Monarchies en toto .
 The British royal family held Prince William’s christening on August 4, 1982, when the young royal was six weeks old . This book is about the 1926 Windsor Kutscheras, twins, and the British OSS and Free Mason plan of 1905 to rule the world through
 Brittian ruled through proxies who reported to London in a system of “Independent rule” the British used for recognized African Continent governments . South Africa became a Union with its own white people government in 1910, but was still regarded as a colony of Britain untill 1961 .
 In liberalism all are equal, there is no arbitrary power or abuse of power . The function of the State power is the protection of the citizen and no other usage . In liberalism, there are no arbitrary powers or abuses of power, and the function of state power is protecting citizens .
 The Manhattan Project run by Columbia Univserity overlooking Manhattan Isleand beach NYC and some cities in Los Angeles County that were participants . Another road, costing more than $30,000,000 from Kabul to Kandahar and thence to ; the Pakistan border .
 Currency reform abrogates multiple rates which priced the Afghani to the United States dollar rat anything from 20 to 57 . The free market rate was near 50.7 . The new Prime Minister undertakes serious currency reform .
 In pursuance of better relations, the Afghan-Pakistan frontier is reopened, largely through the peace efforts of the Shah of Iran . On September 7 the king and U.S. Pres. Dwight Eisenhower visit to Washington, D.C., on September 7 .
 Sardar Mohammad Nadir Naeem is a politician in Afghanistan, and a member of the former ruling Barakzai dynasty . He is a former member of Afghanistan's ruling regime .
 JFK was in Manhattan where he addressed the national A.F.L-C.I.O. convention at the Americana hotel . JFK was assassinated 7 days before his assasination .
 Later in the day, he left for the Kennedy Palm Beach estate La Guerida . He was joined for the weekend by the ever present Dave Powers and his old Harvard roommate Congressman Torbert Macdonald .
 Near Santa Monica and home of the P-51 which was part of the Manhattan Project as an escort to Boeing bombers and defense of England from Dover from German bombers .
 JFK and the Peace Corp Shriver Lawfrods all seemed involved and present during the dates of my November 18 birht and November 19 birth certificate . The Santa Susana Field Laboratory Simi Hills was used for the development of pioneering nuclear reactors and rocket engines beginning in 1948 .
 He saw inaction as cowardice and a sin greater than ill-considered aggression . He said inaction was cowardice, not aggression .
 Francophile, Irish descent, Roman Catholic marriage to an Irish Catholic Bostonian . Francophile married to a Bostonian Bostonian.
 Her mother was of ' Trish' descent, and her father had French, Scottish, and English ancestry . Her mother is of 'Trish descent' and she is of Trish descent .
 There were lecturers and teachers of anthropology in the U.S. before 1902 . There was no independent department in any American university until Columbia's .
 In 1899, he became a professor, and in 1902, he was the head of the newly formed department . In 1899 he was a professor at the University of Cambridge, England .
 Charles I was King of England, Scotland, and Ireland from 27 March 1625 until his execution in 1649 by Sir Thomas Fairfax led New Model Army . The Queen Mother, the Atomic Bomb drop and Barrack Obama are tied to August 4 .
 C.I.A.A., NSA, FBI, DoD, DOS, SEC, Judiciary and multinational corporate . 'Intelligence intelligencers' are American stooges controlled by the British Empire Great or Freight. These guys on YouTube exactly correct.
 A CIA Story by John Stockwell . “The U.S. goal in Angola was not to keep out the Cubans and Soviets but to make their imperial efforts as costly as possible to prove that, after Vietnam, we were still capable of response .
 Since strategic thought survives by ignoring experience, it has a highly professional interest in avoiding accounts such as this . It has a very professional interest to avoid such an account like this .
 Many were spent, many thousands died, and many lies were told to the American people . War was waged without purpose to American vital interests and without hope of victory, he says .
 A number of allegations have taken place related to the Mena Airport as a CIA drop point in large scale cocaine trafficking beginning in the latter part of the 1980s . The airport was a drop point for large-scale cocaine trafficking .
 JFK wasn't killed by a person and possibly not even shot by Lee Harvey Oswald . JFK wasn’t shot by someone but may have been shot by Oswald, says historian .
 Raphael Cruz Sr an Evangelical Zero in 1961 . The Freight Train Kills the Great and Takes Power . Raphael Cruz Jr. was Evangelical zero .
 Tom graduated from a university with a Bachelors degree in business . He worked for several companies before a long career with AOL then AOL Time Warner . Tom worked for AOL then Time Warner.
 Edward Donegan was told he had some quirk when he dropped a milk bottle from his high chair . He reacted strongly was not like other children, his parents noticed . Donegan says he reacted strongly when the bottle was dropped .
 Festus Gainey died when she was 9 years old . She was raised on a farm in North Carolina until Festus died at 9 . She is survived by her mother and father .
 Moved from North Carolina to South Carolina and the Dew Family, Grace and Ellen, and Dot Dew as a sort of sister living under Grace and . Ellen Dew . Dot Dew was a sort-of-a-sister . Dot lived with Grace Dew and Ellen .
 She and Harold appear to be of three hidden hidden Maria Augusta Kutschera children . These were out of wedlock with either King Edward VIII Prince of Wales OR King George V Prince Albert of York . These children were likely to have been born with either Edward VIII or George V .
 The Second protector of Maria August Kutschera was likely the Vatican through a Convent . A pregnancy and a possible free spirit ended a religiously disciplined cloister life .
 The Third Protector of Maria Augusta Kutschera was being hidden in the USA . The other 7 children, likely not having the FOXP2 Gene and Minimal Brain Disorder Syndrome, went on to fight the Nazi with Allies loyalist propaganda .
 As these genes were being researched involuntary lab work was being done by Speech Therapist biologist Sidney Gottlieb . The genes are being researched in the lab .
 James Paul Donegan and Glorian Donegan both had genes tied to assassinations . The idea was to see in which offspring the gene would show had how when it did show the gene was expressed, it did .
 He too was told the gene existed but was eager to smear his mother and I as some form of Nazi he could identify with his sociology intellect . He also wanted to smear me and my mother as some sort of Nazi, he said .
 At the same time he could get me ousted from high functioning functioning of me and did so, he could smear of me . But he might find a cure for Nazism. He might find it, but he may find it .
 As I am pushed from success by his undermining the prerequisites, I moved apart from similarity to various political leaders who have the same lineage as me, the Obamas and others . As he is pushed . from success, he said, "I am pushed ... from success"
 It is my belief both Kamala Harris and AOL Time Warner were part of a smear of me which was tied to leftism fighting and discrediting Nazism via shaping me in to a Nazi as I grew racially resentful of, sensitized to racially aggressive conduct towards me .
 At the same time the present of racial fights replacing normal life shortened the blossoming of my life and as an unwanted family member of rich and famous people. At the time of the present, racial fights replaced normal life .
 My not finding a niche for myself I could blossom in was part of the social outcome sabotage of me Kamala Harris helped Tom Donegan with as I was accused of harming her social justice causes, minors and racially disenfranchised exploited people . My not being able to find a niche was
 I should not that while I believe in limited government I have also believed in limited class society . I should also believe that while . I believe that limited government should not be a government-run society, it should be a society-run .
 We are all one, citizens, and not distinguished by any other arbitrary characteristic . We are not distinguished from any other characteristic. We are citizens, citizens . We will not be separated from each other .
 Bone Marrow and the Curious matter of the Fatal attack at British Medical bone xray and treatement medical facility Camp Bastion Lt. Lt. Lieutenant. David Cameron was killed in the attack . Lt. Cameron was injured in the incident .
 Three more USAAF air raids followed, two occurring on 2 March aimed at the city’s railway marshalling yard and one smaller raid on 17 April aimed at industrial areas . Winston Churchill indicated a need after Dresden to reduce attacks primarily affecting civilians .
 Sidney Gottlieb was an American chemist and spymaster best known for his involvement with the Central Intelligence Agency’s assassination attempts and mindcontrol program, known as Project MKUITRA .
 The Organization for Economic Edward Paul Donegan all loyal to the USA have been tempting Cooperation and Development would be interested in, and also hides my family as the source of those genes used in others . NSA, CIA, and FBI to ambush and use for racial balancing as our genetic, intellectual
 Racial studies espionage activities have been fruitful to observe, mimick, or copy without permission by those tied to espionage backed distrust of older white men and their attitudes . It is more a matter of racial competition and cultural appropriation, cultural co-option than law enforcement .
 I will address the issue of the efforts of clandestine activity to preempt my positive work in high tech and other fields as likely tied to create the seeming gap between the cognitive attributes I have and those others who may come from under ground railroads during the rise of Nazi Germany .
 The nuclear components (target, projectile, and 4 initiators) are inserted into bomb unit number L11 . The target, projectile and four initiators were inserted into the bomb .
 The survivors of the USS Indianapolis are rescued after four days in the water . The survivors were rescued after being trapped in the ocean for four days .
 Survivor Accounts From the Worst Sea Disaster in U.S. Naval History . ‘There were a lot of sharks,’ says one of the survivors .
 Like the State of Washington in the Pacific Northwest Japan is in good physical proximity to Russia, China, North Korea, Polynesia, Malaysia, Indonesia and other locations .
 The U2 Spyplane and perhaps the F-86 or perhaps some other plane my father flew could have all shared the USAF duties conducted at the Japanee base Oswald worked on . Oswald's father worked on the U2 spyplane he flew .
 Indonesia, CIA Station ma Chief Fanklin Anderson, and Suharto Crane Group, military overthrow of Indonesia, Obama Jr planned Generalisimo of Indonesia . Obama Jr. planned generalisimo . Russian and Indonesian CIA activities run from Japan .
 The Manchurian Operation began on 9 AUGUST r 1945 with the Soviet invasion of the Japanese puppet state of Manchukuo . August 6, 1945 August 9th of the 1945 Soviet invasion .
 It has also been referred to as the Manchurian strategic offensive operation . It was also known as the 'Manchurians strategic offensive' operation .
 This is the story of secret Illuminati MKULTRA World Ecosystems Eugenics and Sleeper Agents in the Illuminati and elsewhere for the 21st Century world economies and beyond . The story is also the story about the control of the Media and Government in the Deep State and their sap
 A battle for Alepo fought by Irregulars is easy to spot . The rights to use a Genome and Irregular Warfare surrounding the rights to is is harder to catch on camera though in this book I have both photos and emails .
 It includes “wetworks” “sleeper agents, and moles and I believe it is based largely on cove ups as well as original goals,” says author. “It includes ‘wetwork’ ‘sleeper agent’
 Irregular Warfare which John F Kennedy signed int law as part of the United States Military and Espionage capabilities I believe now have taken on a life of their own and are defending their mistakes . George Bush, Gregg Abbot, Donald and William Barr, the OBamas, the Trumps
 CIA known leadership genes for foreign economies, for the connected, (and of course their religious and political leadership Cadre) and targeting the original genealogies with secretive hits .
 Glorian Donegan ovum, Malcom X father, is Feb 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 for Obama, in Eva Ban pregnancy, with Ann Dunham (like CIA’s Sue Gordon of the Trump admin, anthropology and zoology) and Barrack Obama Sr. cover stories .
 JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation Thorkil Kristensen in the Oval Office .
 JFK and Thorkil Kristensen with unidentified man February 20, 1961 Fertilization Feb 20 the delivery about November e JFK Warren Commission upon assassination ¢ OECD MKULIRA Building World Genetics Church Committee .
 The Troubles were a period of conflict in Northern Ireland . It involved republican and loyalist paramilitaries, the British security forces, and civil rights groups . The conflict was fought between loyalist and republican groups .
 This book and CIA DARPA murders are about the history of and plans discussed and February 20 1961 tested between George Ball, JFK, and OECD’s Thorkil Kristensen and the Brain, Economies, and Eugenics . It is also about the Pacific Ocean, war
 My story of being harassed by espionage agencies is the fallout from the ongoing allies espionage history of thumb on the scale . General Eisenhower warned of the impact of meddling in complex biological systems .
 Mukasey was nominated to be Attorney General by President George W Bush following the resignation of Alberto Gonzales . He was nominated by President Bush after Gonzales resigned as Attorney General in 2005 .
 Seeking the genome center of this, mine and my mothers and fathers was my journey into MKULTRA and the Manhattan Project . The Manhattan Project and DNA research . DNA research and studies in Eugenics in the 20th Century .
 It is also about the evolution of criminal conspiracies in world politics, how they started, what drives them, and what they have turned into . The fittest theory to describe the criminal conduct of Espionage agencies and politicians from espionage agencies is what originates in this book .
 The Crown Jewels of Royalty and noble office are what the independent son i of Joseph Kennedy Sr wished to both escape and reject . Before | leave this high, leave this .
 The mafia profits from big business pictures are not always hyperlinks . He likely considered them murderous mafia profits .
 JFK and RFK either knew it and or later learned of it, RFK or RFK . My theory that the CIA QEII Mafia killed Marilyn and JFK is that RFK and JFK and JFK knew it . RFK was RFK's friend, Marilyn, and JFK's
 She, Marilyn, could have been the Narrator of how extensive and murderous the CIA mafia really was . Marilyn could have told the story of the CIA's involvement in the CIA .
 The National Defense Authorization Act is the name for each of a series of United States federal laws specifying the annual budget and expenditures of the United States Department of Defense . This is what the Term or Word means probably snipped from authoritative sources .
 A Double Agent is a person planted or recruited to appear to work for one organization while being an Agent In Place . Richard Cheney likely learned British Propaganda in the form of fiction .
 In 1962 Dick Cheney likely met his wife being introduced to British espionage operations like The Sound of Music . He married in 1964 and Alma Powell may have introduced it to Colin Powell .
 Legends are the needs of Infiltrators who have Government or Business Offices to abuse to alter the perception of history and destroy the Constitutional outcomes of contemporary events which create the alternative reality criminals (Too Infamous to run or hide) can survive and prosper under .
 It also involved the simultaneous use of secretive out of registry blue bloods in those other world location like the acting and speech experts to be part of a large scale secret study .
 Shadow government has controlled much of history and groomed many of the 21 Centuries leaders in media, law, business, and government . They don’t like being found out .
 JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for European Economic Co-operation Thorkil Kristensen at around 11 18 61more in the Oval Office .
 Donald Barr holds Experimental Monkey in White House November 23 1961, 1961, Cipher for black experiment in mixed race . Donald Barr held Experimental Monkey at the White House .
 JFK and Thorkil Kristensen with unidentified man February 20, 1961 11 surface of water 18 61 11/18/61 concerns; and reporting on the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe .
 Fertilization of Barack Obama and Edward Paul Donegan from Glorian Donegan Ovum (she born DEC 13 from King Edward VIII/ Maria Von Trapp parents) birth NONMEMBER 18 1961 JFK assassinated at 2 year mark . That is the premise of this bbok
 Max Detweiler in the Sound of Music is the Nazi official Ps Franz Kutschera, rear seat, hoping the Captain and Maria Von Trapp, front seat will remain in Austria have Maria and others sing Nazi propaganda music . “Father Franz” who is represented by
 DETAILS about pre-world War one and what led into the Second World War . I think it’s important for the American people to know some of these facts so in the past week or so as I just started out this YouTube channel I’ve been doing a
 It talks a lot about Sigmund Freud who was kind of the founder of MKULTRA or one of them he’s known as the father of psychology . But his history has been sanitized and even most psychologists or doctors psychology do not know a lot of this history .
 The work of the Church Committee and the work of Leo Ryan were attempts to out the Globalist Business Plot activities of cover ups and subversion, treason, murder, and assassination . They use gibberish as code speaking in Spaced Out Space Aliens Prophecies .
 After being P-51 Recon pilot for Doolitle combination of fighter bombers over Europe then A Bomb of Japan . He flew F-86 Recon in Korea, likely alluded to in Julie Andrews film .
 Radar from United States Base in Japan helped the United States recon against Russia, Korea, and China . Radar from U.S. base in Japan was used to detect Russian, Korean, and Chinese vessels . Radar was used in the Cold War .
 Many movies metaphorically suggest a pilot in that area met a woman . This book speculates and many movies suggest a woman met a pilot . The pilot's story is based on the pilot's experience .
 My father told me he hit on a sister of Glorian, could have been Marylin Monroe or Julie Andews . Before next meeting Glorian and falling in love, he fell in love with her .
 Edward and Albert were a Propaganda Front Cabal Structure and Methods Dedication To and r Jen Moore . Jen Moore was likely part of the CIA gangstalk of me but resented the duty .
 She considered it a CIA attempt to hide Nazi infiltration of the USA and that this was tied to the JFK murder and many others . The JFK murder was a CIA plot to cover up Nazi infiltration .
 The Gangstalk is a theater team which skits out things that are not true but appear to be true and may match (in public) what a dopple has done in public . The gangstalk skits about things that may be true but seem to match what a
 Gangs of people walk around near me, use apartments near him, dress like me, and say we together are buying the sight of models with my DNA, them as porn, and during that we are together getting punished for having photographed women to you and paying restitution an protection fees .
 Mulholland Falls Falls Analogy. Silenced Truth Tellers assassinated #WETWORKERS assassinated . #Wetworks: Silenced truth tellers assassinated. Silence of truth .
 MK Ultra, Nazi Germany, Freud,OSS, Dulles, Black budgets (Illegal Slush Funds inside Espionage) Alister Crowley, Jack Parsons, NASA, L Ron Hubbard, Scientology, Babylon Working, Pedophelia, Child Trafficking, Blackmail, & evil
 My mother along with my father were refugees of the Nazis or British Fuedal . The Trust Fund has been hijacked to support and fund race baiting sexual attacks on me vilifying me unjustly .
 Songwriters: Paul Simon y ere | Ww +, ridge Over Troubled Water .
 Good common European Brains from Celebrities . Minimal Brain Dysfunction half of Windsprs (English Royals from Austria Hungary Germany Germany Central Europe)
 Donegan lurid slush funds and Glorian |P©o8t@™ of groomed eneaan leaders as at least 10 8 other high profile Senate or above U.S. Politicians are . At least 10 other high-profile US politicians are. Donegan
 Ed Donegan | Jen More silenced while trying to out this family genome history . Jen More: "Knowing this is a cutting edge batch of DNA ... is the cutting edge bit of DNA"
 The Fencing operation manufactures the appearance of liability of the Kings trust fund of Ed Donegan then uses the Trust Speech as fund for parties which are broking up by FBI or research Marshalls .
 This is the battle of WWII and Monarchists and Anti-Monarchists as part of that, says CNN.com's John Defterios . This is a battle of World War II and Monarchism and anti-monarchism, he says .
 National Socialist German objected to both Communism and Fuedalism as to international an interference with the German nation . National Socialist Germans objected to Communism and Fuedalistism as to international interference .
 She was born and raised in the Deep South, likely tied to the Von Trapps . She and Harold raised in likely the Baptist Church . She married James Donegan and was influence him .
 James Paul Donegan was raised in oppressive poverty and social conditions in Boston . His Irish immigrant well educated parents were little more than street people Boston .
 Mel Gibson's background is tied to the American Revolution and forced into poverty, and beliefs similar to that of Mel Gibson . Consider his background nd hers, tied to American Revolution, and those of the 18th century . Mel Gibson and Mel Gibson were both born in poverty .
 The Patriot is a 2000 American epic historical war film written by Robert Rodat and directed by Roland Emmerich . Mel Gibson, Chris Cooper, Heath Ledger and Jason Isaacs star .
 Incorporated as Sumterville in 1845, the city’s name was shortened to Sumter in 1855 . Andrew Pickens, Francis Marion, Daniel Morgan and Thomas Sumter .
 It has grown and prospered from its early beginnings as a plantation settlement . The settlement is now a tourist destination in South Africa .
 The city and county of Sumter bear the name of General Thomas Sumter, the “Fighting Gamecock” of the American Revolutionary War . Sumter is the birthplace of the Revolutionary War hero, the "Fighting Gamecocks" of the Revolution .
 Sumter is 22 miles from Sumter to Bishopcille South Carolina, South Carolina . Bishopville is Bishopville where my mother was moved to after Festus Gainey died .
 She joined with Jim in resentment against being left in poverty and the struggles of the Donegan family . Though not born a Roman Catholic, she was not born Roman Catholic . She joined Jim with her husband in resentment of poverty .
 Most of the Pro British movement in the eminated from Jewish refugees of NAZI Germany and sometimes is a percvieve locus of the Deep State Shadow Government . The suspicion of Isreal ran in my family and many anti-Deep State beliers holders .
 Many Roman Catholics fit the Mel Gisbon profile, anti Jewish Publishing empire power base while also anti-colonalism . I tend to sympathize with Jews and their rights and really place the focus on the British .
 The life my mother and father tried to build for his family is lost especially as I am here in Texas and COINTELPRO mafia violence stages that I am a sex offender, I an not, and on the public attack on me claims it becomes family members of me . The life
 It is more an attack on Atheism and military veterans as religious attack than anything else, but that I am subjected to these attacks is a crime against James and Glorian as well as an attack upon me .
 COINTELPRO against me by Texas by Texas is happening in a climate of the state led by Abbot and Paxton . Texas runs the DMV of Texas, Texas courts, Texas DOC, and other operations in Texas . It's true they hav a budget for those often illeg
 The hatred I have for the shakedown artists attack on me I compare with Gavri¢ of the movie Peacemaker . The hatred he has for the attack on him I compare to the hatred I feel for Gavry¢ of Gavrry¢ .
 Glorian lived on a farm with Festus Gainey until Festus died when she was about 9 years old . Glorian was Glorian's companion until she was 9 when she died .
 She and Harold Gainer were adopted as orphans by the Dew and family, Grace, Ellen as older sisters but adoptive ones older though acting as parents . Grace and Harold were adopted by Grace Dew and Ellen Gainer as orphans .
 It was in this South Carolina family I am told my father met Aunt Dot and Glorian Gainey to become Glorian Donegan . The Donegan family is a South Carolina native .
 She married Festus Gainey on 3 October 1915, in Meadow Township, Johnston, North Carolina, United States . She was born in 1915 .
 She lived in Goldsboro Township, Wayne, North Carolina, United States for about 5 years . She also lived in Wayne, N.C. for about five years and Goldsborough, North .
 She died in December 1975, in Wayne, North Carolina, United States, at the age of 79 . She was buried in Wayne Memorial Park, Dudley, Wayne, U.S.
 Festus Gainey of North Carolina DID die when my mother Glorian Gainey born 1926 was about 9 . Glorian's mother died when she was 9 and Festus died when her mother was 9 .
 William Olen “Bill” GAINEY married Lois Irene WALKER and had 2 children . William Oen ‘Bill’ GAINEy had two children. William Oiney was born in 1941 .
 Glorian and Harold had FOXP2 Syndrom, probably left behind when at 9 years old her father Festus died, King Edward VIII resigned, and Austria was getting siezed after the Berlin 1936 Olympics we all learn about .
 Glorian grew up on a South Carolina farm with the Dew Gandy family after her ‘Uncle Festus’ died on his farm long before, orphaning Glorian and Harold . Harold and Glorian were raised on the farm by their parents, Glorian .
 Glorian’s hats disspeared to and othe family memorabilia was destroyed and thrown out . Tom and Mark promised to scan and return the photos, but they disappeared completely .
 This happened at least since the mid 1990s and up until Glorian’s death . This happened in the mid-1990s and until the end of the 1990s .
 James Donegan’s beer mug from his German flight group disspeared from the Moraga house as did everyone of his standing in front of plane photos . My father wondered if I took it to use for drinking since Tom was living in D.C. during college .
 I had mine diagnosed in the 1990s, possible leading to increased Stalk of me . I had his diagnosis in the 90s .
 My mother and I had swallowing problems most of our lives until we figured out that having water nearby helped . Having water nearby and conscious pre-swalling of saliva helped.
 "All those talks are lost from most people, but a few others from that household may be alive" "A few others may still be alive," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "I'm not sure how long I'll be able to get back in touch with my
 James, Ed Tom would lay awake wonder if mother would be O.K., multiple doctor trips had not resolved the throat problem . James would ask if she would be OK. James would still be able to speak to her mother .
 Glorian’s biological brother Harold from Festus family made lots of “You like like a king in that blue bathrobe Ed (i always use bathrobes and that was given to me) “Say Hello to the Hero”
 Likely homicide of patriot Jen Moore who was outing an Espionage spy ring she called the Anwan Spy Ring . Jen Moore was outing a spy ring which seems tied to a wellness group in Georgia but operated from and through Pakistan : this as a breakthrough in the Webb case .
 U.S. prosecutors can point ‘to an example where the group in question ISI has committed the same crime in 4 India.’
 The spy ring facilitated calls from and to Afghanistan, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Nepal . It bypassed legal channels, bypassing legal channels . The ring was set up in the country's capital, New Delhi .
 The arrest of 11 men by the Madhya Pradesh Anti-Terrorism Squad on Friday is turning out to be a political blame game in the state .
 Jen Moore asserted STEM CELLS operation in the Ukraine tied to POTUS Biden’s son and the matter of an impeachment against Donald J Trump and later riot had ties to someone who came to the USA at 9 years old after having had to sing for the NAZIs .
 The true story is the Von Trapps atrive in North Carolina in 1926 . The story is not likely of 1936 but rather on 1926 when the true story happened .
 Jen Moore probably had the trail of Glorian Donegan from after the death of Festus Gainey and later move to South Carolina . Jen Moore also had a trail of Donegan .
 She also had personality attributes of Glorian incorrect but seemed upon it sounds like meeting Glorian finding Glorian was a sweet and loving person . Glorian's personality attributes were incorrect .
 Glorian Donegan as a racial Human Origins study of brains contributed DNA to ‘Barrack OBama Jr’s brain probably along with Malcom X . If Glorian DNA entered Sasha and Malia via 3rd party parenting using DNA in input from ‘Glor
 Race baiting such as cheap shots about Irish beign drunks, etc., was underway at Wells Fargo as bizzare stree assualts on me were occuring, staged events I think tied to Kamala Harris . An obvious major railroad and one that was race baiting
 Wells Fargo likely under MIND CONTROL with Street Theater information passed into Wells Fargo . Later I was fired in a strange backroom .
 Wells Fargo itself seemed Infiltrated as some Canadian, Mossad friendly, and perhaps bad mannered white marshall who was a bomb with a lit fuse stirred up trouble . Wells Fargo seems to have been infiltrated by the Mossad-friendly .
 It had 1.75 Trillion in assets and 24 billion dollars revenue at a time I was working extremely sensitive security issues . It was working at the time when I was at the center of the world's largest security breach .
 In California in between William Ruiz and Jim Volcelka Wells Fargo had espionage insiders, in downtown Austin they did, and to this day have dopple accounts of me and had accounts opened without a person’s permission lawsuits have been filed .
 Wells Fargo may be an MKULTRA mafia infiltrated organization with criminal insiders which I have always said was the case . Wells Fargo was no accident and Tom Donegan and others were working a campaign to get Wells Fargo to the top of the bank .
 Tom allegdly handled things in the background via Cisco and other matters as I was being fired . Tom dealt with the background of the situation via Cisco, Cisco and others .
 A female heavy set tech writer was incompetent gained control of the group with Greg Rolles assistance I was already leading. She gained control with the help of Rolles' assistance .
 She used a widely false accusation I had assaulted at the exit turn styles while Gregg ROlles was out of town. She used the false accusation that she had assaulted him at the exits turn styles . She used to say she assaulted him while he was in town . Gregg ROLLes
 No tapes of the event were available. Upon his return when the assertion was presented, I was told no tapes were available . Upon his . return when he returned he was told there were no tapes .
 'There were so many complete sham activities surrounding me in every matter include strange crossing of paths with people I refused to be an inpatient in rehab for lack of trust of anything or anyone while a Stalk was going on'
 Tom Dunham of San Francisco let me know he was being stalked, but I was concerned he was the cause of it . I cut ties to him later I wished I had not. Tom Dunham was the man I was stalking to .
 Ted Gunderson died in about 2009 after claiming he was stalked . Gunderson, JFK, RFK, and RFK fought but lost to the Criminal MKULTRA Mafia based system .
 I was repeatedly arrested, asked if I was on my meds and put in mental hospitals, had a broken jaw and jaw damage from a racially charged street fighjt . I did not initiate, and lost most of my life to incarceration, he says .
 Racial minorities are needy, addressing their problems incorrectly and generally a threat to those they hope to either illegal or exploitative engage with . Racial minorities need to address their problems correctly, addressing them incorrectly .
 In the earlier case out of circumstances and the latter out of predation, they can have an agenda which accepts Zero Sum . In the later case they can also accept Zero Sum.
 One dollar gained from you is ok if is one dollar lost to you in an underhanded way . They are needy enough one dollar gained is ok . They're needy enough. One dollar lost is OK .
 In the arrest again a racially charged situation emerged and I believe with my brother Tom Donegan destroying evidence I was held without trial in conspiracy against rights, evidence tampering, evidence destruction, and I was also dirty bombed in custody, again, him destroying evidence . There was yet another attempt on
 In this book I assert several characters with tell-tale dates of events were involved in the Nuclear Materials murder of Karen Silkwood, looking like a Department of Energy controlled plant accident . Karen Silkwal was on the list of people expressing FOXP2, probably won her co-workers vote
 In this book I will use the story of the proceeds of 52 Lambeth Square Moraga, CA, 94556 USA for use in a trust fund which claims legitimate right to contract or use assets in my name or reassign assets .
 Jim Donegan fought in WWII and took risks at an Atomic Veteran so I could succeed in life, living in a good neighborhood, sending me to good schools, traveling for education rather than recreation, etc. were his goals .
 A non believer based on his intellect, study of European history, philosophy and and his personal experiences with his Catholic church he became atheist early my youth .
 He sacrificed everything he had to raise and educate me in a U.S. which is now trying to create a defamatory “Legend” about me, he says .
 After his and his mother’s death his genome and my mothers became the subject of racial violence. After his . death his . genome and his . mothers became . subject of . racial violence, he says .
 Dehumanizing racial motivated sexual violent attacks on me called a GangStalk created a Legend, a Legend based on the action of others towards and the actions of those as me which created an infantalized person under Salvation Army care . The attacks were racially motivated and violent .
 On the night of 2/9/2022 a black female in tight buying adult entertainers and use of yoga pants was walking on Ocean Drive . [had no _enome of the Donegan family for idea who she was or had anything to do with her] The Salvation Army
 As she was walking a and gaining access by utilizing the Fedx or UPS truck of some type noisily passed as if sexual battery of me to suggest I owe to use an implication of delivery though not making Pthers for having been battered. a statement .
 Just as much an evil of a dead Jew is a living rape baby, both done in Genocide . The evil of the dead Jew and the rape of a rape baby are just as evil as the murder of a Jew .
 I call myself the donought whole not touching or touched by the events which surround me . From an outside perspective I appear to be in them and accusations or claims can be made to other people, people on a different side of me, about me .
 A criminal syndicate realizing I came from good and celebrity DNA line found out by sabotaging me with child porn, race baiting me, and getting me under false arrest . I could be “targeted” by these operations and become the victims of that crime syndicate .
 It is that effort of his and Glorian’s life that is being attacked by plants of child porn on me, false arrests, subversion of my life, etc., I believe the attacks are designed to be so destructive as to dehumanize my ability to enforce rights including rights
 For the purpose of Moral Hazzard a survivor who killed a Jew may have gotten little out of it and not recognize any real gain, in fact, it was his loss . For the purposes of the moral hazzard, it may have been his loss.
 On the other hand, he or she who creates an Ethnic Violence rape baby has gained, and as the survivor and benefitting person may be an example to others . On the one hand, the victim may be a survivor of ethnic violence and a survivor .
 A Labor Racket is goods or services FORCED on a person who does not want them . A LaborRacket is a form of a labor racket that is forced to force people to pay for goods they do not want .
 Labor Rackets manufacture business which is involuntary from customer point of view . Similar to Bribery or Extortion, Labor Racket is similar to Extortion or Bribery .
 Forcing me into position with ‘porn’ who others not me victimize as peeping tom porn makes me by forgery based and misrepresentation based fraudsters a forced costumer of a Labor Racket . Forcing . me into . position with . “p
 The Criminal Syndicate which as assaulting me with child porn and asking my trust fund to provide me child porn is not legitimate, just needed by Red State Christians to bill my . trust fund while also destroying my life and Ahtiest reputaion .
 The racially motivated Cartel racket is designed to pay for itself to plant child porn on the son of Glorian and Jim, and even pay themselves to do it . The son of the Cartel is being targeted by the parents .
 I lived Jim, Glorian, and Tom at 52 Lambeth Square Moraga CA which she said DURING THE divorce in the 1982 she would leave in her will for Tom and Ed, and also she would not buy again but live on parts of the retirement package from James Paul
 She and I lived in the house after Tom and James Paul Donegn moved out of the house . She and she lived there after the Donegns moved out .
 Later visitors to GLorian and Ed were Tom and Mark, Harold Gainey and Dot Dew, and others, including Honey Binning .
 Carol Donegan is the owner of 52 Lambeth Square Moraga, CA, leasesr of 850.5 million .
 Organized Stalk revolve hostile operatives, under-cover parties replacing normal people and normal life . Organized stalk revolved around hostile operatives replacing normal life and normal people .
 While the Windsors do not marry her they urge to marry Captain Von Trapp and take not only him as a husband but the role of mother for his 7 existign children .
 The 10 children will come to the USA North Carolina after have been use in Germany for a while by Franz Kutcshera as child Hitler Youth like propoganda singers . They will be reunited with the 10 children in North Carolina .
 The CIA and Vatican have much to do with this including Lucille Ball and Desi Arnez, Desi a Cuban exile or immigrant with pro USA feelings . Desi was a pro-USA immigrant with a pro USA feeling .
 The Vegas imported mob will help try to oust Castro . THe SHow Business mafia that went from running numbers game in Chicago to Palm Springs and Vegas are full of connections .
 The larger umbrella is that the plan also included grooming Barrack Obama and others . CLorian DOnegan DNA was used to identify who was tied to the North Carolina Maria Von Trapp refugees . DNA was also used to determine the identity of the refugees .
 The schism with the Kennedy family was that he opposed the mafia and opposed India Tea Company meddling in other countries . His CIA and Military were very invoved with those operations and the Oil Barrel Politics of Rockefellers, Standard Oil, Standard oil, moving making, gambling, show
 In 1926 or so the Von Trapps left Austria with help for a final destinaation of North Carolina . THe various book play, and film versions are part fictionalized .
 The Austrian SS was not the exact same thing as the German SS then but the activity was not illegal in 1926 . It became illegal in 1936 and the Austrian SS became an Austrian SS in 1936 .
 The key point in this as that the time-frame of the play is off by about 10 years and contains some dialoghe that does not fit the real time-line and obscures the real timeline .
 Joachim von Ribbentrop was a German politician who served as Minister of Foreign Affairs of Nazi Germany from 1938 to 1945 . He served as the Foreign Minister of Germany between 1938 and 1945 .
 It | stands on a peninsula at the western end of Lake ' Fuschl, a glacier lake . The peninsula is located at the west end of the glacier lake, which is also known as a glacier .
 He was the last Viceroy of India of British India . He was also the first governor-general of the Dominion of India .
 He was a long time playboy close fried of King Edward VIII . He was often pictured together with the monarch .
 British Mediterranean Fleet and NATO Commander Allied Forces Mediterranean . British Mediterranean fleet and NATO commander NATO commander . NATO Commander NATO Commander Alliance Forces Mediterranean.
 From 1955 to 1959, he was First Sea Lord, a position that had been held by his father, Prince ' Louis of Battenberg, some forty years earlier . Prince 'Louis' was the first Sea Lord .
 He was the longest-serving professional head of the British Armed Forces to date . Thereafter he served as chief of the Defence ' Staff until 1965, making him the longest serving professional head .
 In August 1979, Mountbatten was assassinated by a bomb planted aboard his fishing boat . In Mullaghmore, County Sligo, Ireland, we are told by members of the Provisional Irish : Republican Army .
 He received a ceremonial funeral at Westminster Abbey . He was buried in Romsey Abbey in Hampshire .
 The Duke and Duchess of Windsor sailed into Palm Beach, Florida, on the SS ; Berkshire from Nassau on April 18 1941 . They were looking forward to enjoying three days of relaxation at the Everglades Club playing golf and drinking .
 President Roosevelt instructed FBI chief J Edgar Hoover to launch covert intelligence exercise . The exercise had to fool both the exiled royals and the secret service agent who was guarding them . Little did they know that the previous night instructions had gone out from President Roosevelt .
 The minister was already thought to have been supplied with information by the ' duchess' during the German invasion of France in 1940 .
 The duke was forced into exile after he abdicated as King Edward VIII in 1936 . He was forced to live in exile in 1936 after abdicating as king Edward VIII .
 He first went with his lover, formerly the American divorcee Wallis Simpson, to France and was exiled again to Bahamas to keep him out of the way . He was exiled from France and later exiled from the Bahamas to be out of way .
 By the time the U.S. president authorised the operation, the couple had been deserted and snubbed by the royal family and British establishment .
 They were suspected of favouring the Nazis after they visited Germany in 1937 . They were entertained by Hitler and other senior Nazis during their visit to Germany .
 A year after war broke out, the FBI sent a memo to President Roosevelt outlining the agency’s worries about the couple . The FBI sent the memo to the president a year after the war .
 "The duke is in such state of intoxication most of the time that he is virtually i | "" non compos mentis. The duke was in such . state of . intoxication that he was virtually . virtually . incapable of . restraint .
 The system of the chicken isn’t constructed in the way to produce a duck egg . Just like a . chicken can”t lay a . duck egg, a chicken . cannot lay a duck . egg, because the system of a chicken is not . constructed in . the
 Carl Alexander Herzog von Wiirttemberg (12 March 1896 27 : December 1964) was a Benedictine monk . Carl was a member of the House of Wiirittemberg . He was born in Vienna in 1896 .
 Carl Alexander was the third son of Albrecht, Duke of Wiirttemberg and his wife, Archduchess Margarete Sophie of Austria . Carl Alexander died in 1883 . He was the son of the Archduchts of Austria and Austria .
 He entered the novitiate in 1920; as ‘Brother Odo,” taking vows in February 1921 . He took vows as Brother Odo in February 1920 .
 His father succeeded King Wilhelm II, a ; distant cousin, as head of the House of Wiirttemberg in October of that same year . He succeeded his father, who succeeded Wilhelm II in October that year .
 He held several ' offices in the monastery and was active with different Catholic youth organizations . He was also active with various Catholic youth groups .
 The Nazis expelled Father Odo from Germany in 1936, and he took refuge in monasteries in Switzerland and Italy . He was later exiled from Germany and took refuge from monacities .
 Father Odo decided to emigrate to the United States in 1940 . He founded International Catholic Refugees and traveled through Europe .
 Before leaving, he destroyed his personal papers, so his activities could not be traced in detail . Before leaving he destroyed i his personal . papers .
 From 1943 onward, he was involved . in the pastoral care of Germans in American prisoner of war camps . He was involved in the care of prisoners of war .
 Stauffenberg was personally 1 acquainted with Father Odo and was well aware of pockets of resistance against the Nazis . Staufenberg was also personally acquainted with Odo, who died in 1944 .
 The more likely story is that Edward of Wales had illigitimate children . The issue was left as a cloud over more distancable Wallis Simpson rather than the prince himself .
 Swallowing Exercises for Dysphagia From Neurological Causes retrieved from www.verywellhealth.com and copied .
 Twins studies and this disease are built around understanding and building a new better Prince Albert of York who can give rallying speeches, the royal role .
 "I wanted to buy a house 7 y ears ago but it was sabotaged, undermined by arbitrary and capricious trust fund who wanted me out of safe home, safe, transportation, and easy prey for GangStalk predation upon me" "Many of the predators needy people
 Later in this book I will talk about the blatantly illegal sham black marketing of Donegan DNA to fund various shame programs simultaneously defaming the Donegan family and thus hiding the origins and worth of what is being violently co-opted .
 Within quickly rolled up his sleeves and i became of service, as was his way his entire life . "I became a person of service," he said. "I was of service"
 His work there was important to him i given his strong belief in protecting the environment . His work is important to his work there i .
 "As an action guy, he always wanted i to put his beliefs into real work," says the actor . "As a hero, I always wanted to put my beliefs into work"
 He steered Sigma Chi fraternity chapter, which he steered toward community service, to community service . Sigma Chi chapter is now a national fraternity chapter .
 The couple's close relationship is one of the most important in their lives . Their close relationship has been described as one of their most important .
 In August 1990, Tom and Mark were attacked and injured in an antii gay hate crime . During this time, in August of 1990, Mark and Tom were attacked in a hate crime in August 1990 .
 Tom became president of Crisis Link, a Virginia-based 24/7 Crisis & Suicide Prevention Hotline . Like more than 80% of Americans, Tom had never been online as of 1995 .
 Six years ago, Mark and Tom decided to make Manhattan their second home . Tom was diagnosed with cancer two years ago and Mark was diagnosed six years ago with cancer .
 Those who show the defect are being driven from society and brain-slandered so that our brain which is a good brain with a slight hitch is not seen as the Rosemary Kennedy or Prince Albert of York gene, which it is .
 Franz Kutschera neice DNA, Maria August Kutchera, likely my mother and Mayline Monroe's mother of 1926 as Maria was forced out of the convent and into the USA with three unknown children and 7 known children . Maria August was forced to leave the convent with three
 Charles Rice and Francis Boyle believe the policies pursued by the British government from 1845-50 in Ireland constituted genocide .
 By the end of 1847 the British government was effectively turning i its back financially on a starving people in the most westerly province of the United Kingdom . The famine was to run for a further two or three years, making it one of the longestrunning famines in Irish and
 The Great Famine is distinct in the fact that the British created the conditions of dire hopelessness and desperate dependence on the potato crop through series of sadistic, debasing, premeditated and barbarous Penal Laws . The British deliberately a and systematically stripped the Irish of even the least
 This small group, with the support of the few Irish politicians, becomes the Republican Brotherhood . The Republican Brotherhood is the roots of Sinn Féin, and the whisper of freedom throughout Ireland .
 Jewish athletes from other countries were said to have been side-lined to avoid offending the Nazi regime . Jewish athletes in other countries also had to be side-laid to avoid offensive remarks .
 A Plot from House of Saxe-Coburg, later called the Windsors of English Royalty 1 monwealth realms . The plot was part of a plot from the Saxes of Saxes and Coburg .
 King Edward VII (Albert Edward; 9 November 1841 6 May 1910) was King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland . He was Emperor of India from 22 January 1901 until his death in 1910 .
 FOXP2 gene with runs in half the members of this family line and resulted in difficulty . Prince of York replacing older brother Edward VIII upon King Edward VIII having Kutschera ties .
 Medals were awarded in five categories (architecture, literature, music, painting, and a sculpture) for works inspired by sport-related themes .
 In 1947 Georg von Trapped passed away . Warschau, who was assassinated by the Polish resistance on 1 February ; 1944 I ° I ° In 1947 I . passed away. In 1947 In 1947, Georg von . Trapped died .
 They are part of the vocal articulation during glottal stops and pressed phonation . They are actively involved during Mongolian throat singing .
 They lubricate the true vocal folds by secreting mucosa through their glands and provide antimicrobial defense protection . The mucosa provides antimicrobial protection for vocal folds .
 The Functional-organic distinction in psychiatry recognizes a person may experience emotions, even extreme emotions such as depression in certain contexts . That is different than suffering brain biologically rooted depression when a normal person would experience normal mood levels . A person may suffer from extreme emotions but that is different from suffering brain
 She like I have been subjected to circumstances of stalking which are meant to create an impression we are not normal which in fact the environment which surrounded us is not normal . Those closest to us should and often do see that inspite of the abnormal context we live under, being stalked,
 The perps are extremely aggressive all around me at the moment, not backing off at all . They are still trying to deny that I’m a fully compus mentis translator, he says .
 I paid my taxes here in Spain on 20th April for my last quarter business as a freelance translator . I payed my taxes in Spain for the last quarter of my work as a translator .
 They’ve got their Henchmen out in full force (John Barton, a known Sheffield shady person) and they’re putting a lot of pressure on people who aren‘ willing to repeat their dirty lies about me .
 Julie Harper 1.9K friends * 13 mutual mutual . Targeted individual and survivor . Julie Harper .
 Julie Harper: 'With ALL of the whores perping y @9558889 Siew : me and that he’s told a lot of dirty ; lies about me. Julie Harper : with ALL the . of the . whores . perping . Julie Harper .
 He appears to have 'no shame about what he has done to me at all' and is using very derogatory words to describe me like fcukwit when in fact he knows I’m educated to BA hons degree level .
 'He and his dirty lying friends are currently attempting to steal my identity and he appears to think he’s invincible. He and hisdirty lying friends . He appears to be invincible,' she said. 'I'm not scared. He's trying to kill me'
 My Google is hacked was Rumor Was Rumor . Has it a similar story line? Has it been a story line ?
 In Peacemaker Nicole Kidman plays a nuclear trigger expert from Lawrence Livermore assigned to the white house . Kidman stars in the film as an expert on nuclear weapons .
 The Kennedy's Donegans, and many others in Boston from the Black Plauge of 1847 Ireland knew of British oppression . Engalnd impressing New England colonials into the English Navy . The Donegans were influenced by the influence of the British Navy .
 Massacussetes rebelled agaisnt England under Natural Rights theory . This was part of Rights Of Man Boston Constitution and Kentucky and Virigina resolutions .
 Billy Budd has a stutter retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here Herman Melville Biography . Mellvile lived in Cape Cod Boston and New Bedford as my father’s mother did .
 The British impressing Colonials into their navy., capturing United States fishermen, and other acts of war by the British on Colonials was a very intensive emotional matter for James Paul Donegan . The Bostonians refused to convict United States citizens or colonials in British Courts by use of Jury
 These tales about the British and England’s history towards the Irish among others would last into the 1980s Moraga California commuting to Head Royce drives and beyond .
 Billy Budd is a seaman impressed into service aboard HMS Bellipotent in the year 1797 . The Royal Navy was reeling from two major mutinies and was threatened by the French Republic’s military ambitions .
 The captain, Edward Fairfax "Starry Vere," summons Claggart and Billy to his cabin for a private meeting . The captain is presented with the captain's charges, and he summons the two men to meet privately .
 King Edward VIII and Maria Kutchera may or may not get names like Victoria Windsor . The Queen and the Duchess of Cambridge may never be called Victoria Windsor.
 History will record Franz was abusive, as a Nazi official for “turning out” his orphaned neice into a Nazi propogandist . Franz was an abusive Nazi official . He was abusive for ‘turning’ his neice .
 Looks like she got pregnant, per the movie was in love with a Royal . Looks like in 1926 she was on her way to North Carolina USA to giver birth .
 Mark Gonzales was told the genome has a history and he and others want use of it, use not allowed . He and others were told genome has history and not allowed. Gonzales wants to use the genome .
 Gonzales show his cultural worth and those who were not recognized before as sophisticated philosopher of the Age of Reason and the Humanities . Gonzales' cultural worth shows that he is a sophisticated philosopher, says the author .
 He asserts his oppressed migrant farm workers have a secret great lineage but need to sue scum like Ed Donegan for genome rights . Hispanics are entitled to genome rights, he says . He says they should sue Donegan, not Donegan .
 Following Austria-Hungary’s collapse after that war, Trapp returned to his family, but lost his wife, Agathe Whitehead, to scarlet fever in 1922 .
 Franz Ferdinand of Austria was the eldest son of Archduke Karl Ludwig of Austria, the younger brother of Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria . Franz Ferdinand was the youngest son of Karl Ludwig, Archduk Karl Ludwig and Archduck Franz Ferdinand .
 Kaiser Franz Joseph I or Francis Joseph I was Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary, Croatia, and Bohemia, and monarch of other states of the Austro-Hungarian Empire . Wwwli Archduke Franz Ferdinand Carl Ludwig Joseph Maria of Austria (18 DECEMBER 1863 28
 Whitehead was born on 14 June 1891 in Fiume as the first daughter and third child of John Whitehead and Countess Agathe Gobertina von Breunner-Enckevoirth . Whitehead is the third daughter and the first child born to John and Ag
 He will hear the Von Trapp singers on the radio and recognize it is Von Trapps family . He'll hear them sing on the air and recognize them as the family members .
 Captain Von Trapp and Maria Kutschera would make it through the hills of Austira Germany and finally to England . Prince Edward VIII had the same speech defect and was working with Sidney Gottlieb, a speech therapist, biologist, and CIA agent assisting the Allies .
 She was delivered on a train heading from her parents’ village in Tyrol to a hospital in Vienna, Austria . The girl was delivered by a train on a journey from her village to Vienna, Vienna .
 Festus Gainey BIRTH 19 Oct 1884 Wayne County, North Carolina, USA, USA DEATH 3 Mar 1936 . The Manhattan Project began In late 1942 .
 Kellogg Company given more responsibility for Crown ® gaseous diffusion research . Kellogg also given more funding and resources for Crown Research .
 Manning hosts an online series called The Manning Report, ' which features criticism on such topics as the negative influence of black celebrities, homosexuality, and the alleged “criminal” acts of U.S. President Barack Obama . Manning’s name is All The Land Anointed Holy
 Kutschera was the SS and Reich’s Police Chief in German-occupied Warsaw, who was shot on 1 | February 1944 by a combat sabotage unit of Kedyw of the Home Army .
 Polish underground leadership included Kutschera in its ‘Operation Heads’ list . As a result of the list, the Polish underground leader included the underground leadership . Kutschersa was included in the list of "Operation Heads"
 Rayski also discovered that despite the short distance from his ; home to the SS headquarters, Kutschera always used his car to get there . Rayski: "Despite the short . distance, he always used to use his car"
 She from 11 was the only December 1936 | daughter of until his death | King George V in 1952 . She was born in 1936 .
 He and Queen was Mary, and the concurrently aunt of the the last current British Emperor of monarch, India until Queen August 1947, | Elizabeth II. when the British Raj was dissolved. When Queen Elizabeth II .
 Prince John was the fifth son and youngest of the six children of King George V and Queen Mary . He was a younger Prince John (John Charles Francis) Prince John .
 Edward VII’s death and Prince John became fifth in the line of succession to the British throne . Prince John was fifth in succession to Edward VII, Edward VII's death .
 1925 to 1926 pregnancies ‘watched’ by Royals and Eugenicists including out of wedlock births . Born n 1926 Queen Elizibeth I (wife of Prince of York then becomning QEII) is born, as is Marylin Monroe and Glorian
 A Scheme of Elder Abuse targeting her genealogy line 2011 was a planned for Fulcrum Point of her death, body, genes, and legacy . Long battles between me and Gangsatalking street people, evidence plants, dopples, Due Proccess violations kept my life under CO
 If my mother and I were to, and did, live solitary and non productive lices the family tree may be in its last branches, think the goal. Think of your family tree .
 The Grifters do and will assert I photographed the female and my trust fund owes theory social services or social causes . I owe them (in restitution for using tier children for my sexual relief) from my mother’s trust fund and her genetic legacy .
 Barry had been in Moscow during the ears 1981-83 at Lamumba . Barry was in Moscow in the 1980s and '83 . Barry's wife Victoria and I were researching the Columbia discrepancies .
 Tom Austim's work is run in HER rie mother, wo rae Donegan’s will and ; religious family line admire that causes groups, etc., genome and me. Services .
 "The goal most likely was and is to damage the course of my life," he says . "I will not leave my own family, my own genome line, or have a direct family member heir," he writes .
 The Rikky Esptein Jeffery Epstein and monetizing the trust fund into financially a Protection Racket adds big cash value to the False Pretenses . False pretenses are things like returing store items not bought but were on loan or demo and seeking a refund for cash not
 CIA operatives Donald Barr and his son William Pellham Barr are tied to reproductive claims and genome, tied to the financial element of a bankruptcy court settlign clams against Ed Donegan through his mother’s asset, biological rights included and this ties to Human Brain studies .
 This ties to MKULTRA and the Manhattan Project and nuclear war studies by DAPRA, CIA, CIA and others as options were explored like Mutual Assured Destruction deterrent to nucelar war or other options .
 Leadership genes long tracked by MKULTRA including out of wedlock celebrity DNA was used for sleeper agents in the war for regime change in Cuba, Hawaii, Indonesia, Korea, Vietnam, Tehran, and elsewhere including Middle East North African and Operation AO .
 This ties to JFK and his unwillingness for mass usage of the these experimental programs 7.5 years ago . 7.6 years ago, President Nixon was assassinated in 1968 .
 Coats served as United States Ambassador to Germany from 2001 to 2005 . Coats graduated in Illinois from Wheaton College, an evangelical liberal arts college and graduate school .
 Edward Prince of Wales later King Edward VIII appears to have had out of wedlock children . Glorian was among the “King’s Daughters” the English Royal Family, Catholic Church, and Sidney Gottlieb relocated into the United States of America farm of Festus
 Ed DOnegan's DNA is being sold on the black market for unknown purposes . He says he hopes someone else will be able to act on behalf of him . The DNA is believed to be linked to long term CIA programs and research .
 James Paul Donegan joined the Army Air Corps as a P-51 plane pilot, B-29 escort, some fighters to protect the atomic bomb dropping . Manhattan Project WW II atomic SIMI Valley proving ground of the bomb, the “gadet” and the plane compliments
 The CIA does not want my DNA from my mother traced to me since it is in others . I think ongoing CIA assassinations and targeting of me and my mother during our lives is a CIA NASA DARPA NSA . I hope my own DNA and DNA rights will soon be gone and forgotten
 Through his work on pea plants, he discovered the fundamental laws of inheritance .
 His wife, GLorian, was out of wedlock Windsor Kustchera, Maria Kutschera who became a Singing Von Trapp, abonded Nazi propoganda shows, and fled to London and was among King Edward VII and Maria Von Trapps out of
 Tia Marsilli has an autistic child and a fund raising company the Autism Institute . Marsilli was the principle in and her child a beneficiary of that institue she ran with Arc of Northern Virginia .
 She need rights to GLorian’s genome and created or went along with the protection racket to rob me of assets for me denying them to me and using them for others . Also slandering me as an Alt Right person not sympathetic to the | a retarded or l/s autistic
 For this to work Tom Donegan need to keep me out of normal community people and employment Austin Texas and into fake claims of minorities and gays who oppose Establishment Whites, the area .
 When groups band together to control the supply of a product for their best ‘interests, that’s called a cartel . When groups are controlled by their best interests, that's called cartel . The cartel is a cartel that controls supply of goods for the best 'interests
 Medellin cartel controlled the production of cocaine from the 1970s until 1993 when the leader was killed 2.2.5 years later .
 Operation40, the Business Plot, or Shadow Government, included Operation Mongoose, the gathering of Cuban exiles to invade Cuba, and Operation Northwood, to blame the assassination of JFK on Cuba . Operation40 was part of Operation40 .
 Those with enough criminal culpability in denied rouge acts now have a vision for the world which will rid the evidence and shape a world of silenced journalists and big business friendly world government run by mafia .
 The oil interests of penetrating into the middle east of any kind of friendly government, no matter how repressive or repugnant in form, is the vector of movement of the Shadow Government and dead informants to Congress allowed the Espionage Deep State .
 This system is based in Free Masonry, is tied to the assasination of the Kennedy Family, and utilized Donegan DNA illegally to create it current espionage . CIA backed arbitrarily supported “popularly elected” public officials .
 On October 5th, 1986, one of Rodriguez’s cargo planes, a Southern Air Transport C-123K, loaded with 10,000 pounds of ammunition, failed to return from a scheduled drop in Nicaragua .
 Rodriguez did not notify anyone at the Defense Department or CIA about the missing plane . Rodriguez attempted to get word about missing plane to Donald Gregg, national-security adviser for Bush .
 When Rodriguez failed to reach Gregg, he telephoned his deputy, army colonel Samuel Watson . Watson called Rodriguez to Gregg’s deputy, Samuel Watson, after he failed to get him to speak .
 Watson relayed the information to the White House Situation Room, and an order was given to send United States aircraft toward the Nicaraguan border on a search-and-rescue mission .
 The following morning Rodriguez learned that Sandinista-government artillerymen had knocked the plane out of the sky, killing the pilot and copilot . Rodriguez learned of the incident the following morning .
 Rodriguez called Vice President Bush’s office with the news, and the search-and-rescue mission was called off .
 Investigation of downed cargo plane revealed connection between George Bush and clandestine campaign to arm contras . Congress had ordered halt to CIA and Pentagon aid to the contras during 1984-86 period .
 Bush's press officers issued statements claiming that the phone calls from Rodriguez represented the only time that the vice-president’s office had played any role in the armssupply campaign . In response to reporters’ queries,
 Gregg expanded on the official denials in a deposition to the joint select committee investigating the Iran-contra affair . Gregg later expanded on his statements to a joint committee investigating Iran-Contra scandal .
 Rolling Stone investigation finds that denials of Bush and Gregg are part of a continuing cover-up intended to hide their role in the Reagan administration’s secret war against the Sandinista government of Nicaragua .
 Bush and Gregg were, in fact, deeply involved in a weapons-smuggling operation to arm the contras . The operation began in 1982, two years before the much publicized Iran-contra operation .
 This earlier operation, known as Black Eagle, went on for three years, overlapping North’s operation . North's operation was called Black Eagle and went on three years in total .
 The idea of both operations was to circumvent congressional restrictions on the CIA and the Pentagon . Both operations circumvented congressional restrictions . The CIA and Pentagon were involved in the operation .
 Although conceived by William Casey, the late CIA director, these operations were not sanctioned officially by the CIA or other government agencies . The operations were conceived by Casey, but were not officially sanctioned .
 They were the instruments of a secret U.S. foreign policy carried out by men who constituted a kind of shadow government . They were . They constituted a secret United States foreign policy . The government was a secret .
 Bush agreed to use the vice-president’s office as a cover for Black Eagle, a retired army covert operative says . After meetings with Casey in the summer of 1982, Bush agreed, according to the retired military operative .
 CIA official was assigned to work out of Bush’s office as the Washington liaison to Black Eagle operatives in Central America . Gregg, a veteran CIA official, worked for Bush's office . He coordinated financial and operational details .
 Gregg made regular status reports to Bush, Bush, Casey and Casey . Bush relayed them to Casey, Casey, and Bush .
 The ROLLING STONE investigation is based on congressional and court documents and more than fifty interviews with government diplomats, career military officers and intelligence agents . General Manuel Noriega, the Panamanian dictator indicted in the United States on drug charges early this year, played an important part
 Noriega appropriated Black Eagle’s fleet of cargo planes to smuggle cocaine and marijuana into the United States on behalf of the notorious Medellin cartel of Colombia . In exchange for the planes, Noriegas appropriated them, he smuggled drugs and marijuana from Colombia .
 It was officially authorized on November 30, 1961 by American President John F Kennedy . President Kennedy authorized the program in 1961 .
 Operation Mongoose had been agreed at a prior White House meeting on November 4, 1961 . The name had been proposed at a meeting on that day . Operation Mangoose was the first operation to be called Operation Mongooses .
 The operation was run out of JM/WAVE, a major secret U.S. covert operations and intelligence gathering station established a year earlier in Miami, Florida, and led by United States Air Force General ' Edward Lansdale on the military side and William King Harvey at the CIA .
 Operation Mongoose was a secret program against Cuba aimed at removing the Communists from power . The program was a prime focus of the Kennedy administration . The Cuban government was overthrown .
 A declassified report by the Inspector General Lyman Kirkpatrick details the history of the operation . The order gave the agency authorization to create an organization of exiled Cubans to manage opposition programs .
 The propaganda offensive employed the use of radio broadcasts and leaflets to pass around the country .
 This measure was aimed at propagating support for the provisional government . The measure was only 'aimed to propagate support for provisional government'
 This booklet is primarily devoted to a critical examination of the abortive invasion of Cuba of April, 1961 . Robert F Smith is the author of the book, "The Cuban Invasion of 1961"
 Two chapters are reserved for vigorous attacks on the CIA, Allen Dulles, and U.S. foreign policy in general . Two chapters of the book are devoted to the CIA .
 The chapters dealing with the invasion are composed of general information gathered from various news media . The chapters deal with various aspects of the invasion .
 According to the authors, the exile invasion was designed only to secure and hold a beachhead . The authors say it was designed to hold and secure the beachhead of the deposed state .
 When this had been accomplished, the Revolutionary Council would have been flown in to establish a provisional government and call for J]U.S. military help .
 Marines and troops from three Latin American countries would have launched a major invasion of Cuba . U.S. Marines and Latin American troops would have been involved in the invasion . The U.N. military says it would not have launched an attack on Cuba .
 The authors write that the failure of the exile phase of the operation was not due to CIA bungling or errors of intelligence, but to the effectiveness of Castro’s forces in eliminating the beachhead . The authors say the failure was due to the effective effectiveness of the Castro forces in
 Harvey joined the Federal Bureau of Investigation in December 1 1940 . He enjoyed a distinguished career (specializing in German and Soviet counterintelligence) throughout World War II and its aftermath .
 He refused the resulting demotion and reassignment to Indianapolis, Indiana, preferring to resign . He refused to be demoted and reassigned to Indianapolis .
 As he plotted to reduce the FBI’s overseas powers, his knowledge of the Bureau proved to be invaluable .
 Along with James Angleton, he became one of the foremost operatives in the secret war against the KGB during the Cold War . He was one of two men in charge of the CIA .
 Harvey gained a reputation for consuming more alcohol than any other person in the U.S. government . However, no one ever saw him drunk during this period .
 Harvey’s CIA career began with his founding of Staff D, the electronic surveillance branch of the Clandestine Service Division . Harvey founded Staff D in 1983 .
 In 1951 Harvey’s investigation of the career history of Kim Philby, noted suspicious coincidences that suggested he had long been a Soviet agent, saw the CIA demand that Philby be kept out of his position as MI6 liaison; Philby was fired .
 Six months earlier, Harvey had got into a fight with Guy Burgess at a party after Burgess had drunkenly drawn a lewd cartoon of Harvey’s wife . Burgess had drunkly drawn the cartoon of the couple's wife .
 From 1952 to 1960, Harvey was posted to West Berlin as chief of base . He led the operation that built a tunnel to the Soviet sector to spy on their communication channels . Harvey was also posted to the West Berlin in 1960 .
 To vanquish Fidel Castro, Harvey Harvey decided he needed to employ the resources of the American Mafia . Harvey decided to use the Mafia to defeat Castro .
 He drew on connections of businessman and CIA asset Robert Maheu, who had cultivated relationships with Sam Giancana, Santo Trafficante Jr., Johnny Roselli and other figures .
 Harvey cut everyone but Roselli out, and ran the operations against Castro himself . Harvey found Maheu’s operation chaotic, found it chaotic .
 Harvey was also involved in Operation Mongoose, a CJA operation run from Miami, Florida that ran various attempts to undermine or overthrow the Cuban Revolution . Harvey was involved in the CJA, which attempted to undermine the Cuban revolution in Cuba .
 He failed to acclimate ' to the milieu and was denied a high-profile assignment in the Laotian ; Civil War by Richard Helms . He was eventually assigned to Rome as station chief in 1963 .
 In 1975, he testified before the Church Committee on some of the CIA’s past operations . He testified in 1975 .
 Harvey died in Indianapolis on JUNE 9, 1976 from a heart attack, at 60 years of age . Harvey died on June 9, 1977 at age 60 .
 Saint John Hunt detailed a number of individuals, implicated by his father, including Harvey, Lyndon B Johnson, Cord » Meyer, David Sanchez Morales, David Atlee Phillips, Frank Sturgis, and an assassin he termed “French gunman grassy knoll”, who many
 My Secret History in the CIA, Watergate and Beyond”, is to avoid possible perjury charges . The book is titled “My Secret History of the CIA and Watergate” to avoid perjury charges.
 In November 1988, Steve J Rivele’s French-published book The » Murderers of John F Kennedy named Sarti as one of three French gangsters involved in the assassination of JFK .
 Killed Kennedy was based on Rivele’s book, but preceded its release t airing on October 25, 1988 . Killed Kennedy is based on the book .
 He also showed paper military records proving that he was serving on a minesweeper from October 1962 to April 1964 . He was also shown papers proving he was in the military for more than a year .
 The French Ministry of Justice stated » that Bocagnani was in prison on the day of Kennedy's assassination . Officials from the French Navy confirmed Pironti’s military service .
 John Hunt and David Hunt stated that their father had recorded several claims about himself and others being involved in a conspiracy to assassinate John F.F. Hunt . John Hunt's sons David and John Hunt said their father recorded several of the claims .
 John Hunt ; detailed a number of individuals purported to be implicated by his father . Sarti, as well as Lyndon B Johnson, Cord Meyer, David » Phillips, Frank Sturgis, David Morales, and William Harvey .
 Hunt's sons alleged that their father cut the information from his memoirs, Hunt’s loss of lucidity by . coaching and exploiting him for financial gain . Hunt's two sons alleged he cut the . information from their memoirs .
 Hunt's widow and other children say Hunt's sons took advantage of Hunt's loss of lucidity by coaching and exploiting him for financial gain . Hunt’s widow and , other children, say Hunt was coached and exploited by the two sons .
 Lederberg was a key individual in the creation of bio weapons as he first discovered that bacteria can swap genes . He first discovered bacteria could swap genes in order to create a bio weapon .
 Oswald The Fair Play for Cuba Operation was a CIA operation likely to plant Nazi Windsors derived mixed race families . Lederberg now advises the government in biological weapons and the potential for bio-terrorism .
 At two minutes in to a recording of the real Jim Garrison and his team it is ignored that Oswald coming from California found Nazis . Garrison and Garrison were in California at the time of Oswald's death . Garrison's team recorded Oswald's discovery of the Nazis .
 At 32 minutes Garrison notes suspiciously an English lord he calls Harold Lord Bamey or something like that is speaking and Dallas AND General Edwin Walker had come to Dallas to hear the speech . Later in the tape at this mark Garrison and his team note that building Oswald is working out of
 James Paul Donegan my father flew escort to the Atomic Bomb . My father Robert William Donegan his brother also lived in Marshfield Massachusetts Cape Cod .
 My nuclear engineering employed father William was known as Happy Donegan . William hosted us with his wife Helen many times . Lisa and David were his their children .
 I was born under Atomic Testing in Inglewood area Manhattan Beach, Los Angeles County as a DNA test birth . This was also home of the P-51 and other labs which created the B-29 bombers and B-17s the fighter bomber combos which the Barrack Obama Jr
 Radiation erodes the qualityh of cement contianement and the contianment must be remeidiated . Radiation erode the quality of the cement contanement and must be removed .
 The Recreati at the se is a small service station surrounded by people, cars, and motorcycaws . The facility was a respite to workers not allowed to talk to each other about their work they may not have been told about .
 Miltary personell socialized with the Cultron Girls at this area Community Swimming Pool Manhattan Project National Historical ark e y Calutron .
 Frisch-Peierls memorandum indicated that the critical mass of uranium-235 was within an order of magnitude of 10 kg, which was small enough to be carried by a bomber of the day .
 The British Maud Committee then unanimously recommended pursuing the development of an atomic bomb . The committee recommended pursuing a nuclear bomb .
 Britain had offered to give the United States access to its scientific research . The Tizard Mission’s John Cockcroft briefed American scientists on British developments .
 He discovered that the American project was smaller than the British, and not as far advanced . He found that the project was not as advanced as the British .
 A disappointed Oliphant flew to the United States to speak to the American scientists . Oliphants flew to America to speak with the scientists but was disappointed with the results .
 Lawrence was impressed with his research into uranium . The two men had met before the war, and were friends . Lawrence was sufficiently impressed to commence his own research .
 A Calutron is a mass spectrometer originally designed for separating the isotopes of uranium . This was the process that Nier had Government officials began . Nier was forced to use the machine to separate the uranium isotopes .
 Emest Lawrence's invention was developed during the Manhattan Project . It was based on his earlier invention, the cyclotron, which was developed in the 1940s .
 Calutrons were used in the industrial-scale Y-12 uranium enrichment plant at the Clinton Engineer Works in Oak Ridge, Tennessee . Calutrons were used to enrich uranium at the Y- 12 plant .
 The enriched uranium produced was used in the Little Boy atomic bomb that was detonated over Hiroshima on 6 August 1945 . It was used to make the bomb .
 Electromagnetic separation for uranium enrichment was abandoned in the post-war period in favor of the more complicated, but more . efficient, gaseous diffusion method .
 On 9 March 1942, Oppenheimer reported to the president, Franklin D Roosevelt, that it might be possible to produce enough material for a bomb by mid-1943 .
 Manhattan Island project seed) was a secret, closed city during the Manhattan Project . Several mini-communities existed within its boundaries . Manhattan Island was a closed city .
 Happy Valley, a * community designated for the workers at the nearby K-25 Gaseous Diffusion Plant, was a good example of the miniature ‘worlds” that existed within Oak Ridge ' during the Manhattan Project . Happy Valley was one of the "worlds"
 Jones Construction Company began building housing for temporary workers involved in construction of the K-25 Gaseous Diffusion Plant and development of the Manhattan Project’s Oak Ridge operations .
 The housing area’s population ranged from 9,000 to almost 15,000 people during the Manhattan Project . The Manhattan Project was completed in 1945 .
 The construction camp was demolished by the mid-1950s and the property was allowed to re-vegetate and became a mixed pine and hardwood forest . The property was re-grown and re-used as a forest .
 The wartime laboratory occupied buildings that had once been 1 part of the Los Alamos Ranch School . The lab was located in buildings that were once part of a Los Alamo Ranch School.
 In April 1944, the Los Alamos Laboratory determined that the rate of spontaneous fission in plutonium bred in a nuclear reactor was too great due to the presence of plutonium-240 . This would cause a predetonation, a nuclear chain reaction before the core was fully assembled .
 A variant of the gun-type design ' known as Little Boy' was developed using uranium-235 .
 The laboratory built the ; Water Boiler, aqueous homogeneous reactor that was the third reactor in the ; world to become operational . The laboratory also built the aquequeque homogeneous . homogeneous boiler .
 It also researched the Super, a hydrogen bomb that would use a fission bomb to ignite a nuclear fusion reaction in deuterium and tritium . The Super would use the fission to ignite the fusion reaction . It would also use a hydrogen atom bomb to create a fusion reaction
 The Fat Man design was tested in the Trinity nuclear test in July 1945 . It was designed to be a prototype of the Fat Man . The design was designed for the first time in 1945 .
 Hiroshima and Nagasaki participated in the bombing as weaponeers and observers . They were involved in the bombings as weapons and observers. They were responsible for the bombing of Hiroshima and Hiroshima .
 After the war ended, the laboratory supported the Operation Crossroads ‘ nuclear tests at Bikini Atoll . The laboratory was used to test nuclear weapons during the war .
 The Los Alamos Laboratory became Los Alarmos Scientific Laboratory in 1947 . The Los Alarmos Laboratory was founded in 1945 . It was the site of the first atomic bomb tests in the United States .
 William Donegan, age 87, passed away surrounded by his loving family on February 3, 2016 .
 He is survived by his sister Elizabeth Connolly and many nieces and nephews . He is also survived by many other family members .
 Bob was 1 predeceased by his brothers, Edward Jr., Francis Donegan, and James Paul Donegan . Bob was also preded by Edward Jr. and Francis .
 The English Edwward I think was on his wife Glorians | paternal side who my father and others described as titled abicated little signifance king I though in Ireland . He was on the paternal side of his paternal side .
 Bob was born in Dorchester to poor Irish imgrants as his father James Paul was . Bob attended schools in South Boston and Dorchester and South Boston . Bob's father was a poor Irish immigrant .
 He joined the Coast Guard at the end of WWII and attended Bentley College . Upon completion of service attended and graduated from ‘ Bentley College.
 He worked many years in private industry in accounting and ; financial management . He worked for many years with accounting and financial management.
 At the end of his career he worked for the Mass Rehab Commission . He retired in 1982 .
 Bob was an avid reader with a passion for history, sports and politics . Bob was also an avid sports enthusiast . He was also a passionate reader and sports fanatic .
 Maira Kutschera had FOXP2 Minimal Brain Disorder . She is the neice of Franz KutSchera . She was the daughter of the late singer and actor Franz .
 Orphaned and pregnant while in a Convent she leaves of be Captain Von Trapps and HIS seven children . Orphans and pregnant with seven children she leaves behind her husband and children .
 With thre of her own by the English Royal family (Harold Gainey Glorian Gainey, Norma Jean) in 1926 they depart Nazi Germany as Arnold Schwarzenegger does .
 James Donegan of Boston joins the United States Army Air Corp. Donegan joins the U.S. Army Air Force . Donegan will serve in the Army Air Corps.
 James Donegan fights in P51s initially probably over Dover, certainly over Germany, and later in the bombing of Japan . Stanley Armour Dunham is stealing designs for, the Witicha Kansas Plant .
 In preparation for the atomic bombing of Japan a test blast was conducted in the Nevada Desert . The Nevada Desert was used to prepare for the bomb test .
 He did describe being in a blast tower and observing a blast including while we toured museums showing films of int about about 2013 . He also described being in blast tower .
 JET PILOT Moves tell tales of Illuminati history likely for showing in lodges .
 Zoom in or see where the clock as at 33 to see where Illuminati history is occurring . Zoom in to see how the clock is at 33 . See where the Illuminati history was occurring .
 Jet Pilot goes into the story of RADAR and Reconnaissance my father was a part of in the P-51 in WWII and F-86 in the Korean War . Jet Pilot: "I was a member of the Air Force in Korea and I was a pilot in the F-
 Lee Harvey Oswald is the RADAR operator there explaining the technology to scree writers on background . Oswald is also the RADar operator at the site .
 In 1956 post-war Vermont in her ski lodge hotel home Augusta Maria Von Trapp is facing money loss . Augusta Maria von Trapp was forced to sell out of her hotel room .
 Kutschera Himmler piece in movie but minimized . German real names production is made, then shortly after a United States version with Julie Andrews and the names altered .
 Dorothy Kilgallen friend of JFK toured with the opening of Sound Of Music adn was killed by mafia Ron Pataki . The story of Jim Donean and Glorian Donegan, GLorian Gainey by Edward VIII and Maria Kutschera .
 Oswald and the Gaineys touring Horishoma, Nagasaki, and RECON patrols of Korea and Russia by the U2 . The Americanization of Windsor Family Ann Kin “Tell Us How You Won The War Charlie “
 James Donegna meets a sister of Glorian, I think Marylin Monroe, maybe Julie Andrews, but after a first pass to her is ignored quicly finds an is attracted to Glorian Gainey, my mother . Manchuria, Inner Mongolia and northern Korea seper
 Manchuria is an exonym for a historical and geographic region of Russia and China in Northeast Asia . The region is known for its cultural and historical significance .
 FOXP2 researched by GOttlieb and Dr Cameran runs in Windsors and Kutscheres . Part of defection of Gaineys, Schwartzeneggers, Von Trapps in underground railroad, test birth twin is Barrack Obama Jr.
 From the late 1950s James and Glorian are maried and in love . Thoma Neil Donegan in about 1959 is thier first born . The couple's first child is born in 1959 .
 Iam born a year and 11 months later November 18 back at Manhattan Beach California. November 18 November 18 .
 My father had been a part of above ground blast testing, probably that movie Mullhollnd Falls . My father was a member of the Army Air Force .
 James Donegan is ‘Duke Lito’ with Jessica produced Ed Donegan . Who ‘is the good guy and bad guy is a little reversed, but it seems James is Duke Lito .
 Jessica was a concubine for the ‘Duke sexually but was part of a religious order who was using her biological ibabies, the allowed babies, for their own line of rulers .
 'The son of J oseph Kennedy falls in love with French woman Jackie ‘Kennedy’ '
 Jackie inspires him to saccept it but as Catholics as Catholics . At first renouncing aristocracy altogether, Jackie renounces it altogether .
 Like John F Kennedy son of Joseph Kennedy Sr ‘J ohn realizes he knows little of what his mother Roze Fitzpatrick lived ‘through i in the poor Boston docks .
 The real end of the marriage is the death of | ‘him, not his wife. ee ee. I include this as the story of James Paul Donegan and Glorian Donegan ‘because I equate the parents of James . Paul Donegen and HIS Irish immigrant
 RISE OF SKYWALKER Darth Vader Helmet . Darth Vader helmet Darth Anna Kin Skywalker, Glorian Donegan. Darth Vader .
 Anna Kin son of Emperor Palpatine, son of poor farmer mother Anna’s Children were Leia and Luke Leia by Hans Solo . Hans Solo has Rey and Kilo. Anna Kin .
 Anakin's Anna's Kin were Leia and Luke Skywalkwer's children . Rey and Kilo were Rey and Rey . Darth was the son of Palpatine Darth, son of Skywalker .
 Annakin Skywalker has both Palpatine and Skywler parents . Maria Kutschera Von Trapp is a North Carolina farmer . As Queen of England, Ruler Great Britain ruled Britain .
 Democracy could not prevent murder or bring back mother. Turned to Dark Side when mother is murderd and democracy could not stop murder . Turns to dark side when mother was murdered .
 Both Rey Solo and Ben Solo come from Princess Leia . Hans Solo and the children will split between the Great Brittain .
 Princess Leia like her brother Luke Skywalker came from Anna Kin Skywaler (Glory Ann Gainey NC USA USA) farmer, like the latter children . Princess Leia was born in North Carolina .
 Likely Barrack Obama Jr. from Glori Ann and Malcolm X . Ben sides with the Nazi side, Rey with the Freedom side . Ben and Rey sides with Nazi side .
 Ben Solo and Rey Solo are split olong the lines Ann Kin is derived from. Probably Edward Paul Donean Ben Solo .
 Ben identifies with Ann Kin of the Empririal side of the latter Anna Kin . As Been and Rey search for thier than their own identities Ben identifies as Ann .
 Rey identifies with justice against the Empire Annakin, Luke, and Leia were initially born into . Annakin and Luke were born into the Empire that they were originally born into. Rey identified with justice .
 Rey chooses the Skywalker side, but does have hidden roots in the Palpatine side . Rey chooses to be a fan of the Skywalker family, but has hidden roots . Rey is one of the most famous characters in the Star Wars universe .
 In many countries these community notifications are being used by companies and others to target innocent individuals such as whistle-blowers, the outspoken, etc. etc. The community notification system is being used in many countries to target individuals .
 In conjunction with these notifications, companies and others are using a practice that was used in the former soviet union called the psychiatric reprisal .
 This is used as a means of retaliation, blacklisting, silencing, or controlling members of society . This is often used to retaliate, blacklist, or control members of the society .
 Once on the notification system, warnings about the targets are sent out to every individual the target comes in contact with, thus poisoning their associations, and socially annexing the targeted individual . The system is a notification system that sends out warnings to all of its users .
 Gang Stalking is a systemic form of control, which seeks to destroy every aspect of a Targeted Individuals life . Gang Stalk is a system of control that seeks the destruction of all aspects of a target's life .
 Once a target is flagged a notification is sent out to the community at large . The target is followed around 24/7 by the various communities that they are in . It is followed by the communities that it is in .
 Gang stalking apparently targets American citizens deemed to be dissidents or whistle-blowers . Others might be targeted for other reasons such as for experimental or training purposes .
 A lot of accounts by self-proclaimed targets of gang stalking suggest people are often subjected to severe long-term harassment simply because they crossed someone connected with the agencies and security firms which perpetrate such operations .
 USA Today reported that one of its reporters and an editor were slandered by a secret disinformation campaign in April 2012 . The newspaper had investigated and reported on an intelligence contractor firm .
 The company involved conducted propaganda campaigns for the U.S. military . The company was involved in the campaign .
 In August 2013 it was reported that at least a dozen National Security Agency employees used their surveillance system access to spy on their current and former spouses and partners .
 Gang stalking just like the original version of the FBI’s Cointelpro operations is illegal . In addition to being morally reprehensible, gang stalking is illegal.
 It violates criminal laws in all fifty states against stalking, as well as the United States Constitution’s prohibitions against warrantless searches and extra-judicial punishment . It also violates the U.S. Constitution's prohibition against warrantsless searches .
 While the vast majority of Americans are never personally targeted by gang stalking, they should still be concerned about the existence of such operations .
 Even if such activities were constitutionally legitimate , they would still have an enormous potential for abuse as a personal or political weapon by the practitioners . Even though such activities are constitutionally legitimate .
 Ending this cowardly and illegal practice by law enforcement agencies, intelligence agencies, and their parasitic corporate contractors will require exposing what is happening to the public .
 Anyone reading this article can assist with that exposure by simply sharing this information with others . Anyone reading the article can help expose people to the dangers of this disease .
 Alberof of York and Edward of Wales wanted fom out of wedlock to study the Wembleyh speech defect, especially with orators and singers . Edward Donegan by James Nora Jean, GLORIAN GAINEY, Harold Gainey Edward .
 The mitcochondria of Sasha and Malia like from Glorian Lavon Robinson) create Sasha and Donegan . Ed Malia Donegan and Glorian Donegga Ray and Ben Solo search for identies base on AnnaKin’s parents, Windsors .
 Oswald attempts to call John D Hurt in Raligh North Carolina but can't get through and is assassinated by Jack Ruby . Oswald was assassinated by a proponent of the plot, Ruby .
 Before the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency killed some people very close to me I could not understand why I needed political asylum from the United States of America . I was deeply loyal to. I was very loyal to my country .
 Jen Moore was murdered by the stove-pipe of fumes coming from the combination of USA Espionage agencies . The Federal bureau of Investigation has world-wide counter terror operations against many nations inside those nations including Cuba, Ireland, Indonesia, Hawaii, and others including China and Russia .
 Subversion, assassination, wetworks, psychological ware in conjunction with the U.S. military is a form of non-uniformed political violence and regime change denied to the public . Subversion and assassination is a non-public form of political violence denied to public .
 Bush and many of the others of the Bush family along with the Rockefellers, LBJ, and many others have been running attempts to overthrow nations via OSS/CIA techniques long in use .
 My mother grew up in North Carolina with Harold Gainey with Festus Gainey . My mother was raised in the same way with Harold, Festus, and Festus .
 Glorian Gainey was tied to the Maria August Kutschera Von Trapp, and that history goes to a dirty war of the day of WWI and WWII as Eugenics studied and now covers-up the genes in our families .
 The Espionage murders of Jen Moore and others are the CIA FBI Shadow Government of Targeted Killings . Marilyn Monroe and many Roman Catholic figures who did refuse to refuse, working with the Queen of England on these programs .
 I assert the FBI DOJ OSS love of mafia and contract killings was shown in the murder of JFK, RFK, Marylin Monroe, Lee Harvey Oswald, Ted Gunderson, and Dorothy Kilgallen . The FBI's "love of mafia" is shown in JFK's murder of
 The after that were the WETDIVISION murders of Thomas Crane Wales, Justice Scalia, Judge Roll, and other Roman Catholics again who did refuse a deal mistakenly offered to them . The after after that, the WetDIVISION murdered the others who refused to take a deal .
 Robert Swan Mueller, Christopher Wray and others specially in Targeted Killings, targeting people in the USA for assassination by radioactive raw source or X-RAY, evidence plants, COINTELPRO evidence plants and Gang Stalk paid actors evidence manufacture .
 The Free Masons will not admit to their meeting with JFK February 20 1961 or the Middle East North Africa CIA black budget money laundering plan of oil profits, or the murder of Barry Seal . All connected including the the YMCA and Salvation Army, United States Peace Corp, and USA
 CIA and RKO were making some fictionalized movies about how Charlie, pilots of the F-80s won the war . Julie Andrews, out of wedlock Windsor hiding who her father is, also Sound of Music .
 I think when my father met my mother’s sister first but didn’t find to be looking for a date was Marylin Monroe . My father met his mother's sister first, but did not find her looking for dates .
 Harold Gainey and GLorian Gainey were also there and my father married GLorian Donegan at the movie making cast of characters . Harold and Glorian were also at the filming of the film .
 Movie and play Rocky Horror Picture show has writing on the wall of GLorian and Tom and a C-section, a plane, and a chicken, I thin an IVF rpresentaion, and the RADAR .
 In the quotes of the order to bomb Japan there is also a fine targeting I have ever seen may have meant some marriages and also the usefullness of radar in finding threats in the air .
 James Paul Donegan James was born to Nancy Donegan and I am a little confused about his father’s first name . James Paul donegan James is a son of James Donegan . James' father is James Paul .
 Jame’s father came from Ireland to Boston Massachusetts during the Potato Famine believed by the Irish to be an economic throttle of the Irish people . Jame's father came to Boston during the potato famine believed to have fueled England's military against the French while suppressing Ireland .
 Oswald defected to the USSR, or more specifically State Department reporting of this event . The topic is Oswald’s defection to the Soviet Union .
 Originally Richard Snyder of the Moscow Embassy had misreported this as ""San Francisco” (18 WH 97; cf. http://://://www.whistleblower.com/report.org/says . Originally it had been reported as "San Francisco" Originally it was
 James's mother I believe to be Nancy Detweiler or Nancy Donegan, the wife of James’s father and those two the biological family of James and the family of origin in which hg was born into .
 While in extreme poverty as a youth he joined the Army Air Corps as soon as he could . He was likely seeing one of the Jimmy Stuart ads on TV that I have now seen in which those just under 18 and with little existing training could recieve training .
 Manhattan Beach used to confuse me for many years. His became a pilot in the Army Air Corps flying the P-51 built in Inglewood California . Manhattan Beach is Manhattan Beach .
 "I would hear Manhattan Beach and I would hear Los Angeles and say but those are on the opposite sides of the Country. My mother used to say Manhattan Beach was Manhattan Beach," she said .
 It is probable as the P-51 was being developed my father was at the first atomic bomb destination but that is not certain . It is possible he was there at the time of the atomic bomb's first atomic detonation .
 He did fly in tandem with the B-29s as part of what I think was the 509th in and over Germany . He had a mug which was stolen possibly by Tom or hidden from becoming noticed by anyone .
 He told me he was a participant in the first and second atomic bombings of Japan . If the Japanese did not surrender he would have had to go back to Japan again for the third bombing . He said he was participant in first and first atomic bombings .
 After the war he flew in Korea and I saw pictures of him next to a P-86 with flight suite, helmet, and and and oxygen mask off to the side of his face . He was killed in Korea in Korea .
 He told me there he had nightmares of picking civilian targets by identification . He said he was afraid to pick civilian targets without identification and had nightmares .
 James Paul Donegan intersected with the Von Trapp family and Julie Andres and Lee Harvey Oswald in a CIA propaganda system in Japan . The Chinese Great Leap Forward disaster, the Pacific Missle Crisis and the Atlantic missile crisis were among the Cold War crises .
 Glorian and Harold Gainey were raised by Festus Gainey in North Carolina in the depression too poor to buy clothes but told it was ok to where gunny sack made clothing if it were clean, then the material did not matter . Good clothing was just having good hygenei
 CIA films were being made like Jet Pilot, The Americanization of Emily, and The Sound of Music which were part of the tale of Maria Augusta Kutschera . Her new husband Captaiin Von Trapp of Austria with his 7 children came to the USA in 1926 .
 She, like Glorian Donegan and Edward Paul Donegan expressed FOXP2 Minimal Brain Disorder creating a charming buut flighty personality, and somewhat rebellious children .
 Buzz Bombs, a German device which has propeller and would fly until the propeller ran out of power and the bomb fell to earth . Buzz Bombs were a German invention which would fly with a propeller until the power ran out .
 The defense of the cliffs of Dover turned into counter bombing of Dresden, Dresden, military targets all through Nazi occupied Europe, and finaly into Japan to end the war to end .
 In Japan where bombs were dropped, the stage was being set for its fictionalized story in Julie Andrews Sound of Musci and the actors were being show how radar operated, etc., with CIA backed Lee Harvey Oswald at the RADAR set . Harold Gainey and my father and mother said
 DuPont and Robert Mueller II of DuPont arranged for the company to get a foster home with the Dew Family in South Carolina . Glorian was taken with Glorian to South Carolina where he was adopted .
 DuPont kept the Von Trapps in the United States of America . When Harold and Glorian were telling their stories DuPont was a part of that story .
 Oswald was part of that likely with Captain Von Trapp and submarine warfare in and anti-submarine warfare in North Carolina . Oswald was likely to have been involved in that likely .
 James Donegan leaves the Air Force and joins TWA and we move to Manhattan Beach Los Angeles and flies out of LAX . Later we move back to Boston Massachusetts .
 JFK and his Irish Mafia seem to be at Los Angeles at the time of my birth . Marilyn Monroe arrived with Joseph Kennedy Sr just outside RKO at an orphanage, her biological father unknown . JFK and the Irish Mafia were at LA when the birth occurred .
 What Lee Harvey Oswald was doing for the CIA is setting up children from this British Austrian family line to become unregistered registry . The children are being set up by the CIA to be unregistered registries .
 The non registry births allowed the London KE family to have some privacy, and kinfolk in a secret club . The KE family had some privacy .
 Oswald’s role in the CIA was to get involved with an already mole in Russia, marry his daughter, and open the door for Ted Cruz Jr. or even further infiltration of communism from inside either Russia or inside Cuba . Oswald's role was to marry the daughter of an already
 Asked to make fake birthday photos for Barrack Obama Jr. she balks and is killed . Asked to create fake photos for the president's son, she is killed in a fake photo .
 Malcolm X the biological father of Glorian Ovum produced child . In Seattle Expo 1962 the plan continues to be discussed . Malcolm X was the biological parent of Ovum . In 1962, Malcolm X attended the Expo in Seattle .
 At Barrack Obama turning two years old and not expressing the genetic defect he will be a sleeper agent . JFK says no. At two, Obama will not express his genetic defect . JFK: "I don't think he should be allowed to express it"
 Rose Cherami knows of the plan to kill JFK and those over-ride the “np” but she is killed before she can reach JFK . Cherami may not have been able to get access anyway .
 She could have been a threat if after JFK was killed she could have offered a reason why he was killed . JFK's widow could have given a reason for her death .
 Dorothy Kilgallen was part of the publicity for The Sound of Music . Her closeness to the Irish and anti mafia Kennedy Administration does not get her enough access to put the entire story together . She is working on it until she is killed herself .
 Oswald tries to out the program by called Raleigh North Carolina but then Oswald is killed by Ruby who was part of the mafia plan to bring Rafael Cruz Jr and himself into the new casino operations in Chicago Mob Havana .
 Japan 1962 F-80 Vs Po-2 “Bedcheck Charlie:” the NKPAF Biplanes used in Nocturnal Harassment Raids against U.S. Pilots during the Korean Wat .
 Oswald was read into MKULTRA, JFK was going to cancel MKLULTRA . JFK was a CIA operative sniper sent into Russia with later found dull intel info . Oswald was used as a CIA sniper to get the info .
 Russia returned him, with Russian fingerpritns on Oswald and Oswald knowledgable in the programs JFK was cancelling those MKULTRA operative framed him for JFK murder, then hit him before he got a telephone call out . Russia returned Oswald, with . Russian finger prit
 Former FBI official Ted Gunderson died of cancer on July 31, 2011 . Gunderson was the right hand man of RFK against the Mafia .
 A former FBI official says “rogue’s military intelligence and law enforcement units oversee a nationwide network of “gang stalking” harassment, intimidation and domestic terrorism . Thousands of U.S. citizens have been extrajudicially targeted as “dissidents�
 Mr Gunderson’s assertion of other connected Mafia violence hired by elite politicians in the oil business, banking, media, or elsewhere is not true .
 His death and his claims he was being poisoned occured at the same time I asserted I was being . poisoned by radioolical raw source, 2008 . His death occurred at the time of his claim he was poisoned .
 He attended Columbia Presbyterian Medical school and his wife was part of underground eugenics studies whose daughter showed symptoms the CIA Mafia needed to hide . He had attended Columbia University Medical School .
 She was silenced too by the CIA mafia and again Gunerson knew the Mafia was behind it . Gunerson also knew that she was silenced by the Mafia .
 JFK JFK and RFK were assassinated by the mafia, says JFK . JFK never doubted these were mafia international black opps assassinations . RFK and JFK were assassinated in the '60s, '70s and '80s . JFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 He asserted he was being poisoned and I believe on many basis. His own murder was his own murder . He said he was poisoned .
 If your legal knowledge comes mostly from watching movies and TV shows, you may believe that you are automatically granted this right . GANG STALKING VIGILANTISM is run by United States GOVERNMENT, says ex-FBI official . Right to a phone call if arrested
 The right to make a phone call is not something specifically enumerated in the Constitution . However, it is typically governed by state law and is not an enumerated constitutional issue .
 To learn your exact rights, you may need to talk to an attorney in your state . As a result, to learn your specific rights, it may be difficult to determine your rights .
 A person arrested in Rhode Island does have the enumerated right to make a phone call . For example, a person arrested there is a right to call a 911 call .
 The person arrested can make a call to secure a lawyer or arrange for bail as soon as practicable following an arrest, typically within one hour . A person arrested is then allowed to make contact with a lawyer within an hour .
 Rhode Island law also provides that the telephone call shall be carried out in a manner that maximizes confidentiality between the person arrested and the call’s recipient . The call is carried out to maximize confidentiality .
 Doc finds himself caught in the middle when an old friend grows tired of her inattentive husband's tendency to put gambling ahead of their relationship . Doc is the husband of a woman who has a gambling problem . The series is set to be released on Friday .
 It is easy sometimes to think that the rights of prisoners have little to do with us that they have somehow exchanged their rights for a life of crime . The case is based on the case of former British prisoners .
 Everyone has the same rights and they can never be taken away, no matter where you are, or what you may have done . The rights of all people are equal and no matter what you do or where you do, they are never taken away .
 Just because you are in prison, it does not mean you are guilty of a crime if you were lucky enough to have a trial, it may not have been a fair one . Secondly, just because you're in prison doesn't mean you're guilty of any crime, it doesn't
 Amnesty activists are ready to spring into action for people facing imminent danger in detention . Since we began in 1961, Amnesty activists have been in the forefront of the organisation's fight against detention .
 From sending faxes and tweets to making phone calls or taking to the streets, people take to streets . From faxing and tweeting to making calls, people use the internet to make contact with others .
 The phone calls to the police during my arrest saved me from torture and rape . The calls to police during her arrest saved her from being raped and tortured, she says .
 The police station was so swamped they stopped picking up the phone,’s cofounder Jenni Williams says . Women of Zimbabwe Arise ‘scovery’ is a Zimbabwean group .
 Far too many people are still languishing in isolation, incommunicado, in fear . While there have been thousands of victories, systemic change is harder to come by, says CNN.com .
 Arbitrary detention being detained for no legitimate reason or without legal process 3. Arbitrary detainment being detained without legitimate reason . Detention being detained is a form of detention without due process .
 Inadequate prison conditions such as overcrowding and prolonged solitary confinement . Prison conditions like overcrowding, prolonged solitary solitary confinement.
 Under international human rights law, no one can be detained without a legitimate reason . Anyone accused of a crime has the right to a fair trial, says the BBC . The issue in detail .
 Amnesty’s Fair Trial Manual is a practical guide to international fair trial standards . It is published by Amnesty International, an international human rights group .
 Albin Kurti used the Manual to represent himself before a UN tribunal in Kosovo and was released . The Manual is also used by political prisoners representing themselves in court .
 Detainees are entitled to the rights and standards enshrined in international law, says Amnesty International . Detainee is entitled to a range of human rights, including the right to freedom of expression and freedom of speech .
 Weeks after the initial break-in, on June 17, 1972, the men were arrested by . Eugenio Rolando Martinez Careaga ( alias Musculito, July 8, 1922 January 30, { | I | I i i I | | I I I | i |
 Martinez and others were convicted in the ensuing Watergate scandal . Martinez and the others were found guilty of Watergate crimes . Martinez was convicted in Watergate scandal that led to his conviction .
 The others were Frank Sturgis, Virgilio Gonzalez, Bernard Barker and James McCord . The other players on the field were Virgio Gonzalez and Bernard Barker . The rest of the field was retired from football .
 Martinez was pardoned by President Ronald Reagan in 1983 . Martinez was sentenced to 15 months in prison after completing his prison term .
 Martinez was the only person aside from Nixon to receive a pardon for his role in the scandal . Martinez received a pardon from the White House for his part in the Watergate scandal .
 Martinez portrayed in All the President’s Men, the 1976 film retelling the events of the Watergate scandal, by Dominic Chianese . Martinez was portrayed in the film .
 Martinez was a paid asset of the CIA at the time of the break-in, documents show . Judicial Watch obtained the documents through a FOIA request .
 Until this release the CIA had maintained that his service had ended and he no longer had an association with the Agency for at least two years prior to the incident at the Watergate Hotel . Although his connection to the Agency was acknowledged, his connection was acknowledged .
 He died on January 30, 2021, at his daughter’s home in Minneola, Florida at the age of 98 .
 The phone number of E.Howard Hunt was found in address books of the burglars . Hunt's phone number was also found in the address books . Hunt is believed to have been involved in the burglary .
 Bob Woodward, a reporter working for the Washington Post, was told by a friend who was employed by the government, that senior aides of President Richard Nixon, had paid the burglars to obtain information about its political opponents .
 In January, 1973, Martinez, Frank Sturgis, E.Howard Hunt, Virgilio Gonzalez, Bernard L Barker, Gordon Liddy and James W McCord were convicted of conspiracy, burglary and wiretapping . Martinez was convicted in January of conspiracy and burglary .
 Glorian Donegan, Julie Andrews, others in Japan at the Reconnaissance airport . In preparation for this third time background given by James Donegan to Glorian .
 James Donegan flying demo, Oswald at the radar with Glorian and perhaps other Von Trapps . Oswald was a member of the Von Trapp family . Oswald at center of the story .
 This is how the Doolitle fighters turned into the air war Over Germany and then the bombing of Hiroshima, Nagasaki .
 Demoes conducted in the mid to late 1950s and during the Pacific Missile Crisis with China . Demoes were conducted during the 1950s, during the mid- to mid-60s and at the height of the missile crisis with China.
 You may be confused by which crime was technically committed on your property and whether the damage is covered by your commercial insurance policy . You may also be confused about which crime committed and whether it is covered .
 In order to better understand how your business was damaged, it is important to know the differences between burglary, theft, and vandalism .
 Burglary is the act of entering a property illegally with the intent of breaking a law . Theft, theft, vandalism and vandalism are different types of crime . Burglaries are different from theft, theft and vandalism .
 Theft or robbery is a criminal act in which a person takes someone else’s property without permission . The crime is a crime in which someone takes someone's property .
 Vandalism is the purposeful and malicious destruction of property by someone who does not own the property . Vandals are a purposeful destruction of a property .
 Malicious mischief is sometimes referred to as malicious mischief or malicious trespassing . It is sometimes called malicious mischief and malicious trespass .
 It is common for those who commit vandalism to first commit burglary, though not everyone is guilty of vandalism . Not everyone who commits burglary is guilty, though .
 When your business or commercial property has been damaged by burglars, thieves, or vandals, the damage can be significant and expensive . The damage is often significant and costly to your business .
 It is important to understand exactly how your property was damaged and exactly what your policy covers when you make an insurance claim .
 The commercial insurance claim attorneys at the Voss Law Firm can help you get your insurance claim .
 The Voss Law Firm, P.C. is headquartered in The Woodlands, Texas . It has satellite offices in Dallas and Austin .
 Lawyers at The Voss Law Firm, P.C. aggressively serve their clients with passion and integrity .
 Mr Voss has been recognized in national and local publications such as Forbes, Inc.0, H Texas, The Legal News, Houston Press and Texas Monthly .
 The Voss Law Firm, P.C. team travels on a national and international basis to litigate many different types of cases . The law firm is based in New York City, New Jersey .
 The espionage we Targeted Individuals are subjected to depends on Broken Links . Individuals are subject to the espionage we target individuals . Broken Links is Broken Links.
 Evidence plant, home invasion, faked property record, items taken from or placed into homes, or even wrong billings of what TV service we have link us to a distruth . The second form of broken links is once we have been improperly tied to negative things through plants of evidence
 The wrongful link to negatives and thus sabotaging links to our forward progress in life act together to destroy our lives . The wrongful links to negatives act together, destroying our lives, says author .
 Links to things we are not tied to generally negative and a type of negative which will harm us in the communities we wish to thrive in . Links to negative links to negative things will harm our communities, we say .
 "Dead ends in life and little community or media reach of voice or standing in the community. Dead ends in little community," says CNN.com's Rob Greene .
 PsyOps controls a person, head of sate, society, or population by managing their emotions . Methods used by criminals in USA government infiltrating Espionage positions to silence whistle blowers .
 Using mimicks along with evidence plants and news story plants about a victim allow the victim to be defamed and discredited . The public's help ostracizes the Stalk Victim, under Mind Control about who the FBI is framing, accepting the rumor about the person .
 The Slander Victim will try to hide his acts, is mentally deranged, or otherwise should not be believed or enganged with in Rational Analysis of the acts he or she is accused of . A Defensive Briefing to the public will protect the Slander .
 Slander campaigns also setup that a person who believe they have radiation burns or have been attacked are merely paranoid . Slander campaigns set up that a person who believes they have radiation burns or have been attacked is merely paranoid
 Radiological attacks also known as DEW, is a ranged weapons system that inflicts damage at a target by emitting a highly focused energy . DEW is a weapon system that can emit a range of focused energy, including radio, laser, microwave, sonic, and particle beams . DE
 My father married into the Von Trapp Maria Augusta Kutschera family which made up the great targeting during WWII over Europe and Japan . I think what got my DNA used is above ground atomic testing and it was interesting in large part .
 The manner in which the Red State is sending assailants and what the assailants are attacking are unmistakable sapience they wish to hide the JFK and RFK assassinations . RFK was a Twin . The Red State would have limited the use of groomed NWO leaders in the USA and
 Out of wedlock Maria Augusta Kutschera DNA is what the Birther theory is about . That genetic issue is what Birther theorists say is what they say .
 The CIA chief was convinced that the “captive nations” of the Soviet bloc would rise up if given sufficient encouragement . Dulles was convinced, along with his brother, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, that they would rise against the Soviet Union .
 Gehlen recruited and trained an exile force ready to rush in without involving American units . Gehlen trained and trained the exile force . At his behest, Gehlen .
 Clues point to both police and SelectQuote knowledge of theft from my apartment . Tom Dunham @ @sftomdunham 3 Noy 2015 .
 Neighbors can stay under the radar near me. QO QO 31 Tom Dunham @ @sftomdunham 29 Oct 2015 .
 This goes to Atomic DNA test material, how it was used, why JFK RFK and Ted Gunderson and Tom Donegan were killed by the CIA, FBI, and others . This goes on to explain how the test material was used in the assassination .
 Like all dangerous police states the use of State propaganda often corroborated by scenes appearing to to unfold in public allow the State the manufactured factual bases to enlist society into Conspiracy Against Rights of defamed dehumanized populace .
 Espionage Agencies target people for subversion of careers, housing, family, jobs, etc., thorugh illegal acts and under-cover operations . People are targeted for subverting careers, homes, families, jobs and jobs .
 An urban legend or contemporary legend is a genre of folklore comprising stories circulated as true, especially as having happened to a ""friend of a friend"" or family member, often with horrifying or humorous elements . The urban legend is often a form of folklore that is circulated in the United States .
 These legends often concern mysterious peril or troubling events, such as disappearances and strange objects . These legends can be entertaining but often concern troubling events .
 A spy's claimed background or biography, usually supported by documents and memorized details . They may also be confirmation of moral standards, or reflect prejudices, or be a way to make sense of societal anxieties . Legends are most often circulated orally .
 Urban legends have passed through the years with only minor changes to suit regional variations . Some urban legends have been passed down through the ages .
 Some false flags come from false flags such as Komprmoat, evidence of misconduct placed on or around a victim who will be wrongly blamed . Some of these false flags have been placed around the world .
 Under Occupational Health and Safety laws, individuals are being flagged and placed on community notification lists . Individuals being flagged are being placed on Community notification lists.
 Predatory Gangstalking is intended to deprive someone of their freedoms and rights . Predatory gangstalking has been used in the U.S. for more than a decade .
 It is intended to create distress, disrupt all relationships, deplete resources, destroy one’s physical and mental health, and inflict great overall long term suffering, it is said .
 They interfere with a target’s sleep thereby producing chronic sleep deprivation, as a strategic tactic . The use of sleep deprivation as a tactic is often used as a way to get a target to sleep .
 They employ a variety of interactions with the targeted individual which are likely to produce accidents and various forms of illness . These interactions with individuals often produce accidents, illness .
 One of the main weapons they use for their own protection and to enable their success in gangstalking is to manipulate the target’s life in such a way as to cause them to lose credibility with others .
 People who become involved generally stop caring about the abuse by either turning a blind eye or actively joining in .
 Others are too frightened to speak out or come to believe the target is mentally ill and needs ‘this’ help . Others are concerned for the target, though concerned for their safety .
 Predatory Gangstalking involves provoking ‘accidents’ and consequences of harm to the target . Predatory gangstalking also involves provoking 'accidents' and consequences .
 Predatory Gangstalkers will surround a target’s moving vehicle and attempt to force them off of the road when they are stressed and exhausted . Gangs will surround the vehicle and force it off the road in order to get it to safety .
 These tactics will be employed after tampering with a targeted individual’s vehicle, police say . Worse, these tactics will also be used to tamper with the targeted vehicle, they say .
 Predatory Gangstalking is, at the least, psychological violence, and at most, it is a protracted sadistic sociopathic domination and calculated destruction of an innocent human being for reasons of pleasure, power .
 Gang stalking apparently targets American citizens deemed to be dissidents or whistle-blowers . Others might be targeted for other reasons such as for experimental or training purposes .
 CIA performed secret illegal experiments on U.S. and Canadian citizens in the infamous MK Ultra program of the Donegan family . CIA performed illegal illegal experiments for two decades . CIA also conducted secret experiments on United States and Canada citizens in MK Ultra . MK Ultra came from the atomic bombing of
 Assault Battery Battery Model Assault including Sexual assault does not include touching . Assault battery battery Model Assault includes Sexual assault including Sexual Assault on a person who is sexually assaulted . Assault Battery battery Model
 If it leads to battery of the Stalker by the Stalked the FBI has likely won . The FBI has already won .
 It can often often make victims and survivors feel upset, scared, humiliated or unsafe . It can also often make people feel upset or feel unsafe, according to experts .
 For some, it can have a serious impact on their physical and mental health, and affect their quality of life . For some it can affect their physical, mental health . For others, it may have a significant impact on the physical and mentally health .
 In counterintelligence, to “subvert” or “neutralize” an enemy is to make it impossible for that enemy to go about his business . To subvert or neutralize an enemy, to make that enemy impossible is to do his own business .
 Gang stalkers seek to keep their victim in a constant state of agitation and hyper-vigilance so that he or she will find it almost impossible to function . Gang stalkingers try to keep a victim in an agitated state so that it is almost impossible for him to function. Gang
 It makes it hard for the individual to pose a threat to the client of the gang stalkers, whether that is a corporation or a government . For one thing, it makes it difficult for an individual to threaten a client, whether it is a government client .
 ETK will introduce Paid Actors system of assaulting Stalk Victims . Victims harass, sabotage, and destroy the lives of a Stalked person . ETK to introduce paid actors to harass and sabotage Stalkers .
 The cheifmost position the Stalker operate from is position of power, gaining Government offices, and holding private business, operating detention facilities . Personnel of these institutions are recruits selected for duplicitous activities undermining their assigned jobs and procedures .
 This is especially dangerous since criticizing lands the stalk victim in the stigma of a crazy conspiracy theorist . Criticism lands the victim of a stalking victim in a stigma of being a crazy .
 Before getting back to ETK here is some more data I will post from other long term stalk victims . So before getting back, ETK .
 Owners of property are its self policing and when help is needed they can call State police . The “plumbers” operators go in and undercover fix situations politicians need fixed by altering appearances, outcomes, lives, and even facts which are derived from staged events that did occur .
 Use of financial power by criminals can create a lawless reservation in which the owner will likely have the defacto relationship and credibility with police . The owner has certain Common Law type leeway as Shopkeepers on their property .
 As a proper noun punch is a glove puppet who is the main character used in a marionette punch and judy show . A glove puppet is a main character who is used in the main part of a punch-and-judy comedy .
 Persons or business that are threat may be slandered, insulted by unjust smear tactics, and worth of targeted person hijacked by others via others via Espionage capabilities surveillance or Conspiracy against Rights including political, intellectual, speech, or religious rights . Persons or businesses that are . threatened may be
 Selecting Down is a Card Trick of Con Artist who can move a card by slight of hand to a lower place in a deck or to the top of the deck . Selecting down is a card trick of the Con Artist .
 A lethal and losing flash-fight fight may still result and cost the Stalk Vitim his or her life . So offense or existential threat conditions or such irreversible harm can be manufactured for the StALK Victim .
 The name “hawk-dove” refers to a situation in which there is a competition for a shared resource and the contestants can choose either conciliation or conflict . This terminology is most commonly used in biology and evolutionary game theory .
 From a game-theoretic point of view, ‘chicken’ and ‘hawk-dove’ are identical . The different names stem from parallel development of the basic principles in different research areas .
 Those like myself who wish to build an intellectual Natural Law Philosophy Scientific Epistemic fabric of political philosophy . moral philosphy, dirved from Natural Rights theory, . moral philosophy .
 Causing harrassing fights which consume time is an FBI system for disrupting ‘radicalism” by distracting activities and even distracting noise or other harassment, the FBI says . Causing fighting is an attempt to disrupt “radicalism,” the FBI said. Causing
 Reinhard Gehlen was Nazi head of intelligence on the Eastern Front war effort of Nazi Germany . Gehlen led the Nazi intelligence operation on the eastern front of the war effort . He died in 1945 at the hands of a German army officer .
 He pionered targeting regular individuals or organizations that Espionage agencies could act through thus remaing publicly out of the picture but bringing about Espionage agency desired ends . He said he wanted to target regular individuals that spy agencies could attack .
 Dulles also led the push to save Reinhard Gehlen, Nazi head of intelligence on the Eastern Front and a genuine monster, from any post-war justice . Dulles was also involved in the fight to get Gehlen justice .
 Gang Stalkers will mob any new potentiall association in life and gossip destroy any fruitful result of the desired new association . Gossipers will suggest characteristics or property of the Stalk victim be obtained from the gossipers instead, thus passing by Stalk Victim in the roadway forward
 Peaceful environments, Sailboarding on a nice day, non threatening public locations, quiet for work, all go into effective mental states and normal life activities . Quiet environments and peaceful environments are key to effective mental health .
 Toxifying all of this creates frantic emotions and hassled frustrated struggles . Toxified all of these emotions and struggles create frantic emotions .
 I Ed Donegan have to MEET people by first warning them the FBI is stalking me and SOON they will Stalk you . Ed donegan has been stalked by the FBI and his friends . The FBI is now stalking Donegan .
 Often the GangStalk is part of Shadow Government and includes lucrative illegal profits . Often the gangStalk includes illegal illegal profits from illegal activity .
 Recruiting operatives into the program under various pay-ff methods allows the illegal operation Human Resources . Recruiters will be influenced by personal gains or desire to participate in the program . Recruits are recruited under the guise of personal gain .
 As a methodology mafia police use activities of Infraguard, My Brothers Keepers, or other Neighborhood watch encouraging them and joining with them . Conflicts and Toxifying my presence in areas Edward Paul Donegan] -epd . Donegan]. Donegan: Police use activities
 Police, black U.S. Marshalls, and others peeping at white women in the gym and elsewhere . Police say they have been peeping in at women's gyms .
 Also these teams of people working to make me seem threat because they dresss someone as me, ety or these blacks or minorities peeping at there own children and demanding restitution and protection money for the immigrant families or others .
 The police leave the crime unconfronted by allow the rumor of it being in the same place as the Stalk victim to circulate . The victim was stabbed to death in the neck in the early hours .
 Savlation Army Prison Ministries, prison release-sees and prison programs are part of Neighborhood Watch mafia . Neighborhood Watch is part of the network of prison programs .
 Stalk Victim is mentally deranged and may attack at any time and for no reason at all . Police set up false flags often using a mimic of the Stalker Victim .
 This is also the Pizzagate theory, that those who suggest a CIA plan are crazy, schizophrenic, and my attack innocent civilians who are NOT involved on wrongdoing, slush funds, or black budgets . This is the same theory .
 Vandalism to my home especially visible to others makes it seem I am the harm to the property I am renting and to the neighborhood I live in . Vandalist to my house especially visible . makes it seems I am harming my home and to my neighborhood .
 Shadow Gov works behind the Stakeholders back and protects itself . 3rd party agency is created to operate as a racket exposing ""beneficiary"" of the Trust Fund or Conservatorship to crime .
 The actual interest of the agency placed in charge and is to protect the wealthy by dehumanizing accusers as mentally ill or deluded and holding them without trial in elder abuse conditions of predatory psychiatry or detention .
 The Great Treason asserts Gangtalk wrestled away artistic works and Britteny Spears and Tom Clancy via and myself Edwad Paul Donean by hostile and abusive conservatorship .
 Human identity, property, rights, and protection from assaults and harassment is built into modern societies . Human identity and property is a key part of modern society .
 The Gangstalk sets up getting control of an environment like taking over a local business . Then starts forms of trespass such as unwanted and maliciously motivated conversation that is both harassing and a threat from a fraud perspective .
 A Dopple in the same store may steal the ID of the Stalk victim and confess to misconduct, perhaps even in the stalk victims home when the stalk victim is not home . Stalk victims may not be home when they are stalked by a person .
 Death threat can occur such as flahses of knives from outside windows, other activities, such as attack or stealing computers . Death threats can be carried out such as using knives from windows, or attacking computers .
 All are intrusive violations of space and vary in legal measure as individual acts but also in also in furtherance of disruptions into a home or use of public property . All are in addition to individual acts .
 The Trespass in my case often involves Sexual Attack, psychotic shouted “cum” noises” or pervert type gestures . Children making sexual gestures or positions near me or even outside my windows or as I am undressing for the shower .
 Sexual attack in the outdoors public area rather than through my apartment walls and vents don’t need a condition of nudity, just things like underwear stolen from me strewn about, lewd comments, lewd acts, etc., even if clothed, an unwanted physical contact, assault and battery .
 Mind Control or Mind Kontrol which is more general, the idea of manipulating thinking is what PsyOps is about . Psy Ops is about manipulating thinking and manipulating thinking .
 Fate Control may slander a Targeted Person, a person Targeted for Harassment, an Espionage Stalk Team my undermine the Stalk Victims life covertly and effectively . Fate Control can slander a person for harassment or for harassment . The Espionage Team may be able to undermine the
 A person under Stalk my alter life plans, life decisions, and life outcomes because of the stalk . At its most successful a person under . Stalker my alter . life plans and life decisions because of . the stalk.
 In Corpus Christi I decided to stay safe in my apartment after a trip the the grocery store on foot and the bus led to 3 very near violent fights setup by an illegal operation . Some of the people attacking me were crazy and likely thought I was out abusing children .
 It is possible that the police operating as criminals may alter the perception or life outcomes of a Stalk Victim . It is also possible that police may also change the perception of the victim to an anti-government stance .
 I hold anti-police sentiments that are not out place in the context of police abuse I have been subjected to but are out of place if the police instigation are successfully denied by police and police are the good guys .
 I have suspected the FBI or others needed Russian Terrorist to attack Boston and the JFK library . The Tsarnevs were sensitized against the USA just as loyal patriot Ed Donegan has been mentally directed to as political position .
 No one can rape the president without being exposed and punished, but the president may believe he can rape someone without consequence . His power can be leveraged to keep silence victims, dismiss allegations, and punish accusers .
 Tragically, powerful people believe they can get away with it because they often can . Tragically powerful people often think they can't get away from it .
 Power truly insulates a person from the vulnerability and risk that most people face . Power insulates most people from vulnerability and risks . Power is the most powerful form of freedom in the world .
 I had been assaulted and evicted from so many laundry mats where police started the fights I thought I would have to wash my laundry in a home wash tub . There were not places left I was not banned from. I had to wash laundry in the tub because there were not left I
 A defense act from an attack victim like me leads to my eviction as a roadblock . Someone else will assume my identity after I am moved off property I signed up for or entered . Often a defense act . leads to eviction .
 The scheme is hijacking starts of something by creating a block is called a Roadblock . A Roadblock is a roadblock where a person is bumped off the path they had initiated and were on until attacked until attacked .
 If someone who even appears to be an investigator or undercover cop begins quietly asking neighbors, employers, relatives, and co-workers about a targeted individual, it will almost certainly begin to corrode that person’s reputation . Even if no explicit allegations are made, it could corrode
 Sometimes slander in a counterintelligence operation can be much more aggressive, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Sometimes slander in counterintelligence operations can be more aggressive"
 FBI campaign to destroy career and life of film actress Jean Seberg during their Cointelpro operations . FBI’s successful campaign to . destroy the career and . life of actress Seberg .
 Seberg was a high-profile target in the prime of her career . Internal FBI memos and news reports explicitly revealed that they were deliberately spreading lies about her .
 Tactics used in the spying-and-lying industry are unfamiliar to the general public . Tactics used by the spying and lying industry are unknown to the public .
 Many people will assume that anyone posing as an “investigator’s” is legitimate, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 ABC program features a demonstration of how easily citizens can be recruited to assist in crimes against strangers .
 For centuries blacklists have been used to identify and discriminate against individuals (and organizations) deemed to be undesirable . Blacklists are blacklists of people deemed undesirable or undesirable .
 In United States history the most famous example was the blacklisting of leftists in the entertainment industry during the 1940s and 1950s . In U.S. history, blacklisting was a form of blacklisting during the 1950s and 1960s .
 The tactic is perfectly suited to counterintelligence subversion because it undermines the targeted individual in a way that will likely force the victim to be preoccupied with economic survival rather than political activism or whistle-blowing .
 The abuse involves slandering and isolating an employee and verbal abuse . The abuse is aimed at slandering, isolating and verbally abusing an employee .
 Apparently, this is a common element of gang stalking campaigns against targeted individuals . This is a gang stalking campaign against individuals .
 The tactic is apparently widespread and since it is apparently connected in some cases to workplace violence I have devoted the entire next section to it in this overview . It is apparently linked to some cases of workplace violence .
 A common element among victims’ accounts of organized stalking is the experience of having their residences broken into . Victims’ residences have been broken into by organized stalker groups .
 A “black bag job” is a clandestine entry into the residence, office, storage facility, or vehicle of a targeted individual or organization . A black bag job is an attempt to gain entry into a targeted person's residence or office .
 The term is a reference to a small black bag filled with burglary tools . The term was used to refer to a black bag full of burglary tools.
 One of the most famous historical examples of a black bag operation was the Watergate breakin . The Watergate break-in was one of the biggest black bag operations .
 Common goals are obtaining information and planting surveillance devices . Common goals of such operations include obtaining information, planting devices .
 They can also be used to steal or plant evidence, and to perpetrate acts of vandalism for psychological operations purposes . They are also used to plant evidence and to commit acts of sabotage .
 Illegal black bag operations were conducted by the FBI during its original Cointelpro operations . Illegal black bags were conducted during the FBI's original operations . The FBI was involved in illegal black bags operations .
 The FBI knew that black bag jobs were clearly illegal, according to a letter from the Senate's Church Committee . The FBI was involved in the black bag job .
 That depends upon whether you subscribe to the subversive notion that the United States Constitution means what it says . The U.S. Constitution is supposed to be a democracy .
 Under the Patriot Act, there has been an expansion of the use by law enforcement agencies of a Constitutionally-dubious tactic commonly referred to as a “sneak and peek” warrant .
 A “Delayed-Notice Search Warrant’s’ allows police to covertly enter private residences, perform searches, and seize property without notifying the residents .
 A wrongly-accused man from Oregon won a $2 million settlement against the U.S. government . He was harassed by federal agents which included black bag jobs . The man won the settlement because of his harassment .
 A more recent review of sneak and peek warrants, which notes that requests for such warrants are granted almost automatically, has been reviewed .
 A study in 2010 found that judges denied such requests in less than one percent of all cases . A study found that such requests were denied by judges only rarely .
 Such activities usually stop short of theft which could lead to police reports . Such activities often stop short short of police reports which could be reported .
 If items are stolen, they are typically limited to items that would be inexpensive and therefore unlikely objects of theft . Reports of the incident will seem implausible and evidence of mental instability . If items were stolen, it would be unlikely to be the items of theft so reports of the .
 Luke Harding, a journalist with the Guardian, describes his experience with gas-lighting tactics being used by Russian intelligence agents while living in Moscow . In this short video clip, Luke Harding describes his personal experience .
 Harding naturally found the experience unsettling, but keep in mind that he had the total support of his wife and his employer . Harding's wife and employer also had the support of Harding .
 Most victims of gang stalking are isolated and if they attempt to describe the experience to others, they are met with skepticism . Most victims are more isolated and are often isolated .
 The most likely reaction is to assume that the victim simply forgot where he placed something, or whether he left the window open, etc. etc. The victim's likely reaction will be to assume she forgot where she placed something or whether she left a window open .
 As with adolescent pranks, phone calls to the victim’s residence are an easy way to harass the victim . Phone calls to victim's residence are a way of harassing the victim.
 Messages can range from insults to threats, although they are subtle, not explicit, in case the calls are being recorded . Messages can come from insults or threats, but are subtle and not explicit .
 Accounts of computer hacking seem to be nearly universal among victims of organized stalking . Stalking victims often use computers to help them cope with the threat of cyber crime .
 U.S. government agents and private security contractors use the tactic both to gather information and to perpetrate psychological operations, such as threats and harassment .
 Larry Klayman filed a lawsuit against the National Security Agency to challenge that agency’s program of mass surveillance . This tactic was apparently used against Larry Klawman, a public interest lawyer and political activist .
 Klayman says his email account was hacked after he filed a lawsuit . He says he filed the lawsuit after his email was hacked by his account .
 Judge ruled in favor of Klayman in his lawsuit against the NSA . Judge ruled that the NSA’s collection of Americans’ phone records was a violation of the United States Constitution . The judge found that the collection of phone records violates the U.S. Constitution .
 As with most of these gang stalking tactics, you can use your imagination regarding the countless ways someone can be framed . The gang stalking tactic is a classic gang stalking technique .
 Planting evidence can be done either to further a slander campaign, or to actually set up the victim for arrest and prosecution . Planting a victim's story can be set up for arrest or set up a prosecution .
 Placing evidence can be intentionally done in ways that the victim himself will easily find the evidence . Planting evidence can also be done to send the threatening message that target is vulnerable to this type of attack .
 For a recent high-profile example of a ‘stitch-up’ by intelligence agencies, consider the case of WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange . Julian Assange is a WikiLeaks founder .
 WikiLeaks’ exposure of U.S. diplomatic cables in 2010 did not go over well with United States officials . WikiLeaks' exposure of diplomatic cables went over well in 2010 .
 The cables included some inconvenient information such as corroboration of evidence that the U.S. had launched a missile strike in Yemen the year before that killed dozens of civilians . The United States conspired with Yemen’s government to conceal the attack .
 Assange was made the target of apparently trumped-up charges in Sweden . To gain leverage for extraditing Assange from the U.K., he was made . Assange is accused of using the case to gain leverage to extradite him from the UK .
 U.S., U.K. and Sweden are treating Assange's case as plausible and legitimate . Apologists and useful idiots for the governments of the three countries recognized the game being played .
 Amid major publicity, Albertson was expelled from the party, lost all his friends, and was fired from his job . He was kicked out of his job and expelled from his party .
 Other such threats are apparently common in gang stalking cases . Gang stalking cases are common in some of the cases .
 They can take any form imaginable, but will inevitably be anonymous and difficult to prove . They can be anonymous, but it's difficult to be proven .
 At one point, a gang stalking crew in my neighborhood dropped life insurance pamphlets on the walkway inside my courtyard . "Life insurance" pamphlets were dropped inside the courtyard of my home .
 A famous example was the use by the feds against Martin Luther King, Jr. A famous use of the term was used against him .
 Pages 220221 of this United States Senate report show that the FBI apparently attempted to blackmail King, and encourage him to commit suicide . Pages 22021 of this U.S. Senate report .
 This can be dumping trash on the lawn, scratching the paint of their car, or scratching their car . This is a good way to get rid of your car .
 Victims should not assume that perpetrators are above doing physical harm to their pets either; I know this both from personal experience and from accounts by a few individuals I have reasons to regard as very credible . Victims shouldn't assume that perpetrator is above doing harm to pets .
 Baiting is any effort to evoke a response by the victim which can be used to discredit or legally ensnare him . Baiting can be an attempt to evoke the victim's response by using it to discredit him or ensnarrow him .
 In a sense, all gang stalking tactics are forms of baiting because their cumulative effect will eventually drive the victim to respond in ways that will create additional trouble . In a similar way, gang stalking is baiting, baiting people who respond to the victim's actions .
 This was reported for example in the Washington Post Magazine’s 2007 cover article on gang stalking . This was also reported in the D.C. Post Magazine .
 Public and political discourse may devalue members of unfamiliar groups, according to the author of the book . The author says offenders may feel that their livelihood or way of life is threatened by demographic changes .
 Offenders may not be motivated by hate, but rather by fear, ignorance or anger . Offenders are motivated by fear or anger, not hate, fear or ignorance .
 People victimized by violent hate crimes are more likely to experience more psychological distress than victims of other violent crimes . Victims are also likely to be victimized by expressive non-verbal speech .
 Victims of bias-motivated crimes are more likely to experience post-traumatic stress, safety concerns, depression, anxiety and anger than victims of crimes that are not motivated by bias . Victims are also likely to suffer from post traumatic stress .
 Hate crimes send messages to members of the victim’s group that they are unwelcome and unsafe in the community, victimizing the entire group . Hate crimes victimize entire group and decrease feelings of safety and security, the author says .
 Discrimination against one’s own group can lead to psychological distress and lower self-esteem . Furthermore, witnessing discrimination against your own group may lead to lower self esteem .
 An offender's bias against a race, religion, disability, sexual orientation, ethnicity, gender or gender identity can be acted out by forced-teaming Stalk Victim into situations mean to be abusive, offensive, revolting, or exploitative . Stalker Forced Teaming e GANG
 A general category of harassment, “street theater” can include some of the tactics described above and below . “Street theater’s” simply refers to any sort of staged encounter with perpetrators in public .
 The comments and actions of the perpetrators are carefully scripted to resonate with the victim, but appear benign if captured on video or seen by witnesses . Typically, both the comments and .actions of the . perpetrators appear benign .
 One example of gang stalking “street theater” is to cut-off victim when he or she is walking, driving, or riding a bicycle . The victim is cut off when she or her attacker is walking or driving .
 A related tactic is to crowd the victim by rudely invading his or her space or brushing against the person . A similar tactic is a similar tactic to crowding the victim's space .
 Victim's account will likely sound paranoid when described to others . Since this occasionally happens to everyone in the normal course of events, accounts by the victim will probably sound paranoid . The victim's account may sound paranoid to others, but it's not uncommon .
 Anyone nearby will be unlikely to notice let alone understand that the action was deliberate . Also, anyone nearby will not notice that it was deliberate. Anyone nearby would not notice the action .
 An FBI surveillance team deliberately provokes people in order to provoke them . Here is an example of how a surveillance team will deliberately provoke you .
 When you’re walking through a mall or a downtown shopping district, the surveillance team will intentionally interfere with your route . The surveillance team is intentionally trying to interfere with the route .
 A pavement artist will “absent-mindedly” cross your path, forcing you to change course to avoid walking into him . The pavement artist is an artist of the night .
 A group of agents will “inadvertently” obstruct your path they’ Il be standing together chatting, forcing you to walk around them . A group will ‘inadvertentially’t obstruct” your path .
 Other pavement artists will “accidentally” create near-misses as you walk along .
 Some “pedestrians” will create situations with a potential for a head-on collision, forcing you to dodge them . Some of these ‘pedestrian’s’ situations will create a potential collision . You must dodge them and avoid them .
 As the psychological pressure continues to build, agents may “innocently” bump into you, jostle you, or step on your heel from behind . Agents may bump into people, or even step on their heels from behind, as psychological pressure builds .
 A group of pavement artists will cue up ahead of you, creating a line-up that delays you as you try to make a purchase, order fast food, buy tickets, and so on . A pavement artist cue up before you can buy a ticket or buy a product .
 The incidents occur in public locations, it's difficult to prove who’s behind them, police say . But because the incidents are public, it is difficult to identify the culprits .
 Targets of gang stalking should expect this tactic and have a clear idea in mind of how they will respond . Targets should expect gang stalking tactics and be prepared to respond .
 As described in some of the sections below, perpetrators of organized stalking sometimes make use of various cutting-edge technologies . Psychological torture does not require electronic hardware, but psychological torture does .
 A basic concept in Neuro-Linguistic Programming is that a particular stimulus such as a sound or gesture can become associated or ‘anchored’ in the thoughts and reactions of an individual through repetition . A particular stimulus is associated with an individual’s thoughts or reactions through
 Gang stalkers exploit this phenomenon by repeatedly performing a particular action such as generating a particular sound as part of a noise harassment campaign . Gang stalkingers use this technique to repeatedly perform a particular act such as generate a particular noise as a result .
 The victim is made aware that the sound is an element of the harassment . His or her mind will naturally begin responding to that sound as a “trigger” for a negative emotional reaction .
 It’s a way to keep the victim constantly agitated because he or she will have the negative response whenever stalkers generate the sound or even when the sound occurs in the normal course of events . The victim will be constantly agitated by the sound, according to the author .
 ‘synchronizing’ is when gang stalking perp’s always perform a particular action at the same moment as a specific action by the victim . Similar to sensitization, “synchronized” is when a gang stalking member performs a particular act at the
 Whenever the victim leaves his residence, a stalker in the area will cough or honk a horn or slam a door . For example, the victim's stalker coughs or honks a horn when she leaves her residence .
 It is a way of reminding the targeted individual that he or she is under constant surveillance . It's a way to remind the targeted individuals that they are under surveillance, it says .
 One of the major weapons in the arsenal of gang stalkers is noise . Noise is noise when writing a book about the FBI or the FBI .
 It was widely reported that loud music was used by the U.S. military in its invasion of Panama in 1989 to harass General Manuel Noriega .
 Accounts differ about how and why the tactic was used in that instance, but no one questions the potential effectiveness of noise to create distress . Accounts differ on exactly how, why, or how, the noise was used .
 As with many of the tactics described here, the cumulative effects are difficult to fully appreciate if you haven’t personally been on the sharp end of them . The cumulative effects of these tactics can't be fully appreciated if you’ve seen them firsthand .
 The tactic can be used to cause sleep deprivation, which in turn can create additional problems, both physical and psychological . Among other things, the tactic can also cause additional problems .
 Gang stalkers have access to a residence adjacent to that of the victim . They can easily generate noises that will be heard only by the target . With Tresspass, by harrasing phone calls, outside noise, other disruptions can be sent into an apartement or house .
 As is typical of psychological operations tactics used by the FBI minions, harassment by noise is virtually impossible to prove . FBI: "Harassment by noise" is a form of psychological operation by the Bureau .
 You could record the noise, but you could not prove where and when you made the recording let alone where the sound came from or who was generating it . The noise was recorded but could not be traced to the source of it .
 It would be difficult or impossible to legally establish that the perpetrator was conspiring with anyone else to deliberately harass you . Moreover, even if you could prove all of that, it would be impossible to prove that .
 Apartment rentals, future employers, stores and communities where the target visits, will be notified . The target visits will be monitored by the company .
 A covert investigation might also be opened, and electronic, means used by the civilian spies/snitches as part of the overt and covert monitoring and surveillance process . A covert probe may also be launched .
 Individuals can be flagged designating them as having a history of aggressive or inappropriate behavior . Individuals can also be flagged by the government .
 This notification system will follow the target if they move, change jobs, visit other areas . It will also follow if they change jobs or move from their current location .
 It let’s the community believe that the target is a person who needs to be watched or monitored, it's not the target of a person . It's a good idea that people need to be monitored in order to keep track of their targets .
 Deception is a major element of counterintelligence programs . Counterintelligence programs are a major part of counterintelligence programs .
 All discussion of Cointelpro-type stalking has to be viewed skeptically . Consequently, all discussion of this type of stalking is skeptical .
 Allegations that the ongoing criminal harassment of targeted individuals is simply an activity by one or more vigilante groups is a case in point . Allegations are being made that vigilante groups are responsible for the harassment .
 It is inconceivable that the Justice Department and the other federal intelligence agencies are unaware of exactly what is happening . Justice Department, other agencies are aware of what's happening, says CNN.com .
 Their silence about the issue means that they acquiesce in it, whatever the specific operational structure might be . Their silence on the issue is that they are acquiescing in it . They are complicit in the issue, whether or not they want to change the system .
 There is a “snitch culture’s element to organized stalking, not just a bureaucratic machine . That said, it is clear that there is also clear that . There is also an element of organized stalking not just the bureaucratic machine.
 Perpetrators of gang stalking crimes rely upon a degree of informal support from sadists and useful idiots . Gang stalking crimes often involve sadists, useful idiots and sadists .
 There is a long history of non-governmental organizations perpetrating very serious crimes against their fellow citizens . Also, there is a history of committing crimes against citizens, says CNN.com .
 The Ku Klux Klan has historically included members of the political and law enforcement community . In addition, such organizations for example, have historically included law enforcement members .
 So the involvement of private groups in organized stalking cannot be categorically dismissed . The core of the activity has to be statesanctioned, even though the core of it must be state sanctioned .
 Gang stalking tactics are sometimes alleged to be used by certain fraternal orders such as Freemasons and by various religious groups such as Scientologists and Jehovah’s Witnesses .
 Scientologists reportedly have a policy called “Fair Game’s” under which they use aggressive tactics . The church allegedly uses aggressive tactics toward individuals and groups it perceives as its enemies .
 “cause stalking” and stalking by religious cults presumably account for only a very small portion of the numerous incidents in the aforementioned crime survey Statistics .
 Members of religious cults (and cult-like fraternal organizations) are by definition easily manipulated, so they could serve in some cases as “useful idiot” vigilantes for others whose motivations they don’t even comprehend . It is true however, that members of
 Most people are unaware of the existence of any domestic counterintelligence operations past or present . Most people would be unlikely to suspect that what they are being told might be disinformation and manipulation .
 Freemasons are sometimes mentioned as a source of organized stalking perpetrators probably as disinformation in most cases . The ancient fraternal order of Freemasons is sometimes mentioned in some of the cases .
 Mentioning the organization often brings to mind tin-foil hat conspiracy theories . The organization was founded in 1996, and has been in existence since then .
 It should be noted, however, that mainstream news reports also include allegations about the group .
 There are claims that the Freemasons’ network is exploited to abuse the power of its members . The Freemasons are accused of exploiting their network to abuse their power .
 Abuse of psychiatry is deliberate action of having citizens psychiatrically diagnosed who need neither psychiatric restraint nor psychiatric treatment . Abuse is the deliberate action by having citizens . In other words, abuse of psychiatry occurs in the United States .
 The diagnosis of mental disease allows the state to hold persons against their will and insist upon therapy in their interest and in the broader interests of society . It is not the first time the state has been able to hold a person against his will .
 Psychiatry can be used to bypass standard legal procedures for establishing guilt or innocence and allow political incarceration without the ordinary odium attaching to such political trials . Psychiatry can bypass legal procedures, bypassing legal procedures and allowing political incarceration .
 Abuse of psychiatry for political and ideological purposes was reported to be systematic in the Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries such as Romania, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia . In the period from the 1960s up to 1986, abuse of psychiatry was reported in Eastern Europe .
 The practice of incarceration of religious and political dissidents in psychiatric hospitals in the Eastern Bloc and the former USSR damaged the credibility of psychiatric practice in these states . The international community condemned the practice from the international community .
 Political abuse of psychiatry also takes place in the People’s Republic of China . Political abuse is also reported in China .
 Psychiatric diagnoses such as the diagnosis of “sluggish schizophrenia” in political dissidents in the USSR were used for political purposes . Psychiatric diagnoses were such as ‘sluggish schizophrenic schizophrenia’ in dissidents in Russia .
 Journalist Douglas Valentine has written extensively about the Central Intelligence Agency . The Phoenix Program details the CIA’s Operation Phoenix in the Vietnam war .
 The program involved torture, assassinations, and the murder of civilians including women and children on a large scale . The program, which is largely unknown to the American public even today, involved torture .
 For anyone who is curious about Operation Phoenix, I recommend this article which he wrote for CounterPunch magazine in May of 2001 in which he explains the nature of the war crimes committed and how those crimes were whitewashed by the establishment press .
 No doubt this also applies to many agents in other U.S. intelligence and law enforcement agencies .
 The CIA's MK Ultra program is an example of the extremes to which federal agencies sometimes go . The CIA’s secret MK Ultra is an instructive example of how federal agencies go .
 MK Ultra involved performing experiments (including psychological and physical torture) on American citizens . I describe MK Ultra in some detail in section 6 below, so I will just note here that it involved .
 No one was punished for his participation in the program which lasted two decades . The head of the CIA destroyed most of the records about it when it was discovered . The program was never punished .
 In September 1970 the leftists in Chile won a plurality of that country’s democratic election, as a result of which, their representative would have soon been confirmed as the next president . The leftist party's representative would soon be confirmed as president .
 Right-wing political leaders in Chile, some major U.S. corporations which did business in the country (including Pepsi Cola and Chase Manhattan Bank), and the CIA were not pleased with this development and communicated that to then-president Richard Nixon and his Secretary of State, Henry Kissinger
 Chief of the Chilean General Staff, General René Schnieder did not believe in interfering with the democratic process . An obstacle they faced was that he did not want to interfere with the process .
 Kissinger was generally treated with great respect and adulation by the U.S. news media over the rest of his career . The incident and other very serious transgressions did not prevent Kissinger from being treated with respect . Kissinger's career was largely overshadowed by the scandal .
 Mainstream journalists' sycophancy and complacency makes it difficult to expose and punish the U.S. government . The United States government is doing its business in secret, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Most Americans are unaware that the FBI is exempt from the Whistleblower Protection Act . FBI Whistle-Blowers are exempt from federal law . The FBI has been accused of leaking confidential information to the media .
 If anything, the agency deserves extra scrutiny because of its history of domestic spying done for political reasons . The agency has a history of spying on Americans for political purposes .
 An October 2013 article in Reason described the FBI as a “dangerous” domestic spy agency . The FBI has been described as a "dangerous" domestic spying agency .
 A more high-profile case of spying on journalists was reported in May 2013, when it was revealed that the Justice Department secretly obtained two months of telephone records of reporters and editors of the Associated Press .
 Mike German was a decorated FBI agent who specialized in counter-terrorism . He was an FBI agent specializing in counter terrorism . He is survived by his wife .
 He discovered fellow officers were violating wiretapping regulations . He had discovered that fellow officers had violated wiretapping rules .
 When he reported that to his supervisors, his accusations were ignored, and his career was effectively frozen . He reported his accusations to supervisors, but they were ignored . He said he reported them to supervisors .
 Apparently, his experience was not unique in an agency which values secrecy more than ethics . Apparently, he was not alone in his experience .
 The individual was subjected to intense investigation for years despite having no criminal record, apart from trespassing incidents related to political protests . The individual had no criminal history, except trespassing .
 At 2:06 in the video of this interview journalist Amy Goodman asks Mike German to explain the FBI’s legal authority to perform the “assessments” which, as I mentioned in the introduction above, are essentially investigations that can now be launched against an individual without
 Much of the FBI’s threat assessment role should be taken over by Congress, he says . He says the agency has a natural tendency to exaggerate the threat of terrorism . Congress should take over the role, he adds .
 German also states that the FBI is now more powerful than at any time since the Cointelpro era . German says the FBI now has more power than ever before . German also says that FBI is more powerful now than ever at any point since Cointeelpro .
 Often a targeted person will become the victim of more than one type of gangstalking . And often, the targeted person is a victim of multiple types of gang stalking .
 Predatory Gangstalking is reported by historians to have been developed by social scientists and psychologists in communist and fascist’s countries as a means of control of individuals within those societies .
 In Old Money societies movers and shakers who held business and government and perhaps Crown positions could decide the fate of citizens .
 They could send ‘people down’ by criminal prosecution, blackballing them in employment or hirings, or harassing them in public and in business locations . This was Called Rough Noise for instance as a person walked by a coffee shop’s trash can the owner might
 Charivari was a European and North American folk custom in which a mock parade was staged through a community accompanied by a discordant mock serenade . Charivari, alternatively spelled shivaree, also called skimmington, was also a European folk custom .
 Masked processions were held outside the home of the accused wrongdoer . The cacophonous rattling of bones and cleavers, ringing of bells, hooting, blowing bull’s horns, and banging of frying pans, saucepans, kettles, or
 The Paid Actors Street Theater of Psychological Warfare is that in Russia has the name KOMPOMAT highly offense is being acted out along a persons route such as to the grocery store, etc., and the staged street theater acted events can make a victim feel or look a certain way
 Defense Intelligence Agencies hoping to stress people to gain their cooperation have learned to make normally human rights approved detention unpleasant such that the detainee has a motive to cooperate .
 In many Feudal societies like England, Northern Ireland, Austria Hungary Hungary Germany Poland and elsewhere gym roughian can intimidate in street harassment .
 Armold Schwartzenegger and his brother were body builders . His Nazi official father may have been as well as his Nazi father . Armold was a body builder .
 It is assumed that money is involved in Predatory Gangstalking because of the amount of resources required to execute such extensive efforts . It is rightfully assumed that . money is . involved because of such resources .
 The gangstalkers develop capabilities directly proportionate to the amount money that funds them, police say . Gangs develop capabilities in proportionate proportion to the money they receive from their sources, says police .
 In following the money trail speculatively, one looks to the possibility that drug money is involved . The money trail is thought to be a link to drug money in the case .
 Some people reason that the government may be involved because of the amount of resources that are available to the practitioners of Predatory Gangstalking .
 Corporations, insurance companies, and even wealthy individuals with revenge motives fund a Predatory Gangstalking .
 In addition to cash payment for participation in Predatory Gangstalking, other forms of barter are used .
 Drugs, *, alcohol, reciprocal favors, release from debts, jobs, contracts, contracts for legal problems, and other forms of compensation . These include drugs, alcohol and reciprocal favors .
 Some gangstalkers are given free housing in exchange for performing Predatory Gangstalking activities against a nearby target . Gangstalks are often targeted by people who are targeted in the area .
 Predatory Gangstalkers often engage in it for pleasure . However, it is clear from observing them that many engage in the activity for pleasure. Gangs stalkers are not only engaging in it .
 One high ranking leader in Predatory Gangstalking stated that it was like an addiction . One high-ranking leader said it was 'like an addiction' to stalking .
 He described how the build up and culmination of a gangstalking assault was intoxicating . But there was a let-down feeling afterwards that compelled him to do it again, and the cycle continued . He described the build-up of the assault as intoxicating, but that there was
 Some people participate in Predatory Gangstalking because they are deceived into participating . It is also true that some people participate because of being deceived into participation .
 Friends, neighbors and associates of a selected target are given false information and finally come to believe the targeted individual has committed a heinous crime for which they deserve what is portrayed them as rehabilitative social intervention .
 Sometimes people reluctantly participate in indirect ways, such as making their homes available at times for part of the operation, for fear of consequences if they did not .
 Others involved in Predatory Gangstalking, including the homeless, do so for money or drugs . Others involved include the homeless .
 Disabled Vets are known to participate in Predatory Gangstalking activities for alleged government or defense contractor’s projects . Disabled veterans have been targeted by the government or contractor's projects .
 Predatory Gangstalkers have successfully elicited the participation of neighbors by appealing to their sense of service to the community . They often represent themselves as affiliates of the government or law enforcement .
 Those in the underworld or secret organizations practice Predatory Gangstalking as part of their membership .
 The craft and practice of Predatory Gangstalking appears to be standardized around the world . Predatory gangstalking seems to be a standardized practice in the U.S.
 Many similarities parallel incidents reported by targets internationally, including those in the U.S. and China .
 It appears that there is a standard protocol involving a series of tactics, progressive phases, and nature of assaults . It appears to be that there are a number of tactics involved in the assault .
 It appears that an individual has been selected to become a target and the groundwork has been established for their assaults long before the individual can be aware that something criminal is occurring in their lives and to their person .
 By the time the targeted individual becomes aware that something very threatening and disturbing is happening to them, they have already been thoroughly investigated by their enemies, stigmatized, discredited, and compromised . The targeted individual has already been stigmatized and discredited by enemies .
 All wells have been already poisoned, so to speak, and all avenues of help and escape have been blocked . "All wells have already poisoned," says CNN's John Defterios . All avenues of escape and help are blocked, he says .
 Predatory Gangstalkers first establish ‘information dominance’ over a targeted individual . Gangs first establish 'information dominance' over targeted individuals . Gangstalks first establish "information dominance" over a target .
 This achievement alone enables them to attain excessive power over the targeted individual . This is because they are able to gain excessive power .
 It is believed that this is accomplished by means of eavesdropping devices in the target’s environment, global positioning technology secreted on their vehicles, and obtaining illegal access to personal records such banks accounts, emails, medical records, and credit card purchases .
 They often achieve 100% surveillance of a targeted individual and almost 100% access to the targeted individual’s entire lifetime of available information from any computer, paper, photographic, or personal source .
 They use all of the information obtained to ambush and sabotage a targeted individual . They then use the information to target and sabotage an individual .
 Predatory Gangstalkers ultimately become capable of entering a target’s house, place of employment, and vehicle at-will and often . Gangs are able to enter their targets’ homes, places of employment and places of residence .
 All forms of communications in the targeted individual’s life is interfered with by the gangstalkers . The gangstalksers interfere with all forms of communication in a targeted individual's life .
 They will intercept email, tamper with voicemail, and obstruct the delivery of postal mail, they say . They also will intercept phone calls and tamper messages . They say they will intercept e-mails and tampered with voicemails .
 All communication in a targeted individual's life will become unreliable and incomplete, both incoming and outgoing . The net result is that all communication in the targeted individual’s life will be unreliable . Both incoming and outbound communication will become incomplete .
 The Predatory Gangstalkers are then capable of greater insidious manipulation and control . The 'Predatory Gangs' are then able to control the world .
 Updates are promptly shared with all of the participants in that predatory gangstalking group . Updates are then shared with everyone else .
 They take frequent photographs of the targeted individual, and maintain photos of the target’s house, vehicle, place of employment, family, friends, and even the target's pets . They also take frequent photos of their house, car, employment, friends and pets .
 They promptly disseminate this information through email and cell phones to other gangstalkers, police say . "They promptly disseminated this information," police said .
 This is the means by which a targeted individual is continually recognized by Predatory Gangstalkers everywhere they go . This is a means by . which is the . means by way of identifying a target or person .
 Psychological profiling is yet another tactic performed on a targeted individual for the purpose of finding weaknesses . Psychological profiling can be used to find weaknesses in a person .
 "They exploit all information obtained, including fears, triggers, value-conflicts, skeletons in the closet, areas of shame, addictions, vices, and all things they hold dear," says author .
 Predatory Gangstalkers use the information obtained to maximize the ability to destroy the targeted individual . They use the data obtained to maximise the information to maximize their ability to . destroy the individual .
 Practitioners of Predatory Gangstalking have their own coded language, both verbal and visual . Predatory gangstalking is a form of crime that can be committed by people who commit crime .
 Hand signals resemble mannerisms used in baseball and other sports . Some hand signals resemble the mannerisms of baseball players . Hand signals are similar to those used by professional athletes .
 Hand signals are used to identify the area of a target’s body designated to be the target of a pending physical attack . They use hand signals to identify an area of the target's body designated .
 They also use hand signals to coordinate the unauthorized entry into a target’s home or vehicle . Hand signals are also used to coordinate unauthorized entry to a target's home .
 They also use hand signals during roving vehicle caravans and while on foot, for the purpose of coordinating attacks and pointing out the location of a target .
 Vehicle alarm panic buttons and horns are other commonly used tools of communication and coordination . Vehicle alarms are also commonly used to communicate with each other .
 In residential areas, outside lights have an established set of messages . Outside lights have been used in residential areas for decades .
 They also use "dead drops" like ‘dead drops’ like spies have done historically to secretly pass along information .
 Public bathrooms are commonly used as locations for the transfer of information and equipment . Public bathrooms can be used to transfer information or transfer equipment .
 Mobile pick-up and delivery systems are in place for this purpose as well . Mobile pick up and delivery system are also in place in the US .
 They have a set of questions and responses to confirm the identity of a predatory gangstalker to another which are also coded . They are also asked questions and answers to confirm their identity .
 In the USA they refer to money by the last names of the president whose face is on the bill . In the U.S. money is referred to by the president's name, not the face of the bill.
 Predatory Gangstalkers will begin an intense and extensive discrediting campaign against a selected target well before the target could even suspect he or she has an enemy . Predatory gangstalker will target a selected victim well before they even suspect they have a enemy .
 This critical tactic sets the stage for neighbors and associates to become alienated from the target . This is a critical tactic of isolating the target from others .
 Predatory Gangstalkers’ goals are to eliminate all forms of support and assistance for the target . One of the goals is to eliminate any forms of assistance . The target’s goal is to be eliminated from support for him .
 Police are given anonymous “concerned citizen’s tips designed to lead the police to believe the target is mentally unstable or a problem in the community in advance of any actual direct gangstalking of the targeted individual .
 This sets the stage for having the targeted individual prejudged so they will be disbelieved and dismissed when the gangstalking begins and they seek help . The targeted individual will be prejudged and dismissed by the victim’s friends and family members . This is the way to avoid being
 The discrediting campaign includes accusing the target of being an ‘undesirable” for any number of reasons, including fabricated reports of having committed crimes that are the most repulsive to members of society . The campaign includes false reports that are fabricated reports .
 Practitioners of Predatory Gangstalking even go so far as to represent themselves as undercover law enforcement or government agents . They pose as undercover agents or undercover agents .
 It has been reported that they will even show false documents for substantiation, but they will never leave them behind .
 They make attempts to destroy one’s gainful employment, pose as offering services to intervene in the problem to further take your money, and will steal funds and personal property . Towards this goal, they make attempts .
 Repeated unauthorized entries into a target’s residence, vehicles, computer, and workplace are hallmark tactics of this crime and is nearly impossible to stop, police say . Repeated attempts to break into target's residence, cars, computers, and workplaces are hallmark tactic of crime .
 Predatory Gangstalkers can pick locks, bypass security alarms, and enter any location posing as utility crews, law enforcement, or delivery men . They pose as law enforcement officers, utilities workers, delivery men or deliverymen .
 Practitioners of Predatory Gangstalking will apply for and obtain legitimate jobs in a target’s home or business in order to have access to the target and their life, relationships, and assets just to do harm .
 This tactic involves the precise timing of interactions with the targeted individual . This tactic is known as the 'timing of interactions' with individuals .
 The target can encounter gangstalking activities that suddenly appear and which are precisely synchronized . For example, the target can go out to get the morning newspaper and encounter gang stalker activities . The target is targeted when he goes out to see the newspaper .
 Throughout the targeted individual’s day, these synchronized encounters repeatedly occur . These synchronized encounters often occur throughout the individual's day, says the author .
 Activities such as leaving one’s driveway, taking out the trash, going to a store, or even walking the dog, are activities which result in an encounter with one or more Predatory Gangstalkers .
 Even when a target strategically does not follow any set routine, these synchronized occurrences continue . Even when there are no set routines, there are synchronized occurrences .
 This makes the gangstalkers appear to be allknowing and almost omnipresent in the mind of a new targeted individual . This makes them seem to be more omnipresent than those who have been targeted .
 The primary objective of gangstalking is to induce as much fear as possible . Over time as the numbers of individuals that become involved or are made aware of a target, the abuse can increase substantially, so that there is no aspect of the targets life that is private or sacred .
 Predatory Gangstalkers are often involved in daily activities of daily living . Predatory Stalkers have been known to stalk stalkers in the past .
 The timing and coordination of these activities are remarkably precise, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The targeted individual becomes aware that all of their activities include the presence of Predatory Gangstalkers . The targeted person becomes aware of all of the activities they do .
 These gangstalkers demand to be noticed by their target, and if they are not, they will take an action . If they're not, the gangstalker will take a further action to get noticed by his target .
 This could include honking their horn strategically, making a comment, creating a scenario to get the attention of the targeted individual . This could also include making a remark or making a joke .
 The targeted individual will henceforth anxiously watch for them . Once noticed, they will return to non-contact, knowing that by that point, the targeted individual is anxiously watching for them. Once noticed they will then be noticed again . The targeted person will then begin to return to
 Strangers often boldly smirk and openly laugh at the targeted individual at some close point in the encounter . However, these strangers often boldly smile and laugh .
 Most of the practitioners of Predatory Gangstalking rotate in and out of the life of a target . The same patterns of gangstalking will occur, but it will involve different people all the time .
 Many different stranger and many different vehicles will walk, drive, or bike past the target and interact in some manner, at various times and locations .
 All of the predatory gangstalkers will be strangers to the targeted individual . They will continue to make their presence, but not their purpose known, known .
 This is one element of Predatory Gangstalking that is disbelieved by others . This is the one element that is believed to be part of the crime . The case is not believed to have been solved by police .
 Other “others” include law enforcement, medical profession, and family .
 Predatory Gangstalkers are targeting subcultures such as criminals, secret organizations, clubs, extremist groups, radical political groups, hate groups, organized crime groups, and other antisocial groups . Those who are unaware of the activities of these groups are being targeted .
 The extent of this massive assault on one individual is as extensive as described here and even more so . Never the less, the extent of the assault on an individual is described here as as extensive .
 Investigation, Surveillance, and Harassment Tactics Africa Day 23 Leaving Serengeti Investigation . Investigation begins with a deep investigation of the targeted individual . Investigation, surveillance, and harassment tactics are used in Africa .
 Information gathered about the target can later be used to tailor surveillance and harassment strategies . Information gathered on the target is later used to help tailor surveillance strategies .
 In some cases, an investigation could also reveal that the target is unsuitable for gang stalking because he or she has connections and resources which would enable the target to fight back .
 Law enforcement and intelligence personnel public and private at various levels are sometimes under pressure to be productive .
 Acts of subversion can be seamlessly incorporated into what is ostensibly an investigation . The investigation is supposed to be a criminal investigation into a crime .
 Stalking was one of the tactics used by the FBI in their subversion campaign against the actress Jean Seberg during their Cointelpro operations, for example .
 Cointelpro was also used to use slander as a tactic to smear individuals . The tactic was used in the anti-CointelPro campaign .
 An investigation provides a legally bullet-proof opportunity to slander the victim . An investigation can be a legally libelous opportunity for the victim's attorney to slander .
 If an investigator quietly begins questioning persons associated with a targeted individual, and tells them that he is conducting an investigation, it could easily destroy the target's reputation and relationships .
 The more you know about someone, the more you can control and manipulate them in all sorts of ways . The more information you have about someone you know, you can manipulate them .
 The FBI enlisted a local police chief, letter carriers, and a switchboard operator at Swarthmore College to spy on campus and black activist groups in the Philadelphia area .
 Another function of gang stalking is to exact revenge against the victim . Gang stalking is also a way of exacting revenge against a victim .
 Stalking is a form of extra-judical punishment for anyone who crosses someone with connections to the vast homeland security infrastructure . Stalking is an extra-judicial punishment for those who cross someone with connection to the security infrastructure.
 Constant surveillance of targeted individuals is also an element of subversion . Constant surveillance is also part of subverted subversion in the U.S. government .
 Anyone who knows that he or she is under constant surveillance will not only be inhibited from acting against the interests of the client of the gang stalkers . He or she will also find it difficult to fight back against the harassment or evade the surveillance itself because many efforts at counter-measures will
 Anyone who is aware that he or she is constantly being watched by illegal spying will suffer the emotional trauma caused by having virtually no privacy . In addition, anyone who is . aware that they are constantly being . watched by . illegal spying . will suffer emotional trauma .
 “Harassment” does not begin to convey the severity of the cumulative psychological effects of organized stalking . On the other hand, “harassment’s” doesn’t begin to indicate the seriousness of stalking .
 Slander, verbal abuse, noise, threats by strangers, constant surveillance, and other tactics, performed daily over a period of years will cause psychological torture, social isolation, and financial destruction .
 Gang stalking is a term used by perperators of gang stalking . Regardless of whether that term is actually used, it is an appropriate description . Gang stalking may be a crime, but gang stalking is not a crime .
 Historical origins of psychological torture methods have ancient roots . Some of the psychological operations tactics described below have been used in the past .
 The use of noise to torment enemies dates back to the warfare of early civilizations including the siege of Jericho in the Old Testament .
 Noise is still used in U.S. military psychological operations . Details about such tactics are mostly classified .
 Some of the core principles of organized stalking harassment are used in military interrogations such as those conducted on terrorist suspects at Guantanamo .
 Several of these concepts were documented by the sociologist Albert D Biderman, in a 1957 journal article about coercive interrogation methods used by the Chinese to obtain confessions from American prisoners during the Korean War .
 Biderman’s Chart of Coercion is on page 48 of this report . Tactics chosen for their lack of directly observable and legally persuasive evidence .
 "The idea is to completely destroy someone without leaving fingerprints," he says . The idea is that someone will destroy themselves without leaving a trace .
 Intelligence-gathering and policing are often done in ways that make it inherently difficult to prove misconduct . Police often do not prove misconduct in the way they gather information .
 Gang stalking employs a refined set of practices specifically chosen for the lack of legally incriminating evidence, and for the likelihood that victims’ accounts will be perceived as simply paranoid impressions of routine events when described to others . Gang stalking is specifically chosen to avoid the possibility of legal evidence .
 'Psychological torture' is a form of real psychological torture for stalking victims . Gang stalking victims are stalked constantly by gang stalkers, says author .
 Counter-intelligence subverted tactics include counterintelligence subverting . Counter-espionage subverting tactics are the primary tactics associated with subversion . Counterintelligence subverts are the most common tactics used to subvertize intelligence agencies .
 A gang stalking campaign starts employing these tactics long before the victim has any clue that he or she is being systematically targeted . Keep in mind that, by all accounts, these tactics start long before victims realize they are being targeted .
 Many of the early instances of harassment are only understood by the victim later when the whole process becomes clear . The victim's experiences are often not understood in the early stages of the process .
 By that point, often the harassment and slandering might have been going on for years . By that time, it might have gone on for several more years .
 “Gang Stalking” is, very likely, a disinformation term created by U.S. intelligence agencies . A Brief Explanation of the ‘disinformation term’ is below .
 News reports indicate that such stalking is also sometimes used unofficially for personal and corporate vendettas by current and former employees of law enforcement and intelligence agencies .
 Counterintelligence stalking goes far beyond surveillance into the realm of psychological terrorism, it is essentially a form of extrajudicial punishment . Counterterrorism stalking goes beyond surveillance and into the territory of psychological terror, says CNN.com .
 It clearly violates the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution, for example which guarantees the right to a trial . The case is being investigated by the U.S. Supreme Court .
 Such operations violate similar fundamental rights defined by state constitutions, which people on the right of America’s political spectrum claim to respect . Such operations also violate the fundamental rights of the U.S. Constitution, the ACLU says .
 Stalking is also specifically prohibited by the criminal codes of every state in America . Stalking also is prohibited in every state of America .
 "Many of their activities have neither constitutional nor moral legitimacy," author says . "They sometimes conduct their operations under the color of law," he says .
 The CIA and NSA have well-documented histories of abusing their powers . All of those groups and other federal intelligence agencies, such as the NSA and CIA, have history of abuse .
 Organized stalking methods were used extensively by communist East Germany’s Stasi as a means of maintaining political control over its citizens . The Stasi used stalking methods to maintain political control of citizens .
 The most well-documented example of such operations was the FBI’s infamous Cointelpro under the direction of J Edgar Hoover . The FBI's infamous operation was the most well known .
 The operations ran from 1956 until 1971 when they were exposed by political activists who broke into an FBI office and obtained secret documents . The documents were handed over to the press .
 Cointelpro’s official goal was to “expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, discredit or otherwise neutralize” individuals and groups deemed to be subversive, it said . The group's official goal is to ‘expose’, “
 Perpetrators use common annoyances such as constant noise by neighbors or rude comments and abusive behavior by strangers, but on a frequent long-term basis .
 "The cumulative effects of relentless exposure to such tactics can amount to psychological torture for the victim," says victim's lawyer . The cumulative effects are psychological torture .
 Accounts by numerous victims of organized stalking share common specific details . The perpetrators are following a well-tested and standardized playbook of methods that have proven to be easily kept off of the radar of potential witnesses and the mainstream news media .
 The following published news reports are discussed in more detail later in this overview . They are accompanied by links to the original sources . The following news reports will be discussed in a more detailed overview of the situation .
 Edward Snowden’s revelations about the National Security Agency in 2013 and 2014 generated a great deal of public discussion about mass surveillance . U.S. domestic counterintelligence activities receive relatively little attention .
 This is despite reports such as those which follow from sources across the political spectrum . This is so despite reports that follow from reports from across political parties .
 Published articles and anecdotal reports have appeared with increasing frequency alleging that something comparable to the FBI’s Cointelpro operations is still happening, although it naturally involves more advanced surveillance technology .
 One of the first significant works of investigative journalism about U.S. counterintelligence operations in the post-Cointelpro era appeared just 7 months after the United States Senate’s “Church Committee” issued its final report about MK Ultra and MK Ultra . MK Ultra
 LEIUs or “Red Squads” have existed in America since the late 1800s . The private national network of such intelligence units that was quietly formed in the 1950s had remained and still remains mostly unknown .
 Several police departments belonging to the group have recently been caught in illegal wiretapping, burglary, and spying on the private lives of ordinary citizens . Several of the police departments belong to the organization have been caught .
 A Los Angeles Times article published in September 1979 under the headline “FBI Admits Spreading Lies About Jean Seberg” was the lead story on the paper’s front page . The FBI admitted to spreading lies about Seberg .
 Seberg a successful film actress and political activist had died the month before in Paris from an apparent suicide . Seberg died a month earlier in Paris .
 As the Los Angeles Times reported, Seberg had been the target of a systematic campaign by the FBI to slander her . Seberg was accused of being the victim of a campaign of slander .
 She had also apparently been blacklisted and terrorized by the FBI using tactics associated with counterintelligence operations intended to neutralize political dissidents, such as “black bag jobs,” illegal wiretapping, and overt stalking .
 During the 1980s and 90s, a trend toward militarization began in American police departments . During the 80s and 1990s, police departments began militarization .
 For example, Special Weapons and Tactics teams were being created across the nation . Special weapons and tactics teams were also being created .
 Little news emerged about U.S. counterintelligence operations . However, relatively little news emerged .
 This is not to say that illegal spying was not taking place; it just mostly stayed out of the media . This was not the case of illegal spying in the U.S. It just stayed out the media.
 Secret Police exposed such spying in Los Angeles and explained how it was kept out of the news . Secret Police, who exposed the spying, said it was not a big news story . Secret police said it is not illegal to spy in the United States .
 Police Chief Daryl Gates apparently used threats and blackmail to scare city council members and the L.A. Times away from digging into his activities . Gates is accused of using threats to scare council members, the Los Angeles Times and the city's newspaper .
 In Los Angeles, police corruption was much more than unmarked envelopes stuffed with cash . L.A. police corruption is more than plain old envelopes, but it's a big problem .
 A cancer research scientist named Arnold Lockshin fled with his family to the Soviet Union in 1986 and was granted political asylum . The case of organized stalking by federal agents did appear in the news .
 An article in the Gadsen Times and other newspaper reports in October 1986 brought national attention to the case . The case was the subject of a series of newspaper reports .
 Lockshin says he and his family were being intensely harassed by agents because of the socialist political views of his wife and his wife . According to Locksin, agents were harassing him because of his political views . He says he was being harassed for his socialist views .
 News reports about domestic spying and subversion in the U.S. and other Western nations became more frequent in the post-9/11 era .
 Spying on civilians by the U.S. Army was one of the scandals which led to the famous Church Committee investigations by Congress in the mid-1970s .
 In October 2004 The Sunday Times published an article about the use of Stasi-type psychological operations to punish whistle-blowers by MI5 . MI5 is an intelligence agency with close ties to the United States intelligence community .
 The book’s title, 1996, was the year it became apparent to Naylor that she was being stalked . The book was published in 1996 .
 The Globe and Mail reported in 2006 that the Canadian Security Intelligence Service and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police used organized stalking techniques against terrorism suspects for whom they lacked sufficient evidence to prosecute .
 A Washington Post Magazine cover article in January 2007 portrayed self-proclaimed victims of gang stalking as intelligent and credible . It suggested that claims about exotic non-lethal weapons being used by the U.S. government were plausible .
 A self-proclaimed target of gang stalking had been distributing flyers in his former neighborhood in Verona, New Jersey, warning about organized stalking of targeted individuals .
 A post in October 2010 alleged that intelligence agencies in the U.S., U.K., and Canada use gang-like tactics to target individuals .
 A local TV news broadcast in January 2011 (on KION Channel 46 and KCBA Channel 35) featured a report about gang stalking referred to as such by the reporters and by Lieutenant Larry Richard .
 Police bought the house next to that of the city manager and used it as a base for psychological operations . The brazen tactics used by the police included purchasing the house . The police also used it to conduct psychological operations of the sort used by counterintelligence personnel .
 Florida’s Pulitzer Prize-winning Sun Sentinel reported in December 2012 on the organized stalking of a police officer . Other police officers and sheriff's deputies from multiple jurisdictions were involved .
 The stalking which included illegally snooping on the victim’s private data and efforts to harass and intimidate her was apparently done in retaliation . The stalking was apparently a retaliation for the incident .
 Navy Yard shooter may have been tormented by gang stalking, according to reports . Gang stalking, such as constant noise harassment, is said to have been a factor in the shooting .
 A TV news broadcast in West Virginia on 14 November 2013 (on CBS affiliate WDTYV) included a report about “organized stalking” The report featured two individuals from Pennsylvania who appeared to be credible and sincere, discussing their constant harassment .
 The plaintiff claims he was subjected to constant surveillance including inside his residence and his vehicle . He also claims psychological harassment from co-workers and strangers . The plaintiff says he is being stalked and harassed by strangers .
 Research biologist Tyrone Hayes discovered some disturbing effects from a pesticide made by the agribusiness corporation Syngenta . Hayes discovered the disturbing effects of the pesticide . Hayes: "Syngenta" is a company that makes pesticides used to grow food for humans .
 When he refused to keep quiet about it, the corporation’s goon squad began slandering him to discredit him . He refused to be silent about it and said it was a mistake .
 They also stalked him, hacked his emails, and threatened him for more than a decade . They also threatened him, he said, "and stalked" him, and hacked him .
 A report on the ABC News TV program 20/20 and an article in the Daily Mail in May 2014 chronicled the ordeal of a couple in Hubbard, Ohio who were systematically harassed for 7 years in a vengeance campaign orchestrated by the town’s fire chief .
 The fire chief was angry at the couple because of a real estate dispute, so he enlisted the help of other firefighters, police officers, and local residents to perpetrate a campaign of constant vehicle horn honking outside the couple’s home .
 The harassment which the couple thoroughly documented on video resulted in legal claims which were still pending at the time of the news reports .
 A disinformation campaign is a common tactic in counterintelligence operations . The low profile of organized stalking in the media is a factor contributing to the low profile .
 In the case of organized stalking, the disinformation is mainly intended to mitigate exposure of the program . The disinformation is aimed at minimising exposure to the program, the author says .
 The intended effect is to convey the impression that everyone who claims to be targeted by gang stalking is simply delusional . The intended purpose of this article is to show that everyone claims to have been stalked is delusional .
 An additional disinformation strategy has been the establishment of front groups most notably, FFCHS ostensibly a gang stalking victims support group, but actually an organization run by counterintelligence operatives . The group is a counterintelligence operation run by operatives .
 An estimated 445,220 stalking victims reported being stalked by three or more perpetrators . U.S. Department of Justice crime statistics from a 2006 survey indicated that 445,000 stalked victims were stalked in the United States .
 The total silence of the DOJ and FBI on this crime is an obvious clue that it is sanctioned by those agencies, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Ted L Gunderson was a high-level FBI official during the Cointelpro era . Gunderson is a former FBI official who worked in the 1990s and early '90s . He was a member of the FBI's Board of Directors .
 Cointelpro began to re-emerge in the 1980s, he says . After he retired from the agency he asserted that a much more sophisticated version of the agency began to emerge in the 80s . He says he believes the agency's new version began to resurface in
 Gunderson’s affidavit on the subject is included in the overview below . Gunderson's affidavit is part of an overview of the case . A link to the affidavit is included below .
 Local and federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies now share crime and national security information via a nationwide network of data “fusion centers” an element of the extensive post-9/11 homeland security infrastructure . The fusion centers are part of a nationwide data fusion network .
 America’s now-vast industry of intelligence-security contractors, federal intelligence agencies, and hundreds of local police department Law Enforcement Intelligence Units make it difficult to speculate about how domestic counterintelligence operations are currently being administered .
 Increasingly-common reports of illegal spying by corporations as well as reports of police officers and federal agents sometimes initiating gang stalking operations for personal vendettas .
 Numerous job listings by intelligence/security contractor corporations for “surveillance role players” with active security clearances and training in counterintelligence . These jobs are outsourced by federal law enforcement agencies .
 A June 10, 2013 article in USA Today noted that about 1. million Americans had top-secret security clearances . About 1.2 million Americans are believed to have top security clearance .
 It would be natural for such informants to be used in a counterintelligence program, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: It's a good idea to use informants in counterintelligence programs .
 The original Cointelpro was found by the United States Senate’s Church Committee investigations to have delegated some activities to organized crime groups . Indeed, it was found that some activities were delegated some of the activities by organized crime .
 Any national counterintelligence program would require at least passive acquiescence by the Department of Justice . The first version of Cointelpro did .
 U.S. Attorney General Robert F Kennedy approved some of the original Cointelpro operations . United States attorney general Robert F. Kennedy approved the original operations . The original operations were conducted by Cointepro .
 Because of the critical role of the DOJ in allowing organized stalking to occur, I devote an entire section of this overview to that agency . The DOJ has a critical role in the way organized stalking occurs .
 The nature of organized stalking by design is such that it is difficult to comprehend and evaluate without considering it in its full context . I urge readers to consider the evidence presented here in its totality .
 Published news and analysis of subjects such as police corruption, privacy, surveillance, and various government scandals are relevant to organized stalking in ways which I try to make clear .
 I hope readers are not put-off by my sometimes harsh views on related political topics . I hope you don't put off by my harsh views of politics .
 "I express my opinions here candidly, and the intensity of my rhetoric is partly a function of having been on the sharp end of gang stalking for years," he says . I express my views candidly. I express myself here .
 As for my analysis of organized stalking, I try to be as measured and cautious as possible . The subject requires a certain amount of speculation because of the secrecy and deception which surrounds it .
 Given the current state of technologies and government policies concerning surveillance, the average American faces many potential and actual invasions of privacy . Given the state of technology and government policy concerning surveillance .
 For individuals targeted for gang stalking, the situation is infinitely worse . The situation is far worse for individuals targeted by gang stalking .
 Anyone associated with the professional news media who is interested in additional information about my personal experiences with gang stalking can reach me at the email address I have provided . Anyone with information about gang stalking should contact me at this email address .
 For victims of gang stalking, I hope that the information I post here will be helpful . For victims, please contact us at http://www.mailonline.com/crime/gangstalk .
 Counterintelligence is the assessment and countering of threats posed by enemy subversion, espionage, and sabotage . Counterintelligence assesses and counters the threat posed by enemies subversion and espionage .
 Counterintelligence is the assessment and countering of threats posed by enemy subversion, espionage, and sabotage . Counterintelligence assesses and counteracts the threat posed by enemies .
 COINTELPRO was the name of a secret illegal counterintelligence program run by the FBI from 1956 until 1971 . The program was exposed by civilian activists in 1971 and subsequently investigated by Congress . The FBI was involved in the program .
 Church Committee investigations in the mid-1970s found that under Cointelpro U.S. law enforcement personnel and their various government and private citizen and criminal accomplices systematically spied on, slandered, terrorized, and committed acts of violence against dissidents .
 Gang stalking is the covert organized surveillance and harassment of a targeted individual by multiple perpetrators . Gang stalking occurs when multiple perpetrators are involved in the covert surveillance of the targeted individual .
 "The goal is to systematically isolate and harass the victim using tactics whose cumulative effects amount to psychological torture," the author says . The goal is systematically isolating and harassing the victim .
 As far as I know, the term ‘gang stalking’ has not yet found its way into any major print publication dictionaries . It is not surprising that a subject residing in the grey area of counterintelligence is not yet a major publication dictionary .
 Organized stalking of a targeted individual employs methods used in counterintelligence operations such as electronic and human surveillance, slander, disinformation and a variety of intensive long-term psychological operations methods .
 The Stasi communist East Germany’s infamous secret police agency monitored and terrorized citizens with the same tactics . East Germany's infamous Stasi Communist East Germany was monitored by the same police agency .
 The latter term refers to the fact that the activity is sometimes associated with political causes . The term "political activity" is sometimes used to refer to political causes.
 In his book Stopping a Stalker, Robert L Snow devoted a chapter to organized stalking by multiple perpetrators associated with causes such as abortion clinic staff members by extreme anti-abortion activists .
 The best term for the counterintelligence operations widely referred to as “gang stalking’s” would be the term “COINTELPRO Stalking” because that is exactly what it is . Arguably, the best term would be “CoINTEL
 An estimated 445,220 stalking victims reported being stalked by 3 or more perpetrators . The Prevalence of Stalking by Multiple Perpetrators is based on U.S. Department of Justice crime statistics .
 DOJ Stalking Survey 2006: Percentage comparable to what appears in crime surveys in the U.K. a nation with whom U.S. intelligence agencies have very close ties .
 British Crime Survey 1998 . Number of victims stalked by ‘four or more” perpetrators is more relevant to organized stalking . Victims stalked with four or more perpetrators .
 An attomey contacted the National Center for Victims of Crime in October 2008 to inquire about the frequency of reports the center receives about organized stalking crimes . Keith Labella contacted the center for victims of crime .
 Despite the frequency of calls to their helpline, the center offered no guidance or referral to other agencies or organizations .
 The U.S. Department of Justice never publicly discusses the issue of counterintelligence stalking, not even to dismiss it as nonsense . Make of it what you will, but the Justice Department never discusses it .
 In a society as heavily-policed as America now is a society whose National Security Agency is tracking everyone’s phone calls and Internet activity . It is inconceivable that tens of thousands or more cases of criminal stalking (as documented in the DOJ crime statistics) fail to appear on
 There are no mention of such crimes by the federal government anywhere except in those statistics . Yet there is no mention in the statistics of crimes committed by the government .
 Organized stalking (the monitoring and “disruption” of the activities of targeted individuals) is being perpetrated as part of a counterintelligence program . There is no other explanation for organized stalking, says author .
 It is being done illegally as it violates state laws against stalking and the United States Constitution’s prohibitions against unreasonable searches and punishment without a trial . It also violates state law against stalking as well as U.S. Constitution's prohibition against unreasonable search .
 The most fundamental explanation for the low-profile of gang stalking is that counterintelligence operations by definition are performed covertly . Covert Methods are used by counterintelligence agents, the author says .
 The FBI’s original version of Cointelpro remained undetected by the public until stolen secret documents were leaked to the press . The FBI's original version was undetected until the leak of stolen documents was leaked .
 Law enforcement and intelligence agency personnel involved in counterintelligence activities are bound by secrecy oaths . Security Clearances are required for counterintelligence agents to obtain security clearance .
 This is also true of the vast industry of private contractors employed by those agencies . Private contractors are also employed by the agencies .
 Job ads for “surveillance role players” require active security clearance, counterintelligence training . For example, job ads posted by security intelligence contractors require active clearance . The job ads require counter intelligence training and security clearance .
 Judges who sit on the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act court are bound by secrecy oaths . Judges who review legal issues about secret federal policies are also bound to secrecy oath . Similarly, judges who sit in the F.I.S. court which reviews legal issues on secret foreign policies are bound
 Members of the House and Senate intelligence committees sit on intelligence committees . Intelligence committees are also members of Congress and the White House .
 Agencies such as the FBI are exempt from the Whistleblower Protection Act . Exemptions include the FBI and the National Security Council .
 Agent who tries to reveal unethical behavior by the agency faces potentially serious legal consequences . Agent who reveals unethical behavior could face legal consequences if he reveals it .
 Contractors of intelligence agencies are also not protected by the Whistleblower Protection Act . Contractors are not protected under the act .
 In an investigation, law enforcement personnel can order witnesses to keep silent . In this case, police can order people to keep quiet during an investigation .
 The FBI issues an administrative subpoena called a “National Security Letter” The document has a gag order attached which prohibits the recipient from discussing it . For example, when the FBI issues a National Security Letter, the document is attached with the gag order .
 Subversion tactics used by the FBI include many tactics from the original version of Cointelpro, and some which were futher refined by East Germany’s Stasi .
 The idea is to destroy the victim psychologically and socially and financially by forms of criminal harassment which create minimal objective evidence from the perspective of witnesses and courts . The victim is being targeted psychologically and financially, and the victim is destroyed psychologically .
 Gang stalking victims are subjected to a form of real psychological torture, the intensity of the intensity must be experienced to comprehend . But for gang stalking victims, these things happen constantly which becomes a form .
 Americans are largely unaware of the history of well-documented relevant programs, such as the FBI's Cointelpro operations and the CIA’s MK Ultra . Both were thoroughly investigated and exposed by Congress in the 1970s .
 The Stasi’s use of Zersetzung was a set of methods virtually identical to current gang stalking in America . The methods were similar to those used by the Stasi in East Germany .
 Nearly three-quarters of Americans do not know what the Cold War was about . 29 percent of Americans cannot even name the vice president .
 Counterintelligence operations thrive in an environment of such widespread ignorance . Counterintelligence ops can thrive in such an environment, the author says . Counterterrorism operations can thrive, he says .
 Even well-educated individuals are unlikely to recognize the connections between a local situation in which they are told that a neighbor or co-worker is under investigation .
 64 percent of the public cannot name the three branches of their federal government . A fourth of the people do not even know that the earth revolves around the sun . Still, it can only make things easier for an agency such as the FBI to recruit vigilante citizen volunteers .
 Organized stalking goes mostly undiscussed in the mainstream news media . Cowardice, Laziness, & Incompetence in the Mainstream News Media go unnoticed .
 There are some notable exceptions most frequently in the local and alternative press .
 This silence in the press is largely the result of the kinds of self-censorship documented in sources such as Kristina Borjesson’s Into the Buzzsaw, and Noam Chomsky's Manufacturing Consent . This silence is largely a result of self censorship, as well as
 It would be difficult to overstate the significance of the news media's cowardice as a factor in keeping modern Cointelpro operations off of the public’s radar . News media cowardice is key to keeping modern operations off the public's radar .
 For perspective, one has to re-consider the reporting on crimes by U.S. intelligence agencies during the 1970s . The crimes were reported by the United States intelligence agencies in the 70s .
 A book by historian Kathryn S Olmsted, Challenging the Secret Government, makes the case that Americans overestimate the boldness of the journalism during that period . A new book by the historian argues that the press overreacted to the government's boldness .
 The following review of Olmsted’s book gives a sense of what really happened . The book will be published by the National Geographic Society .
 The news media generally had a loss of nerve at a critical moment in America’s history . With a few notable exceptions such as Seymour Hersh and Daniel Schorr the news media often had a lack of nerve .
 "We missed a golden opportunity to fully expose the deep corruption in the U.S. intelligence community," he says . "As a result, we missed the opportunity to implement serious reforms," he adds .
 Conventional wisdom would have it that, in the wake of Vietnam and Watergate, the nation’s press was emboldened to enter a new phase of investigative zeal . This is not the case, but it's the case of Watergate .
 Olmsted, a lecturer in history at U.C.Davis, provides an absorbing contrarian account of the extent to which, with a few singular exceptions, the press retreated .
 Olmsted charts how Hersh’s story, along with a cautious but competitive exploration of FBI abuses by the Washington Post, resulted in two congressional investigations that also had the potential to break the code of deference previously accorded to organizations responsible for national security by both Congress and
 Both press and Congress quietly retreated to the same silk-gloved handling of the CIA and FBI in the name of national security . This is a fascinating study of how, just months after Watergate, both press and . Congress quietly retreats to the . same silk glided handling of CIA
 Search results on the Internet’s largest search engine, Google, fluctuate wildly for particular words and phrases over time . Disinformation is the subject of a new series of stories on the subject .
 Google search results provide a rough indication of the online presence of certain topics . Only people within Google know the exact policies and algorithms which determine those results .
 A Google query of the term ‘gang stalking’ in October 2013 yielded over six million results . A Google search for the term 'gang stalking' yielded over 6 million results in October .
 Anyone even familiar with counterintelligence will recognize this tactic; it's called disinformation . Anyone even superficially familiar with it will recognize it as a tactic .
 Organized stalking has been able to remain mostly below the public’s radar . This is another reason organized stalking is being able to stay below the radar .
 Disinformation is used to muddy the waters surrounding the topic wherever it is discussed online . Disinformation has been used in the past to muddy up the waters around the topic .
 If you view all of the mainstream press reports about domestic spying, counterintelligence activities, and gang stalking from the past decade, it is clear that something is going on . Failure to Connect the Dots is a failure to connect the dots .
 Few people see most of the reports let alone all of them together and combined with the context provided by the analysis you are now reading . On the other hand, very few people see all of those reports, let alone .
 The evidence grows every year that a governmentsanctioned program of informants and domestic spying and organized stalking is an element of the current homeland security infrastructure . If you browse through the “Published News Reports on Gang Stalking” section of this overview, you will see that the evidence
 Few civilians ever see the evidence all grouped together, and therefore they are very unlikely to realize what is happening . Unfortunately, very few civilians ever ever see that evidence all together .
 These investigations can be initiated with no evidence that any criminal activity has occurred, FBI says . The investigations can involve such intrusive measures as physical surveillance, recruitment of criminal informants, interviewing associates of the person being investigated and deploying undercover FBI agents .
 The FBI’s internal rules were further relaxed in 2011 so that without even opening an assessment agents can begin searching commercial databases for information about the individual being investigated . Agents can also search through the subject's trash and search through his trash .
 Expansion of the powers wielded by the ‘surveillance state’ has been occurring in the U.K. as well . The U.S. has been experiencing an erosion of civil liberties in recent years .
 Citizens of the United States should be mindful of that fact because of a close relationship between the intelligence communities of both nations . Citizens of U.S. should be aware of that .
 Among the secret documents revealed by NSA whistle-blower Edward Snowden were presentation slides about how the NSA assisted its British equivalent, GCHQ, in developing technology that was used to spy on citizens via their webcams .
 The Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 expanded the surveillance powers of the government in the name of national security . In the same way that the U.S. government slashed some of Americans’ traditional rights by legislation such as the Patriot Act, in the UK .
 As far as I know, the members of Parliament did not hold much public discussion about how the U.K.’s intelligence agencies might want to spy on a couple of million innocent citizens via their webcams .
 The potential for abuse of power by members of private intelligence corporations and government agencies in all of this is enormous, says author .
 The abuse was reported partly because it was directed at members of the news media . Here is an example of such abuse which was reported in the news .
 One of the counterintelligence tactics which the federal government hires intelligence contractors to perform is spreading disinformation . The government hires contractors to spread disinformation, which is spread by the government .
 Most Americans would probably be surprised to learn that systematically spreading lies is even a government contractor job which their taxes are funding . But they underestimate the extent to which the United States government’s defense budget has become a pig trough for shady contractors .
 If you criticize a comedian, you will likely become the target of a joke . You will likely be the target for a joke, comedian says . Comedians should be careful to avoid being targeted by comedians .
 A reporter and editor at USA Today investigated and reported on the United States propaganda industry in 2012, they were anonymously slandered by those same contractors .
 Slander is just one of the tactics used in organized stalking by counterintelligence operations . Counterintelligence operations are often used to stifle journalists and journalists .
 Any or all of the tactics which are described in detail in a section of this overview could be used as a weapon by people in the business .
 In theory, an organized stalking operation against an individual could be initiated by anyone familiar with the tactics who has associates willing to participate . Anyone familiar with these tactics could be able to participate in a stalking operation .
 Perpetrators with financial resources could easily employ private investigators, others with relevant technical skills to wage a sophisticated operation against someone .
 Someone with connections to current or former law enforcement or intelligence agency personnel or military personnel with a background in intelligence could mount a very serious campaign against a victim without even involving government agencies in the initial stages .
 In a tactic called “baiting’s” a surveillance operation can selectively capture evidence of a targeted person responding to harassment . The tactic is called "baiting" and is a tactic used to selectively capture video of a person being targeted .
 Evidence could then be used to justify the initiation of more formal scrutiny by a government agency . That evidence could be used by the government .
 At whatever point it becomes useful or necessary, the perpetrators can turn over to the government counterintelligence personnel . The perpetrators can officially or unofficially turn over whatever they have gathered to have the individual targeted .
 Organized stalking tactics (and a national counterintelligence program which uses such tacics) could easily be exploited and probably are as a weapon against individuals who are disliked for any reason by someone who is either a member of intelligence/security firms, law enforcement agencies, and intelligence agencies .
 Being a member of the FBI-corporate alliance called InfraGard could create a perfect opportunity to have someone blacklisted . Being a corporate alliance with the FBI could create an opportunity to blacklist someone .
 Being associated with the national counterintelligence program of organized stalking is like having a cousin who is in the Mafia, says the author . The author of the book, "Stalkergate," says it's like a Mafia cousin who's in the family .
 A leaked secret report from British law enforcement authorities found that many law firms, wealthy individuals, and large corporations hire private investigators to conduct illegal spying for them . The report was published in June 2013 .
 Freemasons have been repeatedly linked to corruption in the police and judiciary . One particular method identified was to become a member of the Freemasons, which has been linked to corrupt practices .
 Almost onethird of those top secret clearances belong to contractors rather than government employees . Almost all of the clearances are given to contractors, not government employees, officials say .
 The budget for U.S. intelligence activities is mostly kept secret . It is clear that monitoring of American citizens is taken seriously by their government .
 A common critique of the modern U.S. government is that it has become unbalanced by the massive expansion of power and secrecy in the executive branch . A common and accurate critique is that the modern government is unbalanced .
 A related problem is that the now-vast network of federal agencies (whose officials are non-elected) operate with minimal accountability . The problem is a lack of accountability in the federal government .
 The potential to be corrupted by power is infinitely greater in law enforcement and intelligence agencies such as the FBI, CIA, and the NSA which operate mostly in secrecy . This is true to some extent in all agencies since they issue and enforce regulations .
 The Threat to American Democracy Posed by the Spying Industry . Even Eisenhower was corrupted by the kind of power he warned against .
 In Iran, a democratically-elected prime minister was overthrown by the CIA (and its British counterpart MI6), and replaced by a monarchy . Iran's government was ousted in 2009 after a vote by the British government . Iran is now the world's most powerful state of power .
 CIA also trained the repressive police force used to maintain the dictatorship . The CIA trained the police force .
 In Guatemala, the CIA overthrew a democratically-elected president and installed a military dictatorship . Similarly, in Guatemala, it overthrew an elected president and replaced him with a dictatorship .
 In both cases, the motives were corporate greed and the desire for U.S. government hegemony . The motives were the same in both cases .
 The current counterintelligence program poses a threat to democracy itself, since it can be used against anyone who dares to question the legitimacy of the government’s authority . In addition to the extreme violations of the Constitutional and state rights of the particular individuals targeted for organized stalking, the current
 The FBI’s original COINTELPRO operations were illegal and disturbing abuses of power . The modern version is similarly corrupt, and it is supported by the now-vast network of powerful secretive agencies .
 About 70 percent of America’s budget for intelligence activities goes to private contractors, a 2012 report from the Director of National Intelligence says .
 The collusion between corporations and the federal government in the area of domestic surveillance is inherently dangerous . It's inherently dangerous for corporations to work with the government in domestic surveillance, says author .
 To have them colluding with one another in secret, inexorably arranging things so that there’s disincentive for disagreement among them, is terrifying, says the author .
 Political support for a Stasi Big Brother police state in the U.S. is partly rooted in hawkish views about law enforcement and anti-terrorism strategy . But it's mostly rooted in greed, and it's rooted in the greed of the West .
 Congress voted in July 2013 on whether to rein-in the NSA’s domestic surveillance program which tracks Americans’ phone calls and emails . House members who voted to continue the surveillance received twice as much campaign finance money from the military and intelligence industry .
 Americans not normally permitted to know how much of their money the federal government spends on spying . Americans are not allowed to know about the amount of money the government spends .
 Defenders of Constitutional liberties are up against a powerful and well-financed industry of parasites . Defenders of constitutional liberties up against powerful well-funded parasites, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Frontline produced a fascinating documentary in April 2013 about the secretive agencies and corporations which make up the modern military and law enforcement industrial complex . Frontline also produced a documentary about the secret world of the military and police agencies .
 The whole thing is interesting, but if nothing else, watch the set-up and the five minutes in the middle about journalists uncovering the massive shadowy industry of private intelligence firms .
 The Washington Post articles upon which the documentary was based were the product of one of the most thorough investigations of the American police state . The documentary is based on the findings of the Washington Post investigations .
 Journalists spent two years investigating the vast network of agencies and corporations performing secret homeland security operations . More than a dozen journalists spent two .
 Journalist Barrett Brown is in jail facing charges related to his role in exposing information leaked by hackers who obtained internal emails from private intelligence firms . Brown on the Role of Private Intelligence/Security Contractors .
 Leaked emails reveal plans to discredit journalist Glenn Greenwald and critics of the Chamber of Commerce by spreading lies about them . Activities revealed in those leaked emails included things such as plotting to discredit journalists .
 At least some secret firms engage in the kind of actions which the CIA might perform against foreign enemies but they do so on behalf of corporate interests . In other words, at least some of these numerous secret firms .
 Here is an excellent article by Barrett Brown on this topic published in the Guardian in July 2013 .
 Drudge Report linked to a brief article posted the day before on InfoWars about a job announcement posted in San Diego . The job announcement was posted on August 21, 2013 . Drudge report linked to an article posted by InfoWars on the same day .
 As I explain in detail in the ‘Organizational Structure’ section of this overview, these job listings are numerous . The job listings for these positions are numerous, including many of the top management positions .
 All of the job listings specify that applicants must have active secret clearances and counterintelligence training . Applicants must also have active clearance clearance and counter intelligence training .
 Multiple indications suggest that these could be jobs for gang stalkers . I have so far been unable to locate any mainstream news reports that might shed light on this issue .
 Law Enforcement & Intelligence Agencies’ Support of a Corporate Agenda . Collusion between corporations and the federal law enforcement/intelligence community is not limited to companies in the spying industry . Law enforcement and intelligence agencies’ support of a corporate agenda is a problem .
 Infragard chapters serve as representatives of private sector ‘stakeholders’ in many of the nation’s fusion centers . Infragar chapters represent private sector stakeholders in the fusion centers, the group says .
 DSAC is a public-private intelligence sharing partnership between the FBI, United States DHS I&A and several of the nation’s leading corporate/financial interests . DSAC partners with the FBI and DHS .
 Some of these corporate/financial interests comprise the DSAC Leadership Board . The DSAC leadership board is comprised of corporate interests . DSAC was founded in 1973 .
 DSAC Leadership Board consists of 29 corporations and banks, including several that have been the subject of OWS protests/criticism . DSAC leadership board includes several entities that have criticized the Occupy Wall Street movement .
 Bank of America, MasterCard, Citigroup, American Express, Barclays, RBS Citizens, 3M, Archer Daniels Midland, ConocoPhillips, Time Warner and Wal-Mart are among the winners .
 DSAC chairmen from FBI and United States DHS I&A are co-chaired by a representative of these private sector interest . Grant Ashley, vice president of global security for Merck & Co.
 The March 2008 issue of The Progressive featured an article about this creepy corporate spy club . InfraGard members can be found in the U.S.
 InfraGard’s communications with the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security can be kept hidden from the public, as they are covered by the “trade secrets” exemption of the Freedom of Information Act . It seems the communications are covered under the exemption of Freedom of
 In a 2009 TV program, Jesse Ventura, the former governor of Minnesota, interviewed Matthew Rothschild, senior editor of the Progressive about InfraGard . Rothschild is a senior editor at the Progressive .
 Ventura confronted a member of InfraGard regarding the partnership’s obvious potential for abuse of power . Ventura also confronted the member of the group . Ventura says he confronted the group about the potential for misuse of power in the partnership .
 Gang stalking is a weapon for people with connections to the government’s intelligence and law enforcement agencies, and their contractors . Gang stalking can be used to target people who have connections with the government, law enforcement, and contractors .
 The fact that counterintelligence subversion could theoretically be used against someone who poses an actual threat to society makes it easy to rationalize the existence of such a program for example, within the Justice Department .
 Since such operations are covert, they are subject to no real oversight, the government says . The U.S. government has no oversight of the covert operation, it says .
 Outsourcing creates plausible deniability for those at the top of the food chain . Outsourcing most of the work to the now-vast industry of private contractor firms creates deniable deniability .
 Mike Lofgren offers a sort of unified theory of the current U.S. power structure . He attempts to explain the connections between Washington, Wall Street, the Pentagon, Silicon Valley, the intelligence community and law enforcement . In the TV interview and essay linked below, Mike .
 This big picture view is helpful to understand U.S. national security and law enforcement policy of which domestic counterintelligence operations are an element . This is important to understand United States national security, law enforcement .
 Lofgren’s views on this subject are not entirely unique, but he does an excellent job of explaining the concept . Other observers have written about the distinction between the formal elected government and the informal “shadow government” or “deep state”
 Washington insider experience, having spent nearly three decades as a congressional staffer . He has served on the powerful House and Senate Budget Committees . He also speaks with Washington insiders experience .
 Lofgren refers to ‘the deep state’ as a hybrid of corporate America and the national security state . Lofren refers to the deep state as the hybrid of the corporate and national security states .
 Mike Lofgren appeared on Moyers and Company in February 2014 to discuss his views on the deep state . He appeared on the show to talk about his thoughts on the state of America .
 Lofgren’s portrayal of the deep rot in Washington has been met with reactions . Here is a webpage of reactions to her portrayal of Washington .
 Heidi Boghosian, director of the National Lawyers Guild, says she is disappointed with the decision . She says the decision was a mistake .
 It is soldered by plutocracy, perpetual war, reduction of industrial capacity, U.S. exceptionalism and political malfunction . The United States exceptionalism is the result of political malfunctions, says CNN's John Sutter .
 NSA whistle-blower Russ Tice made the comments in an interview from September 2013 . Tice said the U.S. government is using the NSA to spy on Americans .
 Many of the individuals and organizations who make up America’s “shadow government” are listed there along with explanations of their connections .
 Chomsky is a professor of linguistics and philosophy at MIT . Chomsky is deservedly one of the most influential analysts of the nature of political power in America .
 His books, articles, speeches, and debates on the subject are so numerous that it can be difficult to know where to begin for someone who wants to become familiar with him .
 Chomsky gave a speech in Bonn, Germany, on June 17, 2013 . Chomsky's speech is a good place to start .
 In that speech, he explained that the standard view of capitalist democracy taught to American schoolchildren is essentially fictional . He said that the view of capitalism in American schools is essentially fiction .
 Roughly 70% of the population the lower 70% on the wealth/income scale they have no influence on policy . Roughly 80% of those in the lower income range have no power to influence policy .
 As you move up the wealth/income ladder, you get a little bit more influence on policy . As you get more influence in policy, you can influence the government .
 When you get to the top, which is maybe a tenth of one percent, people essentially get what they want, i.e. they determine the policy . When you're at the top you get what you want, you're likely to get it . iReport.com: Share
 Chomsky: America is essentially a one-party state, and the one party is the business party . Chomsky: The one party in the U.S. is America's business party, which is the only party to oppose the government .
 He argues that this general power structure has been the same since the nation’s founding . He says it's the same thing since the founding of the nation .
 If you think that things like voting and writing letters to your political representatives might help slow America’s mutation into a police state, you might want to re-evaluate how far things have already deteriorated . The U.S. is already in a state of lawlessness .
 Glennon suggests that in practice, much of our government no longer works that way . Though it’s a bedrock American principle that citizens can steer their own government, Glennon says .
 National Security and Double Government is self-governing, with virtually no accountability, transparency, or checks and balances of any kind . National security and national security apparatus is effectively self-governed, says author .
 There’s the one we elect, and then the one behind it, steering huge swaths of policy almost unchecked . President Obama is the president of the United States, but he's also the one in charge of policy .
 And indifference to the threat that is emerging from these concealed institutions, he says .
 Comedian George Carlin rants about the deep state in a 3-minute rant . Carlin: "Deep state" is a state of state. The deep state is not a democracy. It's a state. We need to have a democracy .
 Victims of organized stalking can only speculate about the exact nature of the shadowy network of perpetrators arrayed against them . A Gang Stalking Organization Chart chart charted the extent of the organization's activities .
 Different classes of perpetrators with different motivations and connections to the victim . That is made more difficult by the fact that the people who are overtly and covertly watching them are different classes of people .
 The street-level perpetrator is typically someone who appears to be a rough-looking homeless or near-homeless ex-con type . For example, the victim is typically a rough looking, homeless ex-convicts .
 Their interactions with the target require no technical skills; the perp is just following some simple instruction for example, to bump into the victim, or to make some specific creepy comment, or harass the victim at his or her residence by making noises .
 Participants in the stalking of course would not be told anything about who they are ultimately working for . Some participants are simply paid a small sum of cash by a person who approached them on the street to perform a single act of harassment .
 At a slightly higher level in the stalker food chain (among those who interact with the victims) are people who appear more clean-cut and are often carrying a cell phone presumably to communicate with their handlers .
 Some of the intermediate-level participants are apparently recruited because of their relevant technical skills or because their jobs afford them access to facilities and information relevant to the operation such as phone technicians, security guards, and landlords . Others are recruited because they have relevant skills .
 At the level above them are the people who actually orchestrate the operation . At the top of the operation is the person who actually orchestrates the operation. At the same time, the people behind the operation are the masterminds .
 The active support or approval of federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies would be necessary for such activities to occur without attracting interference from the massive homeland security infrastructure now in place .
 The Department of Homeland Security is the latest agency to crack down on terror threats . Homeland Security was founded in 1903 .
 The CIA is not supposed to be preying on Americans, but anyone who has read about MK Ultra knows that is a purely theoretical boundary . Technically, of course, the CIA is supposed to not pre-emptively target Americans . Anyone who knows MK Ultra can't be trusted to
 Anyone who has not been living in a cave since June 2013 knows that the NSA is deeply involved in unconstitutional domestic spying . Similarly, anyone who hasn't been living with the NSA knows that domestic spying is illegal in America .
 There is no way that everyone from local cops to the United States Attorney General is not in the know about organized stalking . And all those agencies plus others have access to the nationwide system of data “Fusion Centers”
 Other players in the overall process include Terrorism Liaison Officers who help choose some of the targets . Corporate partners such as InfraGard and DSAC, and Threat Assessment Teams in various civilian organizations .
 The perps include a type of person famously used by East Germany’s Stasi the civilian snitch .
 Stasi agents referred to such a person as an Inoffizielle Mitarbeiter unofficial collaborator . Such a person was referred to as an unofficial collaborator by the Stasi authorities .
 The same might be true of the U.S. judiciary’s “Star Chamber” the secret FISA Court . FISA Court is a secret chamber of the secret courts . The secret court is a secretive chamber of power in the United States .
 U.S. government has been caught doing such things before . Organized stalking of dissidents is a precedent for the government . The government has stalked dissidents before .
 Context provided by an awareness of documented crimes past and present by government agencies is critical for evaluating the plausibility of claims about ongoing counterintelligence operations in the U.S.
 Most Americans are unaware of the criminality which routinely occurs at the upper levels of government . Watergate and Iran-Contra scandals occasionally break into the public’s consciousness .
 The same government officials who oversee America’s domestic surveillance and law enforcement programs often have a casual attitude about their own obligation to obey the law .
 NSA whistle-blower Edward Snowden’s subsequent revelations proved that Clapper was lying to Congress . Clapper himself was forced to acknowledge that he lied to Congress which Clapper himself admitted . Snowden's subsequent revelations prove that Clapper lied .
 A typical American citizen would be prosecuted for perjury if he or she lied to Congress . Clapper obviously has no such concerns about perjury . A typical U.S. citizen would have been prosecuted for lying to Congress, he says .
 Intelligence agencies and federal law enforcement agencies exist in a mostly secret and politically-protected realm . As a practical matter, intelligence agencies exist outside the laws that bind the rest of us .
 The intelligence and law enforcement community enjoys virtually unconditional support from both major parties . Neither party has to worry about negative political consequences for its role in creating domestic surveillance programs which violate the Fourth Amendment .
 WikiLeaks published a searchable database of more than 1. million U.S. diplomatic and intelligence documents from the mid-1970s in April 2013 . In April 2013 WikiLeaks published more than a million declassified documents .
 The documents included a revealing transcript of a discussion involving then-Secretary of State Henry Kissinger . Kissinger was Secretary of State George W. Bush's secretary of state .
 The Freedom of Information Act is now required to obtain information from the government . "I’m afraid to say things like that. But since the FOI Act, I'm afraid to . But since I’ve been here, I don’t think that’
 Kissinger: For the average American, violating federal laws would be a serious matter . Kissinger: "For government officials like Kissinger it is literally a joke" Kissinger: The average American would be breaking federal laws, but for Kissinger it's a joke .
 A veteran intelligence official with decades of experience at various agencies identified to me what he sees as the real problem with the current NSA: “It’s increasingly become a culture of arrogance.” The official says the NSA has become increasingly arrogant .
 He himself was asked to skew the data an intelligence agency submitted to Congress, in an effort to get a bigger piece of the intelligence budget . The data was skewed by the intelligence agency to get more of a bigger part of the budget .
 He refused and was promptly replaced in his job, presumably by someone else who would do as told .
 Such behavior at the federal level sets the tone for law enforcement agencies lower down the food chain . Such behavior is a good example of law enforcement in the United States .
 Rasmussen poll found that more than twice as many American voters regard the federal government as a threat to their rights than those who view it as a protector of their rights . Rasmussen poll: More than twice the majority of Americans regard the government as an enemy of rights .
 The poll found 54 percent of voters considered the federal government to be a threat to individual liberties . The poll also found that 54 percent considered the government to threaten individual liberties. 54 percent said the government was the biggest threat to their liberties .
 Only 22 percent of Americans view the government as a source of protection of individual liberties . Only 22 per cent view government as source of protecting individual liberties.
 The bad news is that as a practical matter many people still naively assume that anyone who seems to be associated with law enforcement should be absolutely trusted as seen in this ABC TV show segment .
 Organized stalkers can easily exploit that fact to recruit accomplices by persuading them that they are assisting an investigation or a neighborhood watch surveillance program .
 This common tendency of blind obedience toward authority figures is such an important element of organized stalking that I address it in detail in its own section of this overview .
 A jury in the southern California city of Fullerton decided that it was OK with them that their local police department beat to death an unarmed mentally-ill homeless man . The man was unarmed and posed no risk to anyone, the jury said .
 The murder was captured on surveillance camera video, police say . It was not the first time the victim had been murdered in the past year .
 A 2013 Gallup poll found that 79 percent of U.S. residents believed that corruption was widespread throughout the government in America . Gallup poll: 79 percent believe that corruption is widespread in the government .
 Corruption is inherently difficult to measure, and public perception is an important indicator . This is a measurement of the perception of corruption, rather than corruption itself, but corruption is difficult to be measured .
 The intelligence and law enforcement industry operate mostly in secret with minimal oversight . Now imagine the depth of corruption in those corners of America’s government which operate in secret .
 America’s government doesn’t just engage in secret invasive surveillance and aggressive policing it also engages in crimes . But America's government engages in a crime, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 CIA constantly commits crimes according to the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, IC 21 . IC 21 is IC 21 as explained in chapter 6 of Into the Buzzsaw . For example, the CIA commits crimes .
 On the other hand, even when good reporting does occur, it often fails to penetrate the public’s consciousness . Even though good reporting often occurs, it doesn’t penetrate public consciousness .
 The CIA colluded with the Venezuelan National Guard to smuggle a ton of pure cocaine into the United States, a former DEA head says . That revelation and other reports of CIA involvement in the illicit drug trade seems to have minimal impact on the assumption that Americans should trust the nation’
 The moment of the 60 Minutes episode is included in a documentary by WhoWhatWhy on counterintelligence .
 A secretive unit within the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration instructs law enforcement officers in various agencies to lie about the origins of their investigations . Reuters revealed that as a matter of official policy a secretive unit in the DEA instructs officers to lie .
 The subject of crimes by police officers is generally under-reported in the mainstream corporate news media especially on national TV news . To evaluate the plausibility of widespread acquiescence in gang stalking by local police officers it is helpful to consider criminality by police generally .
 List of convictions of police officers on pages 24 to 47 of this report . Read the list of convictions for police officers in the past .
 The list is in alphabetical order by the officers’ names, and covers the past half-century . The list includes officers from the U.S. Army, Navy and Air Force Korea .
 Law enforcement agencies in America make extensive use of criminal informants in their investigations . Many cases authorize criminals to commit crimes when an agency believes it furthers its goals, as reported for example in USA Today .
 A document released in December 2013 showed that informant crimes authorized by the FBI increased another 5 percent in 2012 to 5,939 crimes . The FBI says informant crimes increased 5 percent last year, according to the document .
 During the original Cointelpro era, police arranged for police to assassinate two young members of the Black Power movement . They arranged for two young Black Power activists to be assassinated by police .
 Chicago police broke into the apartment at 4:00 in the morning and murdered them . The Chicago police actually carried it out, breaking in to the apartment and murdering them .
 Information about this, remarkably, was released at about the same time as Watergate . In fact, the information about this was released as Watergate was also released .
 Of course, the most well-known crimes by the FBI occurred during the COINTELPRO era, and I devote an entire section to that later in this overview of the FBI's crimes .
 Despite the extreme secrecy in which the agency operates, evidence continues to emerge of ongoing criminality, says CNN's John Defterios .
 U.S. officials are sometimes willing to perpetrate very serious crimes against their own citizens when they believe it could further their agendas . Operation Northwoods is the latest in a series of crimes committed by the United States against Americans .
 In the early 1960s, America’s top military leaders reportedly drafted plans to kill innocent people and commit acts of terrorism in U.S. cities to create public support for a war against Cuba .
 Plans reportedly included assassination of Cuban émigrés, sinking boats of Cuban refugees on the high seas, hijacking planes, blowing up a U.S. ship, and even orchestrating violent terrorism in USS cities . Code named Operation Northwoods, the plans reportedly included the possible assassination
 The plans were developed as ways to trick the U.S. public and the international community into supporting a war to oust Cuba’s then new leader, Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro was the Cuban leader .
 Body of Secrets is a new book by investigative reporter James Bamford about the history of America’s largest spy agency, the National Security Agency .
 The plans had the written approval of all of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . The plans were presented to President Kennedy’s defense secretary, Robert McNamara, in March 1962 .
 The civilian leaders apparently rejected the civilian leadership and have gone undisclosed for nearly 40 years . But they apparently were rejected by the civilian leaders .
 A few programs involving serious deception and criminality are not aberrations . My goal here is simply to cite a few examples to make the general case that such programs involve serious deception .
 A U.S. cruise missile struck a village in Yemen in December 2009 killing 41 people including 14 women and 21 children . The United States government and the Yemeni government conspired to lie about the incident . The Yemeni government said the victims were members of an al-Qaeda training camp .
 Shaye was arrested on apparently trumped-up charges and given a sham trial that was criticized by major human rights organizations such as Amnesty International . He was sentenced to five years in prison after exposing what really happened in the missile strike .
 The unexploded cluster bomblet in the photo below was found at the location of the missile strike in Yemen . According to Amnesty International, the unexploded bomb was found in the Yemeni strike .
 U.S. government officials killed a bunch of women and children . The incident barely registered on the radar of the news media and the American public .
 They arranged to have the journalist who exposed all the killing and lying kept in prison for reporting it . Then, when they got caught, they arranged to get the journalist to be kept in jail .
 If you think that a government routinely does that kind of stuff (without any negative career consequences or political consequences) or legal consequences for those involved, you’re not skeptical you're just 4 . The government was previously caught waging an illegal counterintelligence war against its own citizens .
 A May 2015 column by journalist Tom Engelhardt examined some recurring patterns of deception, hubris, violence, and incompetence in the U.S. national security state .
 It has already created a global surveillance system of a kind never before seen or imagined, not even by the totalitarian regimes of the last century . It is already creating a kind of global surveillance that has never been seen before .
 Its end goal is to have access to everyone on the planet, Americans included, and every imaginable form of communication now in use .
 This helps explain why its top officials were so viscerally outraged by Edward Snowden and his revelations . The government is outraged by Snowden's revelations .
 United States law enforcement and intelligence agencies currently operate with essentially the same lack of accountability that existed during the days of COINTELPRO and MK Ultra . U.S. law enforcement, intelligence agencies are currently operating without accountability .
 Following the Church Committee investigations in the 1970s efforts to implement policies to protect Americans from crimes by the federal government .
 The Patriot Act was enacted in the wake of the 9/11 attacks . Unfortunately, those protections have been thoroughly undone by policies such as the Patriot Act .
 The FBI and even the IRS now assert the right to have warrantless access to the email communication of all Americans, to cite just one example . The IRS and the FBI now assert that they can have access to all Americans' email communications .
 Even Church Committee reforms aimed at outlawing assassinations of foreign leaders have been undermined . Arguably, even the Church Committee reform has been undermined by the reforms .
 The government now orders drone assassinations in places like Yemen and launches wars without the approval of Congress . The government launched the “military intervention” against Libya in March 2011 .
 It's difficult to assess the extent to which America’s law enforcement and intelligence agencies have retumed to being rogue entities . The agencies routinely invoke “national security” as a justification for keeping American citizens from knowing their business .
 Political cowardice by members of Congress as well as laziness, group-think, and careerism among many journalists at major news outlets has resulted in a lack of oversight of America’s most secretive government agencies .
 Some journalists report that intelligence and law enforcement communities have slipped the leash . Fortunately, there are some exceptions, with some exceptions .
 A Forbes magazine writer to cite just one example has suggested that we probably need another Church Committee investigation .
 Without new leadership, new laws and top-to-bottom reform, the agency will represent a threat of ‘turnkey totalitarianism’ Mr Binney said .
 Congress members fear of the intelligence community . Oversight of the U.S. intelligence agencies is the responsibility of the House and Senate intelligence committees . Congress members’ fear is that the intelligence agencies are under attack .
 Those committees are unlikely to provide much real oversight though if they are afraid of the people they are supposed to be monitoring . Those committees will not be able to provide real oversight if they're afraid of their own people .
 In March 2014, two members of Congress made comments which strongly implied that such fears exist . The comments were made in March 2014 .
 On April 10, 2014, Senator Chuck Grassley gave a speech about the Whistleblower Protection Act . Senator Grassley spoke about the act in a speech .
 President Obama’s Insider Threat detection program fails to adequately distinguish true insider threats such as spies and terrorists from whistle-blowers, says Grassley .
 The head of the FBI’s Insider Threat Program did not bring the training materials as the senators had requested so they could review them . Senator Grassley explained in his speech that when he and Senator Patrick Leahy had a briefing with the FBI the week before, the FBI didn't bring
 Victims of organized stalking by corrupt law enforcement and intelligence agencies sometimes try to gain the attention of members of Congress so they might intervene to stop such criminal behavior . Victims often try to get members of the Congress to intervene .
 "I encourage such efforts, but I would caution targeted individuals to be realistic," says President Obama . Obama: "I would caution people not to be optimistic about the future"
 Senator Leahy is the Chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee . FBI officials walked out of his briefing when he and Senator Grassley tried to question them about how they target individuals as potential threats .
 Concerns that the spy industry in the U.S. has slipped the leash have been voiced by many people who know the profession from first-hand experience .
 A report released by the GAO in February 2014 indicated that over a third of the personnel records for intelligence contractors lacked the documentation needed to validate the number of personnel employed or the reasons core intelligence functions were being assigned to them .
 The lack of oversight for private spooks does not just apply to those working for government agencies . It also applies to a large shadowy industry of corporate spies who work for intelligence security firms .
 A November 2013 report on corporate spying by Gary Ruskin, director of the Center for Corporate Policy, used the word “lawlessness” to describe the nature of the industry .
 His report “Spooky Business” concluded that the private intelligence and law enforcement industry functions with virtually no oversight . The private intelligence industry functions without oversight, he said .
 DHS is America’s third-largest government agency, with a massive $39 billion budget and 225,000 employees in 2014 . DHS is the largest government agency in the U.S. and is America's third largest .
 With all those federal employees and private contractors feeding at that giant pig trough in an area of government which operates largely in secrecy oversight is critical .
 If the true nature of the programs themselves is illegitimate, the public’s rights and interests will not be protected . Oversight of an inherently corrupt system will not protect the public's interests . Regardless of the integrity of the oversight, oversight is necessary .
 Declaring an endless “war on terror” guarantees as a practical matter that civil rights will always be a low priority . Other agendas such as political control, corporate profits, and career interests associated with enforcement and surveillance will drive government policy .
 Analysis of domestic counterintelligence operations often requires speculation based on information from public sources . In the absence of leaked official documents, analysis of counter-intelligence operations requires speculation .
 When a criminal is caught perpetrating a crime, often the transgression is just one of a large number of crimes, most of which went undetected . Most of the crimes were committed by a large group of people, police say .
 That also applies to crimes perpetrated by law enforcement and intelligence agencies . That's also true in the U.S.
 What follows are, presumably, just glimpses of activities which mostly stay off of the public’s radar . What follows is a look at some of the activities which stay off the radar .
 The article revealed the modern system of what are traditionally referred to as “Red Squads” intelligence units within urban police departments . Red Squads conduct spying and counterintelligence activities, such as infiltrating groups deemed to be subversive .
 LEIU is a private organization, and therefore mostly free of any oversight . Despite having received government funding, the group’s management of a sensitive intelligence database is largely free of oversight .
 Los Angeles Times article under the headline “FBI Admits Spreading Lies About Jean Seberg” was the lead story on the paper’s front page . September 1979 article was the headline of the story .
 Arnold Lockshin fled with his family to the Soviet Union in 1986 and was granted political asylum . He was granted asylum in the USSR . He is a cancer research scientist .
 Lockshin says he and his family were being intensely harassed by federal agents because of their socialist political views . He says they were harassed by government agents for their socialist views . The case is the latest in a series of federal investigations into the case .
 A book Silent Terror by Arnold Lockshin about the organized stalking campaign against his family was published in 1988 . A book of Silent Terror was published about the campaign of organized stalking .
 Newsweek/Daily Beast was among the first mainstream U.S. news reports about a trend of intense systematic harassment in the workplace . August 2000 article was among first mainstream United States news reports .
 The process, known as “mobbing,’s involves multiple perpetrators engaging in the coordinated psychological abuse of an individual employee . The process is known as "mobbing" and involves multiple people engaging in coordinated psychological abuses .
 The article does not link the reports of such organized harassment to a larger phenomenon, but that form of abuse is a common element of victim accounts in organized stalking cases .
 An episode of the PBS News show NOW addressed the possible re-emergence of the FBI’s Cointelpro operations . March 2004 An episode was aired on NOW .
 Newsweek noted that the Pentagon was quietly re-entering the business of domestic spying . June 2004 article in Newsweek said the Pentagon had quietly entered the spying business .
 U.S. Army agents spied on Americans during the 1970s . The Church Committee investigated the Army's spying on Americans .
 An article in The Sunday Times, a major newspaper in the U.K., reported that the intelligence agency uses gang stalking tactics to punish whistle-blowers .
 In the book, Naylor describes her experiences as a target of organized stalking . Naylor described her experiences in the book as "organized stalking"
 The book’s title, 1996, was the year Naylor realized that she was being stalked . The book's title was 1996 .
 The Canadian Security Intelligence Service and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police used gang stalking techniques (referred to as “Diffuse and Disrupt” tactics) against suspects for whom they lacked sufficient evidence to prosecute .
 A criminal defense attorney stated that many of her clients complained of harassment by authorities, although they were never arrested . The defense attorney said many clients complained that authorities harassed them .
 A Washington Post Magazine cover article portrayed self-proclaimed victims of ‘gang stalking’ as intelligent and credible . It suggested that claims about exotic non-lethal weapons being used by the U.S. government were plausible .
 Their organized response to the article would make some political campaigns jealous . For example, their organized response would make them jealous of political campaigns .
 We must write the Washington Post in high numbers to show that this story merits a follow-up . We need to write the D.C. Post with high numbers of people .
 "We must get our side of the story out, before the perps start inundating them with letters that we are crazy," says the author of the book . "We need to get our story out," she says .
 A post on the political blog Daily Kos alleged that intelligence agencies in the U.S., U.K., and Canada use “Zersetzung” as East Germany’s Stasi referred to gang stalking against individuals .
 Daily Kos receives several hundred thousand visits per day . The article did not provide sourced details, but it might have helped raise awareness of this form of criminal harassment .
 A local TV news broadcast in California (on KION Channel 46 and KCBA Channel 35) featured a report about "gang stalking" referred to as such .
 Police bought a house next to the city manager’s home and used it as a base for psychological operations . The brazen tactics used by the police included purchasing the house . The house was purchased by police to be used as a psychological base .
 KCRA 3 News reported that the police department would not return its calls about the matter . KCRA3 News said that police would not respond to the calls .
 Donna Jane Watts, a Florida Highway Patrol trooper, was stalked by other police officers and sheriff’s deputies from multiple jurisdictions . The Sun Sentinel, a Pulitzer Prize-winning newspaper in Florida, reported the organized stalking .
 The Sun Sentinel later won a Pulitzer Prize for public service journalism for its series of articles on deaths and injuries caused by reckless driving by Florida police officers .
 A few days later, a similar complaint was filed by another apparent victim of group stalking by law enforcement officers in Florida . Law enforcement officers responded to the complaint .
 Toni Foudy, a former sheriff’s deputy, alleged that she and her husband were the targets of illegal surveillance and harassment . She and husband alleged that they were the victims of surveillance .
 The two cases were reported on a local TV news broadcast in Palm Beach . Treasure Coast Newspapers also reported on the cases .
 Lawsuit: Sheriff's deputy left after a year on the force during an internal affairs investigation into her patrol car becoming disabled . She left the St. Lucie County Sheriff’s Office in 2005 but left after one year .
 Foudy resigned because she believed she was being targeted by people at the agency, lawsuit says . She resigned from the agency because she felt she was targeted, lawsuit claims . Foudie resigned because of fears of being targeted .
 Foudy and her husband said they began receiving harassing emails in 2006 . The couple say they have received harassing emails since that year .
 Several times a week, patrol cars would drive by their home and blare their sirens, the couple said . The couple said the couple's home was targeted by police officers .
 Foudy’s relatives also became targets of the illegal surveillance . As the complaint notes, the complaint also notes that the surveillance was illegal .
 Navy Yard shooter was 'gang stalked' in an MK Ultra-type operation using electronic weapons and noise harassment . Navy Yard shooting resulted from an MK-Ultra-style operation using noise and electronic weapons .
 A marine had gone AWOL after stealing some sensitive military property including night vision goggles and a laptop containing classfied information . A marine went AWOL and was found dead at the scene .
 Naval Criminal Investigative Service initiated an organized stalking campaign against the suspect and his associates as well as an investigation . Suspect's associates were allegedly stalked by the Naval Criminal Investigation Service .
 Various psychological operations tactics were used, such as overt stalking, in addition to some far more exotic methods . Various psychological techniques were used by the CIA .
 Possibly the operations were intended to serve as both a form of extra-judicial punishment and as experimentation . Possibly the operation was intended as both an extra-judgement punishment and an experiment . The operations were likely to be used as punishment and experimentation .
 The broadcast featured testimony by two individuals from Pennsylvania who appeared to be credible and sincere . Two individuals discussed their constant harassment by perpetrators using gang stalking tactics . The broadcast was broadcasted by two people from Pennsylvania .
 Kantor claimed that his stalking began after he made a Google search for information about how to build a radio-controlled airplane . Kantor claims that he stalked him after he searched for information on building a radio controlled airplane .
 The individual was subjected to constant surveillance including inside his residence and his vehicle and constant psychological harassment from co-workers and strangers . He was then subjected to surveillance inside his home and vehicle .
 Mr Kantor sued the federal contractors for which he worked, because of the orchestrated harassment he was forced to endure at his workplace . In addition to his claim against the U.S. government, he also sued the contractors he worked for .
 The reporter did not elaborate in the article on the term “gang stalking,” and he did not reply to my email to him about the issue . He did not comment on the issue.
 The article does not mention the name of the man Chudy is accused of being a stalker .
 This was not a case of “gang stalking,” (government-run counterintelligence subversion) But it is an example of the increasingly common thuggish tactics of a rogue industry of corporate spooks in America .
 A report on the ABC News TV program 20/20 and an article in the Daily Mail chronicled the ordeal of a couple in Hubbard, Ohio who were systematically harassed for 7 years in a vengeance campaign orchestrated by the town's fire chief .
 A statement by the Guilford Police Department about the matter was also posted in The Day newspaper . A statement was posted in the newspaper by police .
 Two of the persons he shot sustained minor injuries; the third was left paralyzed from the waist down . The incident occurred in the early hours of October 1 .
 He also made other phone calls and sent emails and text messages about what was being done to him . He also sent other calls and texts about what he was doing .
 May sent ten packages of information to various people to “expose” what was happening . May also sent information to other people to expose what she knew .
 Philip Kerr is seeking to win a High Court injunction against intelligence agents . He says he was targeted because he refused to co-operate with the security service . Kerr says he is seeking an injunction against the intelligence agents in the UK .
 Kerr sought advice from former MI5 intelligence officer and whistle-blower Annie Machon . Kerr retained legal counsel and asked for advice from a high-profile former intelligence officer .
 The same case was reported with updated information in April 2015 in the Daily Mirror another British national daily tabloid newspaper .
 No one can participate intelligently in America’s republic without such an historical background . The nation's history of racism and anti-Semitism is a problem, he says .
 The strategies and tactics used in organized stalking have their roots in earlier programs and agencies in America and elsewhere .
 COINTELPRO was a secret program of FBI counterintelligence operations against American citizens orchestrated under the leadership of FBI Director J Edgar Hoover . FBI Director Hoover was the leader of the FBI .
 Project MK Ultra was a secret program run by the CIA from the early 1950s until the early 1970s . Mind control and interrogation experiments were performed on U.S. and Canadian citizens . The program was run from the 1950s to the 1970s and 1980s .
 They spy on criminals, but also conduct counterintelligence activities . Counterintelligence activities include infiltrating and disrupting organizations deemed to be subversive .
 Red Squads have been used especially by urban police departments since the late 1800s . Police departments have been using the squads since the 1800s to fight crime in urban areas .
 Historically, Red Squads have taken very seriously the protection of business interests and the disruption of political movements . Historically, the Red Squad has protected business interests from political protests .
 They have been rather casual in their attitudes about complying with the law and principles of morality . They have also been rather more casual in . regard to complying with . complying with law .
 The Stasi communist East Germany’s secret police agency enforced the political control over citizens through a combination of surveillance and psychological terrorism . East Germany was ruled by the Stasi during the Cold War .
 Core elements of the system of spying and psychological torture, called zersetzung, are used in gang stalking in the U.S. today . The system is used in the United States today .
 Anyone who doubts that the U.S. government could be sanctioning a widespread conspiracy should read the basic facts about these programs, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 You don't even need to explore obscure sources of information; simply read the established mainstream accounts of the undisputed facts . You don’t need to go to obscure sources to find out the truth .
 COINTELPRO was a secret illegal program in which U.S. law enforcement personnel and their various government and private citizen accomplices systematically spied on, slandered, terrorized, and committed acts of violence against American citizens . J. Edgar Hoover, FBI Director from 1924
 The program ended after being exposed in 1971 by civilian activists who obtained information about it and leaked it to the news media .
 Significantly, COINTELPRO was not exposed by insider whistle-blowers . FBI agents and their civilian minions dutifully perpetrated their assigned crimes until the operations were derailed .
 Exposure of the program required those civilians to break into an FBI office and steal documents about the program and give them to the news media .
 A January 21, 2013 article in CounterPunch magazine asserted that COINTELPRO is now secretly being used again on a wide scale . The article was published in the same month as the publication of this article .
 What was originally deemed as a justifiable effort to protect the United States from Soviet and Communist threats and infiltration, soon devolved into a program for suppressing domestic dissent and spying on American citizens .
 Approximately 20,000 people were investigated by the FBI based only on their political views and beliefs . The FBI investigated only those based on their beliefs .
 The fact that the “perceived threats” were usually American citizens engaging in constitutionally protected behaviour was apparently overlooked .
 The stated goal of COINTELPRO was to “expose, disrupt, misdirect, discredit, discredit or otherwise neutralize” any individual or group deemed to be subversive or a threat to the established power structure . The goal of the stated goal was to expose, disrupt
 The FBI's techniques were often extreme, with the agency being complicit in the murder and assassination of political dissidents, or having people sent away to prison for life . The FBI’s techniques were sometimes extreme .
 Some of the more “moderate” actions that were used were blackmail, spreading false rumors, intimidation and harassment, according to CNN.com .
 It has been argued that the U.S. is unique in that it is the only Western industrialized democracy to have engaged in such a wide spread and well organized domestic surveillance program .
 It finally came to an end in 1971 when it was threatened with public exposure . It was finally ended in 1971 after being threatened with exposure .
 PCJF was able to obtain documents showing how the FBI was treating the Occupy Wall Street movement as a potential criminal and domestic terrorist threat . Through a Freedom of Information Act request, PCF obtained documents showing the FBI's treatment of the movement .
 Retired FBI official from COINTELPRO era on “gang stalking’s” testimony . He was familiar with the original operations because he participated in them as FBI official .
 Ted L Gunderson served as the head of the FBI field offices in Los Angeles, Dallas, and Memphis . Gunderson was the FBI director of Los Angeles and Dallas field offices .
 His investigations included working for the defense in the famous murder case involving former U.S. Army physician, Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter's investigations included the murder of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
 Gunderson says “rogue’s military intelligence and law enforcement units of the federal government oversee a nationwide network of community-based gang stalkers . Gunderson claims thousands of American citizens have been extrajudicially targeted as dissidents or undesirables .
 Gunderson also claimed that his efforts to expose gang stalking resulted in him becoming a victim himself, as efforts were made to silence him . Gunderson claimed that he was a victim of gang stalking himself .
 Gunderson gave a presentation in which he described how organized stalking tactics were used against him . Gunderson said electronic surveillance and “gas lighting” were used to keep tabs on him .
 Gunderson said that the scope, intensity, and sophistication of gang stalking increased since its inception . Gunderson: Gang stalking has increased since it began as it exploited new surveillance and communication technologies .
 Ted Gunderson’s claims about gang stalking are complicated for several reasons . Gunderson says gang stalking is a problem for Gunderson and others in the U.S.
 Former FBI official worked in the agency during the era of COINTELPRO . He had professional expertise and first-hand experience with counterintelligence operations .
 His public statements about gang stalking in his affidavit, as well as in his public discussions of the matter, which can be found on YouTube, include references to various fringe topics, such as Satanism, child sex rings, and such . On the other hand, his public statements on gang
 Those claims and the fact that he is no longer around to clarify or defend them raise several questions . Those questions might never be answered .
 Gunderson never provided any documentation or other evidence to support what he said . Gunderson was never found to have any evidence to back up his claims .
 One possible explanation for the more bizarre things he discussed is that he could have simply been nuts .
 The most plausible explanation for Gunderson’s bizarre claims is that he was continuing to work for the FBI at least informally after he officially retired, and he was spreading disinformation . Gunderson is a former FBI agent who worked for the Bureau in the 1990s .
 Gunderson participated in the original COINTELPRO, and in which he was never perceived by anyone as crazy . Gunderson’s FBI career was consistent with his FBI career, and never perceived as crazy, he says .
 A common disinformation tactic used in counterintelligence operations is to discredit a person or idea by associating it with craziness . That is very likely what he was doing, and that's very likely the case .
 Actress Jean Seberg was gang stalked by the FBI in the days of the original COINTELPRO operations . Seberg's case is one of the most high-profile well-documented cases of gang stalking .
 This was a case with explicitly incriminating ‘smoking gun’ FBI memos and mainstream news reports documenting what the feds did to their victim . This was the case with explicit incriminating FBI memos . The feds did what they did to the victim .
 Seberg committed suicide after giving birth prematurely . Seberg was pregnant and gave birth prematurely, which led her to give birth to a baby girl . The tragedy led to Seberg's suicide .
 Seberg was just one of many victims targeted by the FBI’s secret police program . Seberg is one of the victims of the FBI's secret police operation .
 A fascinating but under-reported aspect of COINTELPRO is the break-in which led to the program’s exposure . The Break-in was the program's exposure to the FBI .
 More than 1,000 FBI documents reveal years of systematic wiretapping, infiltration and media manipulation designed to suppress dissent . Group of activists broke into small office of Federal Bureau of Investigation in Media, Pa., and stole documents . Group broke into two-man office of FBI, stole more than
 The Citizens’ Commission to Investigate the FBI forced its way in at night with a crowbar while much of the country was watching the Muhammad Ali-Joe Frazier fight . The group called itself the Citizens' Commission .
 The documents began to show up in the newsrooms of major American newspapers . They were mailed anonymously in manila envelopes with no return address . Within a few weeks, they began to appear in major newsrooms .
 John N Mitchell asked Executive Editor Ben Bradlee not to publish them . He said disclosure could ‘endanger the lives’ of people involved in investigations on behalf of the U.S.
 The Post broke the first story on March 24, 1971, after receiving an envelope with 14 FBI documents detailing how the bureau had enlisted a local police chief, letter carriers and a switchboard operator at Swarthmore College to spy on campus and black activist groups .
 To this day, no individual has claimed responsibility for the break-in . No individual has since claimed responsibility .
 Among the most interesting documents are the three which you can view or download below . You can also download the three documents below to see the photos .
 Just browsing through the contents pages gives a sense of the scope of the FBI’s crimes .
 Robert Guffey author of the October 2013 Fortean Times magazine cover article on “state-sponsored gangstalking” posted a reference to the following material on his blog, Cryptoscatology on January 26, 2014 .
 These accounts of organized stalking apparently perpetrated by U.S. government agents are from the same period as the FBI’s COINTELPRO activities, which of course took place during the Cold War .
 CIA's official mission statement refers to spying on America’s “adversaries” which generally refers to foreign adversaries . CIA's mission is to spy on America's enemies, which generally refer to foreign enemies . The CIA has a mission statement that includes spying on foreign enemies
 The mission statement says the CIA “upholds the highest standards of conduct” even though the agency has a well-documented history of involvement with things like torture, assassinations, drug trafficking, and orchestrating coups .
 Despite its mission statement, the long list of moral and legal transgressions by the CIA includes spying on Americans based on their political beliefs . The CIA has also performed unethical experiments on Americans .
 It is worth considering the implications of the U.S. government’s history of mind-control experiments .
 Project MK Ultra ran from the early 1950s until the early 1970s . The CIA secretly conducted mind-control and interrogation experiments . The experiments were conducted from the 1950s to the early 70s .
 Many of the experiments were performed without the consent of the subjects, and in some cases without the subjects even being aware that they were being used for experimentation .
 Methods tested included sensory deprivation, isolation, hypnosis, verbal and sexual abuse, electrical shocks, and the administration of drugs and substances which caused confusion, brain damage, blistering, and paralysis . Methods that were tested included .
 There are no MK Ultra tribute floats in America’s parades . That might explain why there are no . MK Ultra .
 CIA Director Richard Helms by his own admission ordered the destruction of the program’s records in 1973 . This is a vague reference to the fact that Helms ordered the program's records to be destroyed .
 The Times’ account of MK Ultra might be understating the CIA’s crimes is that the newspaper has a history of sometimes functioning as a conveyor belt for that agency’�s lies .
 Experiments performed at dozens of colleges and universities, hospitals, prisons, and pharmaceutical companies in the United States and Canada .
 Front organizations were used by the CIA to operate the program through those institutions, although in some cases the top officials at those institutions knew about the CIA’s involvement . Front organizations are used in the program .
 Keep that in mind when you evaluate the plausibility that a widespread program of organized stalking could exist without being compromised by various officials .
 In the mid-1970s the program was exposed by the U.S. Senate’s Church Committee investigations . The Church Committee exposed the program in the 1970s .
 The investigations were a response to a series of revelations about crimes by the U.S. government . Those revelations included the attempted assassinations of foreign leaders, the Army’s spying on civilians, Cointelpro .
 This passage from Andrew Goliszek’s book In the Name of Science gives a sense of what was involved in MK Ultra . The passage is excerpted from the book In The Name of the Science .
 These are descriptions of some of the of the experiments performed by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter's experiments include experiments to discover the effects of LSD .
 In 1957, a young girl was led to a small room at Montreal’s Allan Memorial Institiute . Her arms and legs strapped to a bed and electrodes from a Page-Russell electroconvulsive therapy machine attached to her head .
 When the signal was given, a switch was thrown, causing her frail body to stiffen then convulse uncontrollably from electroshock . Electroshock was forty times more intense than was considered safe .
 Another patient was kept in a drug-induced state for several months while being forced to listen to an audiotaped message twelve to sixteeen hours per day . Another patient, this one an older man, was kept .
 A series of bombings perpetrated from 1978 to 1995 killed three people and injured 23 others . The Unabomber was a serial bomber who committed a series of bombings .
 The bomber, a mathematician named Theodore Kaczynski, was referred to as “the Unabomber” by the FBI before they discovered his identity . The bomber was a mathematician and mathematician . He was known as the "Unabombers"
 An article in the June 2000 issue of the Atlantic suggested that the experiments could possibly have been a factor in Kaczynski’s later acts of violence . The experiments were published in the Atlantic .
 In October 2014, it was reported that ABC is planning to produce a TV mini-series about MK Ultra . ABC is also reportedly planning to make a series about the MK Ultra project .
 If there are reasons to think that the FBI, CIA, and NSA stopped secretly perpetrating crimes against Americans at some point after the Church Committee investigations in the 1970s, I am unaware of them . President Carter and Senator Frank Church investigated the CIA and NSA .
 The U.S. intelligence and law enforcement agencies abused power in the United States . The reforms which followed were nowhere close to being serious enough to rein in rogue tendencies of those agencies .
 Arguably, the situation today is much worse than it was in the era of J Edgar Hoover . The situation in the U.S. is far worse than in the days of Hoover's time .
 Surveillance technologies are now vastly more sophisticated, and there has been an enormous expansion of both the size and power of the public and private sectors of the spying industry . Surveillance technology is now more sophisticated and more powerful than ever .
 Because of such concerns and scandals such as the NSA’s secret mass surveillance programs, many individuals, publications, and organizations have called for another Church Committee-type investigation .
 A “Red Squad’s” is a police intelligence unit . Law Enforcement Intelligence Units Philly LEIU patch is a reference to the Red Squad .
 Since the late 1800s they have been used by urban police departments in the United States for spying and counterintelligence activities, such as infiltrating and disrupting groups deemed to be subversive . Police departments have been using them since the 1800s to spy and counter intelligence activities .
 The most famous example of Red Squad-type activity was in Chicago in 1886 when police officers and private security agents working for the Pinkerton Detective Agency used spying and violence to suppress a labor movement .
 That culminated in a violent riot at a labor rally in the Haymarket Square . The riots culminated in the death of many people .
 8 labor activists were convicted for their alleged role in the violence . After a trial which was widely viewed as unfair 8 were found guilty .
 Of the 8 laborers, 4 were executed by hanging, 1 committed suicide, and 3 received prison sentences . 4 of 8 laborers were hanged by hanging and 3 were imprisoned .
 The riot and violence which preceded it police had killed two laborers the day before gave rise to the annual celebration of International Workers’ Day or May Day .
 The two images below were published in Harper’s Magazine shortly after the riot .
 Historical information about the Haymarket affair is insufficient to make any assessment of how many if any of the seven police officers killed in Haymarket Riot, or how many of the approximately 60 police officers injured were corrupt goons .
 During the First World War, police in Los Angeles expanded their focus to include ideological subversion, hunting for radicals and ‘disloyal” people and groups .
 Public Disorder Intelligence Division had 2 million secret files over the course of fifty years . The LAPD’s Red Squad had gathered 2 million files on all manner of legitimate dissenters, from the Wobblies to antipoverty groups .
 In 1970, the P.I.D. spied on students and professors at UCLA who were suspected of “conspiratorial activities,” and agents provocateurs infiltrated student demonstrations .
 A civil suit resulted in a $1.1 million settlement from the city that forced the LAPD to enter into a consent decree that curtailed some of the worst surveillance practices . These two groups were part of a civil suit that resulted in the settlement .
 In many cases, the targets are labor unions, leftists, and other dissidents . The U.S. government has been cracking down on anti-gay rights .
 They were ostensibly created to combat terrorism, but have been used mostly to infiltrate and suppress liberal and radical political organizations and civil rights groups . They were created in response to the threat posed by the U.S. government .
 The role of Red Squads has been to keep the public safe from criminal and terrorist organizations . Historically red squads have often been more involved in dishing out terror than preventing it . Red squads are often involved in the dished out terror rather than preventing terrorism .
 A commemorative statue of a policeman was erected in Haymarket Square in 1889 . A statue of the policeman was also erected in the square in 1883 .
 On the 41st anniversary of the Haymarket affair in 1927 a streetcar driver apparently crashed into the monument intentionally . The incident happened on the 41th anniversary of Haymarket .
 Not everyone is a fan of cops who serve as corporate thugs . Instead, they say they want them to be a police officer .
 The current version of the statue resides at the Chicago Police Department headquarters . It is located in Chicago's police department .
 In 1956, 26 Red Squads gathered in San Francisco and formed an organization for sharing confidential intelligence about crime . The Association of LEIUs was formed the same year the FBI initiated COINTELPRO .
 LEIU provides training and technical assistance to its members . LEIU maintains a system of sharing criminal intelligence, providing training .
 Organized stalking is a set of counterintelligence tactics rather than a specific program . LEIUs and Organized Stalking are counter-intelligence tactics . Organized stalking is a counterintelligence tactic .
 Many reports about organized stalking also make clear that the operations are sometimes initiated for corporate or political agendas, and for purely personal vendettas . Many of those reports also show that stalking operations are often initiated for personal reasons .
 The majority of organized stalking operations are perpetrated, it is inconceivable that members of Law Enforcement Intelligence Units would not be aware of those operations if not participating in them .
 A major red flag is the fact that the LEIU association is a quasi-governmental entity . A major concern is that LEIU is not a government body . The LEIU Association Association is an association of quasi-governors .
 The group received federal funding to create a networked database of criminal intelligence to share among its members . It is a tax-exempt organization, and therefore mostly independent of any real oversight .
 Civil liberties groups have expressed serious concerns about the lack of any external accountability for the LEIU . The LEIU has been accused of failing to adequately address its activities, including handling of sensitive intelligence .
 The article a copy of which is posted at the end of this section is a remarkable piece of journalism . The article is published at the conclusion of this article .
 The existence of the LEIU and the nature of its activities remained and still remains mostly below the radar of the press and the American public . The LEIU was founded by the University of Iowa in 1968 .
 In Chicago, too, the Red Squad’s activities were shrouded from the rest of the police department . The Red Squad's activities were also shrouded from rest of police .
 In Chicago a state’s attorney investigating the police received a report that his own phone had been tapped . In Chicago, a state's attorney received a . report that he had his own . phone tapped . The report was published in Chicago .
 O’Toole also reported that LEIUs burned their files to avoid having them seen by investigators . O'Toole: LEIU’s files burned to avoid being seen by the investigators .
 LEIU operations consistent with contemporary accounts of organized stalking and with accounts of operations conducted by communist East Germany’s Stasi is the use of civilian spies . LeIU operations are consistent with those conducted by East Germany's Stasi .
 A Chicago grandmother was paid $25 a month by the Red Squad to infiltrate church and community groups . She told reporters, “I am a police spy, and I am proud of it.” She said she was proud of her work .
 Chicago police intelligence officers used blackmail to coerce employees of Illinois Bell to cooperate in illegal wiretapping . In another incident mentioned in the article, Illinois Bell employees were forced to cooperate with police .
 Telephone company cooperation in illegal wiretapping is one example of a long history of complicity of American corporations in government programs involving spying and lying . Corporations “Surrendering Information About Their Clients”
 Carl Bernstein reported that CBS News was essentially a puppet of the CIA during the 1950s and ‘60s . Famed Watergate journalist Carl Bernstein also reported that the network was a puppet to the CIA .
 The group has essentially no civilian oversight because it's exempt from the Freedom of Information Act . The group is exempt from FOI Act because it has no oversight .
 LEIU is a perfect weapon to use against an individual who crosses anyone with connections to it . LEIU will be used as a weapon against those who cross anyone with ties to it, says author .
 Some of the organizational structure and procedures have no doubt changed in the past few decades, although the group is still shrouded in secrecy . It is difficult to know exactly how it might differ now apart from its use of digital databases and more advanced spy gear .
 Each branch of the military, for example, tends to pursue its own agenda to a certain extent while simultaneously working to support a common goal of national security . The U.S. military is one of the most powerful branches in the world .
 The federal intelligence community also has well-known rivalries between agencies . Each of which desires to see its relative prestige and influence maximized .
 There are turf battles in the law enforcement community as well of course . Sometimes there are tensions between FBI and local police .
 All of America’s law enforcement and intelligence agencies now have access to enormous amounts of information for example, through the national network of data fusion centers . On the other hand, all of America's law .
 It would be impossible for the feds to be unaware of widespread use of organized stalking by local police, police and vice versa . The feds would not be unaware that organized stalking is widespread in the United States .
 Their silence on the issue implies that the feds approve of what is happening . Their silence implies that they approve of the issue .
 The material in the Published News Reports section of this overview indicates that federal agencies use the same tactics against targeted individuals just as they were caught doing in the Cointelpro era . Federal agencies are using same tactics in the same way they were used in the past .
 In the absence of more whistle-blower revelations, it is impossible to know how the various local, federal and private elements of America’s Stasi might be colluding with each other .
 Many accounts of organized stalking include reports of sophisticated electronic surveillance, black bag operations, and exotic weapons . LEIU’s connection to the United States Army Intelligence .
 Army trained several Baltimore intelligence-squad officers in techniques of electronic eavesdropping and surreptitious entry at its Fort Holabird spy school in Maryland .
 Baltimore cops passed along intelligence reports to the army . Baltimore cops also passed along many of their intelligence reports with the army.
 The Central Intelligence Agency has also been caught performing domestic spying . The CIA’s Involvement in Domestic Spying .
 Operation CHAOS was shut-down in 1973, after the exposure of other conspiracies such as Cointelpro and Watergate break-in . The previously-mentioned OperationCHAOS is now defunct .
 The Watergate break-in also had a CIA connection the exact nature of which is still not clear according to some reports . Incidentally, the Watergate . break-ins also had an CIA connection .
 A key figure in the break-in, Howard Hunt, was a former career CIA officer, and one of the burglars, Eugenio R Martinez, was still on the CIA’s payroll at the time of the break in .
 Watergate break-in showed that in America, corrupt politicians can draw upon a deep supply of corrupt ex-spies and ex-law enforcement agents to perform illegal special assignments as mercenaries . At a minimum, the Watergate break in showed that corrupt politicians .
 ACLU's Allegations of the CIA’s Domestic Spying are even more justified today . O’Toole was not alone in his suspicions about the CIA's participation in spying .
 Little is known about the CIA's domestic activities . Because of the excessive secrecy surrounding CIA operations, little is known .
 During the 1960s, the CIA spied on as many as 7,000 Americans involved in the peace movement . The agency was in clear violation of its statutory mission to co-ordinate foreign intelligence operations only . The CIA ventured into the domestic spying business through ‘Operation Chaos’
 Before 9/11, policy makers promoted “information sharing” among intelligence and law enforcement agencies as a cure-all, creating the likelihood that the CIA would increasingly operate domestically . Unfortunately, the failure of intelligence failings caused policy makers to promote ‘Information sharing’ among intelligence
 CIA is a participant in FBI Joint Terrorism Task Forces, which engage in both foreign and domestic terrorism investigations . Today we know that the CIA is part of the FBI's joint terrorism task forces .
 The history of the CIA’s abuse of power and the continuing lack of public accountability over CIA operations make such revelations concerning to civil liberties advocates . Civil liberties advocates are concerned that such revelations are concerning .
 The CIA’s involvement in the NYPD intelligence activities targeting innocent Muslim communities in the Northeast reveal the CIA is once again treating Americans as suspected enemies . The CIA's involvement in this intelligence activities reveals the agency is treating Americans with suspicion .
 George O’ Toole had serious concerns about the potential for federal agencies such as the CIA to exploit the LEIU . O' Toole: The LEIU itself is a lawless spy agency that could be exploited .
 CIA had very close ties to the police department in Fairfax County, Virginia, where the CIA headquarters is located . The CIA headquarters are located there .
 Fairfax cops have been trained in electronic surveillance, surreptitious entry, lockpicking, safecracking, and explosives .
 O’Toole’s article even includes details of a felony break-in perpetrated in February 1971 by several Fairfax County police officers and CIA agents . The article also details details a burglary committed by police and CIA officers .
 Whenever an agency gathers intelligence on its citizens, the potential for abuse is enormous . FBI's Cointelpro, CIA's Operation CHAOS, and other programs are examples of potential abuse .
 The potential for abuse of power when the agency is privately-run is even greater, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 FBI found that an intelligence specialist with the Las Vegas Police Department was passing information from the LEIU database to mobsters . As the Chronicle reported, the FBI also found that a Las Vegas police intelligence specialist was passing on the information to the mob .
 Most of the article posted at the above link is behind a subscription paywall . Most of this article is in the form of a subscription to the article .
 A dozen activists were arrested, and police used pepper spray and rubber bullets to disperse the crowd . Police also used rubber bullets and pepper spray to disperse crowd .
 Counterintelligence methods used by communist East Germany’s secret police agency the Stasi are among the elements of organized stalking operations in the United States today .
 Methods used by the Stasi overt and covert surveillance, slander, and psychological operations tactics were essentially identical to those currently used in counterintelligence operations in America . Methods used in U.S. are similar to those used by Stasi in Germany .
 The Stasi’s use of Zersetzung is much more relevant to modern gang stalking in the U.S. than is the FBI's program of Cointelpro .
 In the decades since Cointelpro, a far more comprehensive and sophisticated domestic surveillance system has been developed in the U.S. than what existed during the era of J Edgar Hoover .
 The nature of America’s spying network has moved much further toward that of a police state . America's spying network is now more like a 'police state' than a 'spying state'
 Stasi was famous for exploiting “human intelligence” to control East Germany’s citizens . The Stasi's technology was primitive compared to that now used by the National Security Agency to monitor Americans .
 A sprawling bureaucracy almost three times the size of Hitler’s Gestapo was spying on a population a quarter that of Nazi Germany . Sprawling bureaucracy nearly three times that of Hitler's Gestapo spying on population .
 Unlike the prison camps of the Gestapo or the summary executions of the Soviet Union’s KGB, the Stasi strove for subtlety . The Stasi was known for its subtlety, unlike the prison and summary executions .
 The interrogation center where the psychological torture methods of Zersetzung were refined were refined . These are the isolation cells in the Hohenschoenhausen Prison in Berlin which is now a museum .
 By the 1970s, the Stasi had decided that methods of overt persecution which had been employed up to that time, such as arrest and torture, were too crude and obvious . The Stasi decided to abandon overt persecution in favour of other methods .
 It was realised that psychological harassment was far less likely to be recognised for what it was, so its victims, and their supporters, were less likely . Victims would often not be aware of the source of their problems, or even its exact nature .
 Zersetzung was designed to sidetrack and “switch off’s perceived enemies so that they would lose the will to continue any “inappropriate” activities . Zersetung was invented in the 1930s to “sick off” perceived
 Tactics employed under Zersetzung generally involved the disruption of the victim’s private or family life . Tactics involved involved disruption of a victim's private life, such as disruption of his private life .
 This often included psychological attacks such as breaking into homes and messing with the contents moving furniture, altering the timing of an alarm, removing pictures from walls or replacing one variety of tea with another .
 Other practices included property damage, sabotage of cars, purposely incorrect medical treatment, smear campaigns including sending falsified compromising photos or documents to the victim’s family, denunciation, provocation, psychological warfare, psychological subversion, wiretapping, bugging and mysterious phone calls .
 Many thought they were losing their minds, and mental breakdowns and suicide could result . Mental breakdowns could result, and suicide may result, experts say .
 One great advantage of the harassment perpetrated under Zersetzung was that its subtle nature meant that it was able to be denied . One of the greatest advantages was that the subtle nature of the abuse was that it could be easily denied .
 The GDR was trying to improve its international standing during the 1970s and 80s . That was important given that the GDR had a strong international standing .
 The use of energy weapons by the Stasi Nuclear-Symbol Counterintelligence tactics were remarkably similar to the tactics now being reported by victims of ongoing Cointelpro harassment in the U.S. Even the most exotic form of torture associated with organized stalking is an issue which appears in
 Three of former East Germany’s best-known dissidents died within a few months of each other . Suspicions were aroused among their friends that this was more than just a coincidence .
 In 1989, when the Berlin Wall came down, members of East German citizens’ committees occupied prisons across the country . Members of East Germany citizens' committees occupy prisons across Germany .
 Thomas Auerbach works as a scientific researcher for the main authority investigating the Stasi . Thomas is a researcher for an authority investigating Stasi.
 He saw X-ray equipment himself when he was taking part in a sit-in in an East German prison . He saw the equipment himself in a sitting-in at the time .
 Documents show potential uses of radiation as a means of poison and sabotage . He has seen documents which show a variety of experiments being carried out .
 Instead of X-rays, it was highly likely that radioactive isotopes were used to try to induce cancer in prisoners .
 This book about the Stasi’s methods of psychological torture was published in 1995 . Psychologie und Psychiatrie im Dienste der Stasi (“psychology and psychiatry in the service of the Stasas”)
 Klaus Behnke and Jiirgen Fuchs studied psychology in East Germany before being expelled in 1977 . They were expelled from East Germany in 1977 after being expelled from the country .
 As of this writing, the book has not been translated into English . Unfortunately, as of this time, it has not yet been translated .
 Zersetzung was the term used by the Stasi to describe the psychological operations element of their counterintelligence subversion . The term was used to describe psychological operations for counterintelligence purposes .
 The objective was to emotionally and socially destroy individuals who were perceived as dissidents, and to do so in a manner which would not be obvious to others . The objective of the assassination was to 'emotional and socially' destroy individuals .
 There does not seem to be an English language translation of this book . Unfortunately, there does not appear to be a translation of it .
 The 2002 documentary based on this book does not seem to seem to be available with English subtitles .
 Hubertus Knabe, a German historian who was a victim of the Stasi, describes the infamous secret police agency . He was under surveillance for smuggling banned books .
 Tour the deep dark world of the East German state security agency known as Stasi . Stasi was the brainchild of the Stasi, a German state of East German intelligence .
 Until the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 the Stasi masterminded a system of surveillance and psychological pressure that kept the country under control for decades . Uniquely powerful at spying on its citizens, until the end of the . Berlin Wall fell in 1989 .
 He shares stunning details from the fall of a surveillance state, and shows how easy it was for neighbor to turn on neighbor . He also shares stunning detail from the end of the surveillance state .
 Erich Mielke was the head of East Germany’s secret police from 1957 until the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 . He was known as the Stasi chief from 1957 to 1989 .
 He was essentially the communist version of FBI Director J Edgar Hoover . The FBI director was essentially an FBI Director of the Communist Party in China .
 Mielke presided over a network of 85,000 full-time domestic spies and 170,000 civilian informants . The former German spy chief also oversaw the CIA's secret operation .
 Film company submitted Freedom of Information Act request to CIA for its records on notorious Stasi leader . CIA denied the request, but the company is producing a documentary .
 In July 2014 Courthouse News reported that the film company filed a lawsuit to force the CIA to release its records on Mielke . The CIA has not responded to the request .
 In the following section, a credible first-hand journalist’s account of organized stalking tactics being used by Russian intelligence agents .
 No one disputes that such tactics were widely used by East Germany’s Stasi . East Germany's Stasi was widely used in the country's East East Germany .
 The U.S. Senate Church Committee investigations found that the government of Canada was also complicit in the CIA program, MK Ultra . Incidentally, the Senate found that Canada was complicit in MK Ultra.
 Anectdotal evidence of the use of organized stalking by Western governments also includes accounts such as this self-published book about gang stalking allegedly perpetrated on behalf of the Dutch royal family .
 Organized stalking occurs across the U.S. so moving from one area to another is not likely to help . Based on my personal experience and numerous accounts by self-proclaimed victims, organized stalking occurs .
 International cooperation among law enforcement and intelligence agencies means that moving from the U.S. to Canada is probably not going to be helpful . Similarly, international cooperation .
 The U.S. intelligence community is run by criminals, traitors, and greedy contractors who run the intelligence community . Unfortunately for the criminals and traitors in the United States intelligence community, this is not the case .
 Williams revealed that those agencies use sock puppets to monitor social media and to spread false information on the Internet . Williams also revealed that the agencies also use sock puppet technology to monitor the internet . The claim has been confirmed by other sources .
 Hacked emails from intelligence contractors revealed elaborate disinformation schemes using sock puppets . NSA document leaked by Edward Snowden proved that the NSA collaborates with its British counterpart GCHQ to spread lies .
 Seeing Through Walls shows how a new scanner can see motion of an individual behind a wall . The technology is being used in the U.S. Army .
 Internal documents from the Cointelpro era proved that the FBI secretly used illegal “black bag jobs’s” to perform surveillance and to perpetrate psychological warfare such as ‘gaslighting’ such as the tactic described earlier . Internal documents show the FBI used illegal
 The tactic is just as illegal now as it was then (invasive spying without a search warrant) It is apparently used routinely in gang stalking, based on virtually all victim accounts .
 It would be very easy to deploy miniature spy cameras (which are now very advanced and small and inexpensive) in the victim’s residence . Consequently, it would be easy to use small cameras .
 Technology which can see through walls is probably unnecessary in most cases, but the technology does exist . So the use of technology which can be seen through walls may be unnecessary .
 Wi-Fi radio signals are now available in most U.S. homes . This August 2012 article in Popular Science describes the technology .
 Such technology could be perfect for gang stalking because, as the article notes, the device cannot be detected, since it does not emit any radio waves . The device could also be used to spy on gang members .
 As I noted in the section about East Germany’s secret police, the Stasi used counterintelligence tactics remarkably similar to the tactics reported by victims of ongoing Cointelpro harassment in the U.S. Even the most exotic form of torture associated with organized stalking the use of
 An article published by BBC News in 1999 describes allegations about the Stasi’s possible use of energy weapons against dissidents .
 Claims about energy weapons being used against targeted individuals in the U.S. are difficult to prove as one would expect . But there are a number of reasons the subject deserves serious consideration .
 The hallmark of all directed-energy weapons is that the target — whether a human or a mechanical object — has no chance to avoid the shot because it moves at the speed of light . The target, whether human or mechanical object, is not likely to be able to avoid a shot because
 Directed-Energy Weapon emits energy at a target without using a projectile . Weapon can produce a variety of lethal or non-lethal effects . Weapon is a Directed Energy Weapon that emits energy .
 Such weapons have existed for decades, and are used by militaries and law enforcement agencies around the world . Such weapons are known to be available in the U.S.
 DEWs use various forms of energy, such as laser beams, electromagnetic radiation, and particle beams, as well as sound . DEWs are used to beam beams of light, sound, and energy .
 Weapons of this type are often referred to as “non-lethal weapons” to distinguish them from weapons such as knives, batons, firearms, artillery, and such . However, the intensity of some energy weapons can produce lethal effects .
 One example of the publicly-available documents on the subject is the declassified Pentagon report about electronic weapons . The report was obtained via a Freedom of Information Act request .
 The Joint Non-Lethal Weapons Directorate at Quantico, Virginia, is a non-lethal weapons Directorate . The directorate is based in Quantico and is based at the Marine Corps Institute of Technology .
 If you are interested in how someone could construct a homemade short-range electromagnetic weapon, this might be a good place to start . This is an example of how you could build a homemade electromagnetic weapon .
 You will need to be pretty resourceful working in your garage to keep pace with the feds though . You will have to work in the garage .
 In September 2013 it was reported that the U.S. Defense Department granted a $49 million contract to General Dynamics for developing directed energy weapons .
 The role of such weapons in U.S. domestic counterintelligence operations is in the realm of speculation and anecdotal evidence . The role is speculation .
 Many descriptions exist on the Internet which purport to be accounts by gang stalking victims claiming to have been attacked with such weapons .
 Accounts include descriptions of burning sensations, headaches, nausea, sudden fatigue, fluttering sensation in the chest, etc. accounts .
 The extensive use of disinformation by gang stalkers raises problems when assessing the plausibility of claims about the use of DEWs against targeted individuals, says author .
 The use of DEWs is perceived by non-victims of gang stalking as being implausible . Discussion of their use could undermine efforts to expose gang stalking generally .
 Even if DEWs are rarely used, it could further the counterintelligence objectives to discuss them on the Internet . It could raise the anxiety of victims, who might begin wondering whether their headaches, high-blood pressure, and other problems are being induced by DEWSs .
 It is inherently difficult to distinguish between some of the effects of DEWs and psychological harassment tactics . DEWs are often used in psychological harassment .
 Stress induced by psychological torment can manifest in some of the same ways accelerated heart rates and headaches, for example . Stress can also manifest in the same way accelerated heart rate and headaches .
 The use of DEWs against gang stalking victims is technologically plausible . DeWs could be used to protect victims of gang stalking .
 No one disputes the existence of such devices, and they’re consistent with the tactics of gang stalking . The devices are consistent with gang stalking, the author says .
 The energy would easily pass through most walls, so it isn’t much of a stretch to imagine the use of energy weapons . For example, harassment by noises generated from adjacent residences is a common gang stalking tactic .
 Such a tactic would be a logical choice for use in organized stalking, since it would be difficult or impossible to prove that such attacks were happening . It would be the same tactic as a tactic used by organized stalking .
 Reportedly, the intensity and lethality of such weapons varies greatly, but even the most extreme applications would be consistent with the malevolent campaigns against gang stalking victims .
 Anyone willing to terrorize someone relentlessly with psychological torment even knowing that it could lead to suicide or heart attack (or lethal violence by the victim) would presumably not have moral reservations about using DEWs .
 Three cases of non-lethal weapons attacks have been reported by self-proclaimed targeted individuals . "I believe that persons whom I believe to be highly credible reported having apparently attacked by some form of nonlethal weapons"
 The role of DEWs in organized stalking is surrounded by at least as much disinformation as any other area of the subject . It is difficult to know how widespread the use of such weapons could be let alone how to defend against them .
 Wired states in May 2012 that a Faraday cage blocks all electromagnetic radiation . The technical issues involved in possible counter-measures are beyond my ken . Wired states that a cage blocks electromagnetic radiation from electromagnetic radiation.
 This is in a separate category from all of those above because its use as a weapon of organized stalking is apparently fictional . Brain Implants is apparently a form of "stalking"
 Such disinformation strategies are extremely effective when most of the public is ignorant of basic counterintelligence methods . The public should be aware of the fact that counterintelligence is counter-intelligence, says the author .
 The technology of implanted electronic devices to manipulate brain functions is very real, experts say . The technology is still very real in the U.S.
 I mention this only to give a sense of the kind of threats on the horizon for everyone, not just for those unlucky enough to already be victims of America’s Stasi . Smart Dust Smart Dust is the latest in a long line of threats to the world .
 U.S. intelligence agencies and their contractors should be granted unlimited power and secrecy and money, author says . Intelligence agencies and contractors should consider the types of technologies that those people will be playing with in the future, he says .
 Brain chip implants could enable Big Brother (and his network of friends) to perform all sorts of monitoring . Here is potentially a more sophisticated version of brain chip implants .
 Snow is describing the impact of being stalked by a single individual with limited resources, not the long-term effects of the perpetrators with seemingly unlimited resources . Snow describes a criminal network which has the support of the government and uses refined psychological operations tactics .
 By the time I saw these victims, the crime was over and the healing process had already begun . Yet, by the time we saw them, the . crime was already over, and the . healing process has already begun, the author says .
 With stalking victims, the crime wasn’t over with, but continued on and on . The stalking victims were stalked by their stalkers and stalked for years .
 Victims of stalking say the experience is like a prolonged rape, a never-ending and terrifying loss of control over one’s life . Victims say they feel like they have lost control of their life .
 Stalking is one of the most psychologically crippling things that can happen to a person . Stalking can be psychologically crippling for a person, experts say .
 “Mobbing” is intense systematic harassment of an employee by multiple co-workers and managers . Mobbing and Workplace Violence t-CRIME-SCENE-TAPE-large570 “Workplace Harassment” versus “mobbing’s�
 Only a fraction of workplace harassment cases involve the kind of coordinated and severe emotional abuse that could be deemed mobbing .
 Mobbing is sometimes but probably not always an element of organized stalking . Mobbing may be a factor in organized stalking, but it's not always always a factor . Stalking is a form of mobbing .
 Only a fraction of cases of mobbing are part of the even more extreme phenomenon of organized stalking . Organized stalking includes invasive illegal surveillance and sophisticated psychological operations tactics, author says .
 Workplace mobbing even when not accompanied by stalking outside the workplace can involve serious psychological abuse . Depending on the circumstances, workplace mobbing can involve stalking .
 In some cases, the bullying leads to a violent response by the victim, as apparently happened in the cases described below . In some of the bullying cases, it appears to lead to the victim's violent response .
 The objective of mobbing is to emotionally torture a targeted employee either to force him or her to quit, or for vengeance, or both . Mobbing is a form of torture to force an employee to quit or to seek revenge or for revenge .
 News Reports on Mobbing Articles occasionally appear in the mainstream press about mobbing . Mobbing articles sometimes appear in mainstream press .
 August 2000 article from Newsweek/Daily Beast is an early example of reporting on what was already becoming an international trend .
 The 2012 presentation in the video clip below is a fascinating 14-minute explanation of the dynamics of intense workplace bullying by psychopaths in the corporate world .
 The above video is exclusively about abusive behavior within an organization, such as a corporation . The video is apparently accurate, but it is not intended to be about mobbing .
 An abusive boss can make the workplace a hellish place for subordinates . The psychopathic boss also has connections to law enforcement and private security personnel . The potential for abuse extends far beyond the range of common workplace harassment .
 psychopaths in corporations abuse the legal system and to abuse modern security technology in order to target individuals for personal reasons have greatly increased recently .
 This is especially true if the manager has established a personal relationship with local or federal law enforcement contact persons . The manager should be able to contact the manager if he has a relationship with law enforcement contacts .
 America's “post-constitutional” law enforcement paradigm’s emphasis on surveillance, secrecy, watch-lists, “predictive policing,” and the aggressive investigation and prosecution of whistle-blowers all create an environment ripe for abuse .
 An individual who crosses someone with connections to the U.S. law enforcement and intelligence community is short on legitimate targets . The entire industry is long on enforcers and short of legitimate targets, according to CNN.com .
 The size and power of America’s ‘homeland security’ infrastructure was radically expanded after the September 2001 terrorist attacks . Organized stalking illegal counterintelligence subversion dates back to at least the FBI's Cointelpro era of the 1950s and ‘60s
 Any dissident, whistle-blower, or even marginally-suspicious individual who wanders into the cross-hairs of the police state these days is likely to be portrayed as a threat to national security by the bureaucrats and thugs who populate the security industry .
 Business America’s diminishing economic opportunities for middle and lower class workers could also be increasing the supply of people willing to serve as pawns and snitches in group harassment activities .
 It seems likely that financially desperate subordinates are more easily manipulated . "Financial desperate subordinates" are more likely to be easily manipulated, it seems .
 Advances in surveillance technology pose another threat to individuals targeted by corporations . Advances of surveillance technology also present a threat to individual individuals .
 Employers now often snoop on employees’ email communications, Internet activity, and Facebook pages for example . Employers often now often also snooping on employees' email communications and Internet activity .
 Any corporation willing to hire private investigators can easily spy on employees’ personal lives in various ways . Also, any corporation . can easily hire private . investigators to spy on employee’s personal . lives .
 Workplace mobbing is self-fulfilling and self-reinforcing dynamics at work . There are potentially self--fulfilled, self-enforcing dynamics in the workplace . There is also a potential self-inflicted violence at work.
 Jeffrey Kantor, a federal contractor, filed a lawsuit in Virginia against multiple U.S. agencies for secretly and illegally subjecting him to invasive surveillance, overt stalking, and intentional systematic infliction of severe emotional abuse . Kantor filed the lawsuit against multiple United States agencies .
 Kantor’s case appears to be a clear example of mobbing as part of a state-sanctioned organized stalking campaign against a targeted individual . The complaint filed refers to “gang stalking” as such .
 Jeffrey Kantor has filed a lawsuit against members of the U.S. intelligence community . The lawsuit alleges the same illegal counterintelligence psychological operations tactics reported by virtually all self-proclaimed victims of organized stalking .
 Mainstream news reports and commentary on workplace violence tend to follow a predictable template . The link between workplace violence and workplace violence tends to be a common topic .
 When mass-shootings occur in schools and involve minors, the role of bullying as a causal factor is sometimes discussed, but for the most part, in cases of workplace violence, the subject is conspicuously absent from reporting .
 News agencies rarely give serious consideration to whether intense bullying by the shooter’s managers and co-workers contributed to the violence . News agencies give little consideration to the possibility of intense bullying .
 News media attention to the role of bullying in schools is small relative to its importance . Even in cases of violence in schools, news media attention is too small to focus on bullying .
 A 2011 survey of high school students found that teenagers who are the victims of bullying are up to 31 times more likely to bring weapons to school . The survey also found that bullying victims are 31 times likely to have weapons .
 U.S. intelligence and law enforcement agencies must be aware of the high potential for violence it creates, says author . Such statistics give an idea of how deeply corrupt intelligence agencies are, he says .
 The failure to discuss what is arguably the most obvious possible causal factor in workplace shootings is partly attributable to intellectually-lazy journalism, but it also involves ideological priorities .
 People wishing to see stricter firearms regulations are inclined to view mass-shootings as opportunities for public discussion of those policies . Mass shootings are opportunities for discussion of stricter gun regulations, the author says . People wishing for stricter gun laws should talk about gun laws, he says .
 Those whose agendas include increased surveillance and security systems will seek to use these incidents to bolster their case for a more muscular police state .
 Another reason for ignoring the role of bullying in workplace violence incidents is that the organizations involved companies, schools, and government agencies where such incidents occur have every incentive to downplay their own negligent tolerance of the bullying .
 Reporting on workplace violence is probably self-censored to some extent . News agencies don't want to raise unpleasant issue of whether victims brought the violence upon themselves by their abusive behavior .
 An exception to the lack of good reporting on this subject was published by the Huffington Post in August 2011 .
 Anthropologist Janice Harper dared to ask the most important question about a mass shooting which had occurred a year earlier in Manchester, Connecticut .
 Omar Thornton, a delivery truck driver, fatally shot eight of his co-workers and then killed himself . Thornton was a delivery driver at the time of the shootings . Thornton's co-worker was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head . Thornton killed himself in the shooting .
 Shooter Omar Thornton reportedly did not have a history of violence or mental illness . He reportedly had no history of mental illness or violence .
 Any intelligent person should be curious about why an otherwise non-violent individual would suddenly lash-out at others with lethal force .
 Thornton had apparently been the target of intense harassment by his co-workers . Thornton had been the victim of harassment by colleagues . Thornton was the subject of intense scrutiny for his behavior .
 There does not seem to be any reported evidence that the shooter was the target of organized stalking . The case like other similar cases has implications for the issue of gang stalking .
 Cases of intense harassment of an individual by multiple perpetrators often fail to generate any serious inquiry . Even when the process culminates in extreme violence, there is no serious inquiry into the case, experts say .
 Academic Reports on the Connection between Mobbing and Workplace Violence . Peer-reviewed studies by Dr. John Sutter have been published on the topic .
 Westhues estimates that at least a third of all rampage shootings can be attributed to mobbing . He says mobbing is a factor in at least one of the most deadly rampage shootings .
 Cho appears to have been the target of an uncommon but distinct and devastating social process called workplace mobbing . Cho was the victim of a workplace mobbed, a process of social violence . Cho is accused of being a victim of mobbing in the U.S. Cho was arrested in
 A workplace shooting in Long Beach, California invites suspicion about the possible involvement of mobbing . An example of a case which deserves a closer look .
 This particular case is interesting for several reasons . Even if there are other explanations, this particular case may have been interesting .
 At the time of this shooting, I lived close to downtown Long Beach, and I witnessed some of the police and ambulance activity associated with the event . Incidentally, at the time I lived there, I saw some of that activity . It's not the first time I've seen a
 Ezequiel Garcia shot his boss, Kevin Kozak, six times on February 16, 2012, on the seventh floor of the Glenn M Anderson Federal Building in downtown Long Beach . Garcia was an agent of Immigration and Customs Enforcement .
 Mr Garcia’s attack on his boss was in response to the fact that Mr Kozak (who was the second-in-command of ICE's Los Angeles region) had turned-down Garcia's request for a transfer within the department . Reportedly (see the article linked below
 Another agent, Perry Woo, then rushed into the room and fatally shot Garcia . Woo then rushed in and shot Garcia in the head, killing her .
 Two government officers were shot one fatally in a federal building in a downtown area of a major city . Yet barely registered as a blip on the media’s radar . This workplace violence incident involved two government officers .
 ICE and FBI which investigated the case declined to provide any details about what happened . Both ICE and the FBI have declined to reveal details of the case .
 The fatal shooting of Garcia was justified, the FBI says . Garcia was shot by police officers after a year of investigation . The FBI spent a year investigating the incident .
 Apart from several paragraphs in the middle of the article linked below, most of the media did not seem to be curious about the incident or about the silence of the government agencies involved . The incident occurred in the early hours of September 4 .
 A man shot his boss six times during his job performance review . The incident occurred during a performance review for his job at work .
 Maybe he snapped after a period of systematic harassment, and the feds did not want that made public . On the other hand, maybe he snapped because he was under constant harassment .
 At a minimum, the case illustrates the secrecy which often surrounds the activities of America’s law enforcement agencies .
 Navy Yard on September 16, 2013 left a dozen people killed and 8 others wounded . The Navy Yard was attacked by a gunman at the Washington, DC, Navy Yard .
 The shooter, Aaron Alexis, had claimed to have been stalked by multiple perpetrators . Aaron Alexis had reported that he was the victim of electronic harassment and noise harassment tactics .
 Alexis even carved “My ELF Weapon” into the receiver of his shotgun, as seen in this photo . Alexis carved the words “I’ve got my ELF weapon” in his shotgun receiver . Alexis also carved a picture of his gun in the receiver
 ELF is a common abbreviation for “extremely low frequency” navy yard shooting . The incident involved other red flags for many observers .
 Alexis reported hearing the voices she reported hearing was symptomatic of schizophrenia . Alexis' schizophrenia typically begins in early adulthood, roughly between the ages of 15 and 25 . Alexis was diagnosed with schizophrenia at the age of 25 .
 Alexis Alexis was an information technology employee with a security clearance at a defense-related computer company . Alexis was 34 years old . Alexis, who was 34, was a computer expert with a national security clearance .
 Persons afflicted with schizophrenia are not typically violent; if anything, they are more likely to be a danger to themselves . Also, persons afflicted with schizophrenia are not typically violent and more likely to be a danger themselves .
 Alexis never reported that he believed that the voices he heard were coming from some supernatural source which would have been more suggestive of mental illness than mental illness . Alexis never said that he thought that he heard the voices were from a supernatural source .
 His accounts were more consistent with the kind of sonic projection device demonstrated here by an engineer who designs them .
 At 20 minutes and 8 seconds into this TV program which aired in 2009 is an interview with an engineer describing and demonstrating how such devices work .
 Everything about it is credible, and additional reading as you will easily find out only confirms it . Roll your eyes at the source if you want to, but everything about the source is credible .
 No manifesto was left by the shooter citing any political or religious agenda that might have motivated him to shoot twenty people at his workplace . The shooter was shot at least 20 people at the workplace .
 His words and actions are more plausibly explained by his claim that he was being systematically harassed, and he eventually snapped . His actions and actions were more plausible than his words or actions could have been explained .
 For example, the FBI bypassed the ATF and performed their own trace of the shotgun used even though the ATF is the federal agency in charge of tracing guns used in crimes . The ATF is responsible for tracing the gun used in crime .
 The investigation of the shooting is being handled by the FBI which is notoriously secretive . It is difficult to guess how much critical information about the case is being kept secret from the public .
 It has not been reported whether some of the shooting victims had been intensely harassing the shooter as was done to the plaintiff in the federal gang stalking case filed in 2013 .
 Alexis had reported being harassed by ‘voices’ and noises, yet no one suspended his security clearance or otherwise intervened . Alexis' employer and the Newport Rhode Island Police Department and the navy were all aware of Alexis' harassment . Alexis reported harassment to police .
 Initial report of an active shooter came in about 8:20 local time . The Capitol Police department's highly trained and heavily armed four-man Containment and Emergency Response Team was near the Navy Yard .
 Capitol Police were the only police on the site equipped with long guns and requested their help stopping the gunman . According to a Capitol Police source, an officer with the Metropolitan Police Department . Washington DC’s main municipal force told the Capitol Cert officers they were the . only police equipped with
 Capitol Police team radioed their superiors when they were told to leave the scene . Watch commander told Capitol Police to leave scene, the BBC was told .
 A Congressman confirmed that the local SWAT unit had been inexplicably ordered not to respond . A few days later, a congressman confirmed that a Congressman had been ordered to stay away from the scene .
 SWAT team member told CNN's Jake Tapper that they were told to stand down to the shooting at the Washington Navy Yard . Michael McCaul said he personally spoke with a SWAT officer who confirmed that he was a member of the team .
 A week after the shooting, The Washington Times published an article exploring the gang stalking speculation surrounding the shooting .
 A few days later, Wired magazine posted an article which also examined the gang stalking aspects of the navy yard shooting .
 Some conspiracists suggest Alexis was a “targeted individual,” or “TI” The term-of-art used by anguished people who believe they’re being ‘gang stalked” by shadowy enemies, often in government .
 Alexis’ police report is common elements in gang stalking accounts . The elements of the police report include covert microwave weapons, conspiracies and sleep disturbances . Alexis' police report says she was stalked by a gang member .
 The Pentagon has used similar voice-projection technology in the past as a non-lethal weapon .
 Such a weapon would create a condition similar to schizophrenia, a report says . According to one report on the project, such a weapon could create schizophrenia .
 It may be useful to provide a disruptive condition to a person not aware of the technology . It may also be useful for a person who is unaware of the disruption .
 The year before, Wired featured an article specifically about the so-called “Voice of God” device . This year's article featured a story specifically about that device .
 The fed failed to intervene in any way despite the shooter’s emails (and despite other obvious warning flags mentioned above) in a case involving an employee with a security clearance who was working at military facilities and reporting that he was being harassed and hearing voices .
 On November 20, 2013, The Washington Times reported that U.S. Rep. Tom Coburn was arrested in connection with the incident . Coburn is a Republican who has served in the United States Congress .
 In January 2014, a local NBC news journalist in Washington D.C. received an email which the United States Navy sent to him by accident . Scott MacFarlane received the email from the U.S. Navy .
 The internal email from the Navy’s FOIA office outlined the strategy which they planned to use to limit the amount of information released to MacFarlane, who had filed a FOIA request for the documents .
 The most charitable analysis would be that this was simply routine “cover your ass” protocol for a government entity seeking to avoid embarrassing revelations about its incompetent management at a naval facility .
 Aaron Alexis’s medical records revealed that the Veterans Affairs doctors who examined him weeks before the shooting determined that he did not appear to have any mental health issues . The Associated Press reported in January 2014 that Aaron Alexis had not appeared to be mentally ill .
 The AP obtained Alexis’s medical records via a Freedom of Information Act request . Alexis' medical records were obtained by the AP . Alexis is the son of Alexis, Alexis' mother of two .
 Normally, the government does not disclose medical records . But the Veterans Affairs Department made an exception because of the public interest in the mass shooting .
 The harassment apparently was leaving him sleep-deprived, and he reported his insomnia to his VA doctors, records show . The harassment left him with insomnia, records showed . He reported insomnia to doctors, as his records showed, as well as the harassment .
 Alexis’s medical record like the other facts of the case are consistent with his account of having been intensely harassed . Alexis's medical record shows that he was intensely harassed, according to the medical examiner . Alexis was arrested and charged with harassment in October .
 The official explanation is that out of the blue, someone who appeared to be normal and even was given a security clearance suddenly went on a murderous rampage for no reason whatsoever . What does not make sense is the official explanation .
 Nomination was made “for blocking access to records” about the Navy Yard shooting . The nomination was made for blocking ‘blocking access’ to records about the shooting .
 Alexis had sent three emails to FFCHS prior to the shooting . Alexis had also sent three other emails to the station . Alexis is accused of shooting three times .
 The FBI rejected the request later that month, claiming that the information was exempt from disclosure requirements . The request was rejected by the FBI .
 In January 2014, the person requesting the information filed an appeal, noting that the president of FFCHS, Derrick Robinson, had already revealed information about the matter . Robinson said he had been interviewed by two FBI agents concerning the case .
 In September 2014, the Justice Department finally sent a letter denying the appeal . The appeal was denied .
 The United States government's position is that the mass shooting at the navy yard was simply a random act of insanity by a disturbed individual as opposed to being the result of intense systematic harassment, as the shooter himself suggested .
 Aaron Alexis, the shooter, is dead, presumably the only potential “enforcement proceedings” would be civil litigation related to security issues . Alexis’s security clearance, and the management of security at the naval base, would be the only issue .
 At least one such lawsuit has been filed by the family of one of the shooting victims .
 Several critical pieces of information will remain in the dark at least for now . CNN will not be able to provide additional information about the investigation .
 Alexis’s claims that he was the target of psyops harassment are being investigated by the FBI . Alexis claims he was targeted by psyops for being a target of harassment . Alexis says he was a victim of psyop harassment .
 "If he had been the subject of any kind of investigation and monitoring, that would have huge implications regarding his security clearance," he said .
 FOIA Exemption 7 concerns records or information compiled for law enforcement purposes . The release of these records would disclose techniques and procedures for investigations or prosecutions . FOIA Exempt 7 concerns .
 This response should not be taken as an indication that records do or do not exist . This is not an indication records are being kept up against the wishes of the public .
 Alexis had sent three emails to FFCHS prior to the shooting . Some news reports about the shooting noted that Alexis had been emailing the school . Alexis was shot dead in the head .
 It would be very interesting to read the description of FFCHS that appears in the FBI’s investigative files .
 No doubt, the DOJ would argue that such information also falls under one or more of the above FOIA exemptions .
 Muckrock, which tracked the FOIA request, now lists its status as rejected .
 Whatever led to the mass shooting at the Washington Navy Yard in September 2013, one thing is clear: the Navy and FBI do not want the public to know about it .
 A series of bombings was perpetrated from 1978 to 1995 which killed three people and injured 23 others . Three people were killed and 23 others were injured in the bombings . Theodore Kaczynski was the prime suspect in the case .
 Kaczynski wrote a manifesto explaining that his motive for the bombings was to expose the threat to freedom posed by modern technology . He wrote that he wanted to expose modern technology to the threat posed by technology .
 The court rejected Kaczynski’s request to represent himself at his trial, and made a plea agreement to avoid having his trial as a public platform to express his views . The court made the plea agreement .
 In return for a promise to not seek the death penalty, Kaczynski pleaded guilty to the murder . He was sentenced to life in prison .
 An article by Alston Chase in the June 2000 issue of the Atlantic explored the question of whether Kaczynski’s violence was the result of his psychological torture .
 Kacyzinski was recruited to participate in a series of psychology experiments . He was deceived about their true nature, which was to examine the effects of extreme emotional stress possibly to help the CIA develop interrogation techniques .
 The article implies that the experiment could possibly have been a factor in Kaczynski’s later acts of violence . The experiment was published in 1998 .
 The injuries and deaths of the 26 victims of Kaczynski’s bombs were quite possibly “collateral damage” from a secret and unethical U.S. government program . The injuries, deaths of 26 victims are quite possibly "Collateral damage"
 “To a hammer everything looks like a nail.” is the phrase used to refer to a hammer . “I’m not a hammer,” says the author of the novel, “to a hammer” .
 In 2009 Bruce Fein advised Congress that national intelligence-gathering system of regional data fusion centers should be abandoned . Fein: "Everything unconventional or unorthodox looks like at least at least a preembryonic terrorist danger"
 He compared the system to those operated by the KGB and East Germany’s Stasi . The system is similar to the Soviet Union's KGB and the Stasi in East Germany .
 Incompetence in the U.S. law enforcement and intelligence community creates threats to Americans in two ways . Threat assessments by bureaucrats by bureaucrats create problems for Americans . The United States is losing control of the intelligence community .
 Real threats such as the 9/11 terrorist attack and the Boston Marathon bombing often go unrecognized . Real threats like the Boston bombing go unnoticed in the United States .
 Actress Jean Seberg, whose “crime” was supporting the civil rights movement, was stalked and terrorized by the FBI, ultimately leading to her suicide . Meanwhile, people who pose no threat whatsoever are often destroyed such as the actress who posed no threat .
 A vast industry of government and corporate entities in the domestic spying business, but relatively few actual threats . One obvious problem currently is that in America we now have a vast industry in the spying business . The problem is that there are few real threats to the U.S.
 People feeding at the giant homeland security pig trough are eager to create the impression that their jobs and budgets are justified, which makes witch-hunts almost inevitable . Predictably, people feeding . at the . giant homeland Security pig trough .
 People who pursue careers in the intelligence and law enforcement industry often have a distorted perception of the danger posed by people who are less conformist and less subservient to authority figures than they are .
 What these kinds of people share in common is that the pattern-recognition software in their head is badly calibrated and oversensitive . The pattern recognition software in the head is bad, oversensitive, they say .
 Based upon the reported facts, I would not refer to the following case as “gang stalking” in the full sense of the term . The case is not a gang stalking case in the way it was reported to have occurred .
 The incident did not involve the intense and sophisticated psychological operations tactics commonly associated with organized stalking by corrupt law enforcement and intelligence agencies and their contractors . The incident was not an organized stalking operation .
 The case was a well-documented example of social and professional isolation of a targeted individual who was blacklisted by government bureaucrats . This case was however, however, an example of the social isolation of the targeted individual .
 Jane Clift, a resident of the Borough of Slough in England, won a libel case against her borough’s council in which she claimed to have been falsely labelled as potentially violent after she complained about someone vandalizing a flower bed in a town park .
 Clift was placed on the “violent persons register” and then emailed people in the community about the fact that she had been placed on it . Clift then put her name on the register and emailed people about it .
 I would confidently bet that the vast majority of Americans targeted by organized stalking would be unlikely to suspect that their personal circumstances might be connected even remotely to the subject of terrorism . The vast majority would not suspect that they might be linked to terrorism .
 It's highly plausible that in many cases such a connection exists within the vast homeland security bureaucracy . Still, it is highly likely that such an apparent connection exists with the government .
 The U.S. government’s Terrorist Screening Database is shrouded in secrecy . The United States government's terror database has been dubbed a "terrorist database"
 Names are routinely added and removed from the “Terrorist Screening Database” combined with the secrecy which surrounds the list, make it difficult to know how many people it includes, but apparently the list has grown rapidly .
 A report released by the ACLU in March 2014 about the terrorist watch list included a number of references which would resonate with anyone familiar with gang stalking . The ACLU released the report in March, 2014 .
 Watch-lists exist in multiple jurisdictions and agencies and databases, and are maintained by both public and private organizations . ACLU United States Govt Watchlisting .
 In addition to the federal terrorist screening database and no-fly list, there is the secretive quasi-governmental database maintained by the Law Enforcement Intelligence Unit association .
 One of Big Brother’s interesting lists was the subject of a July 2008 article in Salon.com .
 Main Core in its current incarnation apparently contains a vast amount of personal data on Americans . NSA intercepts of bank and credit card transactions and the results of surveillance efforts by the FBI, CIA and other agencies .
 Main Core is an emergency internal security database system designed for use by the military in the event of a national catastrophe . Main Core was designed to be used in emergency situations such as martial law .
 The Last Roundup: Getting your name removed from a watch-list Blacklist is nearly impossible . Avoiding the cliché “Kafkaesque’s” nearly impossible when describing United States government watch-lists .
 The protagonist in Kafka’s novel ‘The Trial’ was arrested by agents from an unidentified agency . He was tried without being told the nature of the charges against him . The protagonist was arrested in Kafka's novel "The Trial"
 Most of the policies governing how people are placed on federal watch-lists are secrets . Government has an official policy of refusing to confirm or deny whether someone is on the government’s various lists .
 A federal judge finally ruled that her name should be removed from the government’s various watch-lists . She struggled for 9 years including a 7-year legal battle before a federal judge .
 Ibrahim had to litigate most of her case without knowing the information in the U.S. government’s case against her . Ibrahim: “Ibrahim's case is the result of the government's decision to deny her access to information in her case .
 Some federal air marshals said they have quotas for identifying a certain number of passengers as suspicious . Quotas for reporting suspicious persons were revealed in an ABC local news affiliate .
 Individuals identified in such reports can end up in an international database watch list . Individuals identified can be placed on a watch list by the U.S.
 It is unlikely law enforcement and intelligence officials would publicly acknowledge pressure on employees to name persons as being suspicious . It is easy to imagine how career pressures upon and within various agencies could create a sort of “witch hunt” culture .
 FBI agents rationalized targeting of individuals for surveillance and subversion even when those individuals were not engaged in subversive political activities . Authors found that FBI agents responded to organizational pressure from the upper echelon of the FBI by rationalizing the targeting .
 Individuals targeted for gang stalking because they are suspected of involvement or potential future involvement in terrorism or crime, but are not implicated by any legal evidence . Targeting suspected potential future “terrorists” is sometimes done in the U.S.
 For example, see a 2006 article in the Canadian national newspaper, The Globe and Mail, regarding such tactics being illegally used in Canada .
 "Homeland security" industry takes expansive view of what constitutes a suspicious person . Not surprisingly, people in the U.S. “homeland security” industry take a very expansive view .
 Federal contractor Jeffrey Kantor was targeted for gang stalking by federal agents . Kantor's innocent Google search apparently led to him being targeted by agents . Federal agents say he was a federal contractor and federal contractor .
 Other mainstream news reports indicate that gang stalking is also used by intelligence agencies to punish or intimidate whistle-blowers for example .
 United States intelligence agencies are often accused of retaliating against whistle-blowers also . The U.S. intelligence agencies have also been accused of retaliation against them also .
 Whistleblowers find no protection in patchwork of laws designed to protect whistleblowers . They find no legal protection in the vast patchwork laws designed for whistleblowers .
 Many American citizens were used as human guinea pigs in the CIA's MK Ultra experiments . If you doubt that is plausible, read about the CIA’s MK Ultra .
 A former U.S. military member was apparently targeted both for the purposes of extra-judicial punishment and to test psychological operations technology .
 Sometimes individuals are targeted by the spy industry purely because of a bureaucrat’s incompetence . Targeting individuals by mistake is often the case .
 A perfect example of this was reported in September 2011 by the journalist John Cook . John Cook reported the incident on September 2011 .
 A CIA analyst arranged to have a man kidnapped and tortured, although he was completely innocent . The CIA analyst says the man was innocent . He says the CIA analyst was a CIA analyst .
 The analyst was promoted to the CIA . The CIA says he was a good employee .
 An analyst described only by her middle name —”Frances”—pressed for El-Masri to be abducted even though some in the agency weren’t convinced he was the terrorist .
 Instead of being punished or fired for the error, “Frances” was eventually promoted to running the Global Jihad Unit by then-CIA director Michael Hayden . Instead of punishment or firing, she was promoted to run the unit by Hayden .
 Stasi era in East Germany, Cointelpro era in U.S. and Stasi period in Germany, gang stalking in Canada and U.K. Exploiting watch-lists for personal vendettas and corporate agendas is a common factor .
 As it is now structured, the U.S. law enforcement and intelligence industry provides a perfect environment for abuse of power . The United States is a perfect place for abuse, says Julian Zelizer .
 The claim that America faces a constant indefinite threat of terrorism has created political cover for seemingly unlimited money and secrecy and power for the agencies and private firms involved .
 Increasingly sophisticated surveillance and “non-lethal” weapons technology makes the potential for abuse even greater still . Increasingly . sophisticated surveillance . technology makes it even more likely to abuse .
 In theory, organized stalking could be used against someone by an individual or corporation in one of several ways . Organized stalking can be used by individuals or corporations .
 Gloria Naylor is a prominent case of gang stalking that apparently involved exploiting U.S. counterintelligence subversion for a personal vendetta . Naylor's case is one of the most prominent gang stalking cases in the world .
 Naylor also wrote a semiautobiographical book, 1996, about her experiences as a targeted individual of gang stalking . Naylor's book was published in 1996 .
 Similar cases have been well-documented in published mainstream news media articles . Similar cases include an incident in Stockton, California in 2011 in which the city manager was stalked by local police after a break-down in contract negotiations .
 Individuals become targets of surveillance states in a variety of ways . Threat Assessment Teams & Personal Vendettas are part of the U.S. surveillance state surveillance .
 A Threat Assessment Team is a small group of designated staff members in an organization which attempts to assess whether certain individuals in the organization pose a threat . A threat assessment team assesses whether individuals in organization pose threat .
 Like-minded professionals gathered together in person or via a teleconference can use the power of synergy to find dynamic solutions in a short time . The use of synergy can also be used to find solutions quickly and easily .
 These meetings allow the participants to share ideas, experiences, fears, and concerns in a problem-solving environment . These meetings are meetings where participants share ideas and concerns .
 You should avoid any diversity of viewpoints on the panel which will decide whether to label someone as suspicious . Naturally, you should avoid . Avoid any diversity .
 FBI webpage makes no mention of issue of workplace harassment and bullying . Tellingly, the FBI’s webpage does not mention the issue of bullying .
 A sociologist found that violent incidents in the workplace and in schools in North America are often a response to the individual being intensely harassed . Kenneth Westhues, a sociologist, said violent incidents often occur in response to intense personal harassment .
 Organized stalking by all accounts involves the tactics associated with counterintelligence subversion . The U.S. government has been involved in a large number of covert operations .
 The FBI is the primary agency in the United States responsible for domestic counterintelligence . It is also responsible for counterintelligence in the country .
 Clearly, there is a potential for abuse of power by these Threat Assessment Teams, says CNN.com.com . Threat Assessment Team.com: "Clearly, there are a potential ... abuses of power"
 A federal judge has found that the practice has already been abused . The FBI has chosen to remain silent on the issue .
 Critics say administrators may try to use threat assessment teams for own purposes . Threat assessment teams may also be used to help administrators, officials say .
 Students’ rights groups say administrators are infringing on students’ free-speech rights . Administrators say administrators infringed on students' free speech rights . Students' rights groups: Administrators infringing on free speech .
 Merely invoking the magic phrase “national security” seems to provide sufficient legal justification for almost any secret policy of the intelligence community . “National security’s” provides sufficient legal and political justification these days for almost anything .
 Even in the rare cases when the U.S. government’s ‘Star Chamber’ rules that a policy is out of bounds, Americans are not permitted to know what the feds were trying to get away with . Americans are allowed to know if the government was trying to
 As practiced, organized stalking is essentially an extra-judicial punishment, and it grossly violates multiple state and federal laws . Organized stalking is illegal in the U.S. and violates multiple laws .
 The policy is presumably justified at least unofficially within the FBI and DOJ as being a legitimate counterintelligence policy needed to subvert individuals who would otherwise pose a threat . However, the policy is apparently justified at the FBI or DOJ . The policy would presumably be needed to counterterrorists
 The policy statement of the nowdefunct “Weed and Seed’s” program was expressed in the policy statement . As explained later in this overview (in the section on the U.S. Department of Justice), probably the closest thing to an official public statement of
 The program’s description suggested a law enforcement strategy of identifying and removing undesirable citizens from neighborhoods through a “community-based” law enforcement approach . That program suggested a . law enforcement . approach .
 In September 2013 it emerged that at least a dozen NSA employees had been illegally spying on their spouses and partners . NSA employees have been accused of spying on spouses, partners .
 This was a small glimpse of the potential abuses of power in the modern U.S. spy industry . "This is a very small glimpse into the modern American spy industry"
 The abuses of power were real, but their revelation might well have been intended to distract from much more serious violations . In other words, the abuses were real but were not meant to distract .
 In addition to thousands of professional spies, the Stasi had over 100,000 citizen informants . The Stasi also had more than a million citizen informants, including thousands of spies .
 An informant for the Stasi was referred to as an unofficial collaborator . The Stasi were referred to an IM, an unofficial informant .
 All sectors of East German society had IMs who supplied information about their fellow citizens to the communist government . IMs were used to supply information to the government .
 A November 2009 article in Der Spiegel examined the nature of this rodent-like element of society which no doubt exists today in America . Der Spiegel looked at the nature in the United States .
 The real motivation behind these acts of betrayal was much more humdrum than one might think, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The origin of the targeting of individuals was simply a trivial incident or a misunderstanding . As the article notes, often the origin of targeting was simply an incident .
 In one case a man was turned-in for having a West German brand of pudding in his kitchen .
 The Organizational Structure of Gang Stalking cockroaches . “The system of espionage thus established, the country will swarm with informers, spies, delators, and all that odious reptiles tribe that bred in the sunshine of despotic power”
 In the shadowy world of gang stalking, it is difficult for the targeted individual to know the exact nature of the organizational structure of his or her enemies . In the dark world, gang stalking is a crime of the night .
 From the victim’s perspective especially when the person first realizes that he or she is being systematically harassed, it is virtually impossible to know exactly who the enemies are and how they are conspiring with each other . The victim's perspective is that it's virtually impossible for the victim to know
 For many victims, their situation remains opaque because of the vast disinformation campaign they encounter when they attempt to ascertain what is happening via Internet research . Many victims are still trying to find out what has happened to them through the Internet .
 The apparent scope of the activity would make it impossible for it to be undetected by America’s now-massive homeland security surveillance and information-sharing infrastructure . As I described in the introduction to this overview, that it is a government counter-intelligence program is an unavoidable conclusion .
 Gang stalking's organizational structure apparently involves a mixture of personnel . Gang stalking’s organizational structure appears to involve personnel, according to the report .
 At the top are government officials and agents in federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies, who would need to at least passively acquiesce in the program .
 Several levels of delegates below them would be needed to manage and perform various operations . Delegates would have to be able to manage operations .
 The FBI’s original version of Cointelpro also made use of local government and civilian minions . The FBI also used local government officials and local police .
 In a sense, everyone who participates in organized stalking and officials who knowingly permit it are criminals . Organized stalking is a violation of federal law and of state laws in every state .
 For many people, the notion that law enforcement and intelligence agencies would be perpetrating crimes seems counter-intuitive . For many, the idea that law officials and agencies are perpetrating crime seems counterintuitive .
 Law enforcement and intelligence agencies such as the FBI often authorize crimes by criminal informants . Also, law enforcement and . intelligence agencies . such an informant is often authorized to commit crimes by law enforcement .
 If a government agency contracts with a private firm and then that firm employs criminal informants, former cops, and former agents to perform the dirty work, the crimes can be several steps removed from officials . The crimes are often done by former agents and informants .
 Structural complexity is desirable if one is trying to conduct activities in a way that will be difficult for outsiders to understand . Another reason is that structural complexity itself can be desirable if it is difficult to explain .
 In essence, the idea is to make it difficult to ascertain the structure and dynamics and agendas which are at work . "In essence, [the idea is] to make [it difficult to identify the structure] and dynamics of the ... agendas which [at work] at work," says
 Having a complex and opaque system of counterintelligence operations serves the interests of the perpetrators as does further obfuscating the nature of the system by spreading disinformation as explained in detail later in this overview . Counter-intelligence operations are opaque and are often used to spread disinformation .
 Intelligence-security contractors all want a place at the pig trough whenever a government program creates opportunities . As with the U.S. military-industrial complex, the contractors want to be at the trough whenever government programs create opportunities .
 Domestic spying industry provides a lucrative career path for law enforcement and intelligence agencies . Also, the domestic spying industry is a lucrative revolving-door career path .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Friday for a new gallery of snapshots .
 Participants in organized stalking can exploit the system for their own personal vendettas . For example, as government-corporate alliances such as InfraGard and DSAC are formed, participants in stalking may exploit them .
 The city manager in Stockton, California was stalked by local police to punish him for not granting them a sufficiently generous contract . A prime example was a 2011 incident in which police stalked the city's city manager .
 Some CI operations are handled directly by the FBI and other intelligence agencies . CI operations in the United States are handled by other agencies, including the FBI .
 Other CI activities performed for the government by private intelligence-security firms under government contract .
 CI activities were performed by the FBI and by private firms . In some cases, the infiltration and subversion of the Occupy Wall Street Movement was carried out by FBI and private firms.
 The original Cointelpro operations were based on secret intelligence/security firm contractors with secret clearances now employed by “homeland security” programs and corporations .
 Cerberus America has a vast, complex, interconnected workforce associated with law enforcement, intelligence, and national security operations . The DOJ, FBI, & DHS Cerberus America have a vast and complex workforce . Cerberus America is an interconnected workforce with law and intelligence operations .
 It includes everything from local volunteer neighborhood watch programs to the Pentagon . The Pentagon is a major source of interest in volunteer work .
 Components of that infrastructure include federal, state, and local government agencies, private contractors, criminal informants and criminal informants . Hybrid quasi-governmental associations such as Law Enforcement Intelligence Units .
 Adding to the complexity are overlapping jurisdictions, bureaucracy, “revolvingdoor’s employment patterns, and coordination between different groups,” the author says . The author adds that overlapping jurisdictions and bureaucracy are a problem .
 Some examples of coordination both formal and informal would be disturbing to many Americans . President Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in government .
 The scale and complexity of America’s security industry combined with its inherent secrecy makes it difficult to speculate about the exact way counterintelligence operations are perpetrated . The scale of U.S. security industry is difficult to describe .
 The three agencies work with each other on the collection and sharing of information . The biometric-based database of criminal suspects is based on a biometric database .
 DOJ is the United States executive department responsible for law enforcement . The DOJ is responsible for the nation's law enforcement agencies .
 The FBI is both a federal criminal investigative agency and the nation’s primary counterintelligence agency . The violations include instances in which attorneys who have a duty to uphold justice have misled courts, withheld evidence that could have helped defendants .
 FBI secretly orchestrated original version of Cointelpro under FBI Director J Edgar Hoover . FBI Director Hoover was behind original version under FBI .
 The DHS was created in response to the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks . The department with primary responsibility for counter-terrorism programs, such as maintenance of national network of data fusion centers .
 As with organized stalking generally, motivations might vary from counterintelligence subversion to experimentation, to personal vengeance for individuals and corporations with connections .
 The CIA's official mission statement refers to spying on America’s “adversaries” which generally refers to foreign adversaries . The CIA”s official mission is to spy on America's ‘adversary’ The CIA has a mission statement that refers to
 The CIA has a well-documented history of involvement with things like torture, assassinations, drug trafficking, orchestrating coups against democraticallyelected governments, kidnapping families for dictators . On the other hand, the mission statement also proclaims that the CIA “upholds the highest standards of
 CIA Director Richard Helms by his own admission ordered the destruction of the program’s records in 1973 . Helms ordered the program's records to be destroyed in order to prevent further MK Ultra crimes . The agency's crimes will never be fully known .
 The CIA is known to have destroyed videos of their agents’ use of torture in interrogations, and to have spied on the United States Senate while it was investigating the CIA’s torture .
 Accounts by self-proclaimed victims of organized stalking often include relatively sophisticated methods . Accounts by victims include sophisticated methods such as sophisticated stalking .
 The tactics and technology are consistent with the operational capabilities of the CIA, the official says . The CIA has a reputation for operating outside of legal and ethical boundaries, he says .
 CIA supports regimes which torture their citizens . Also worth considering is the fact that the CIA supports regime which torture its citizens .
 It does not strain the imagination to think that such an agency might have its slimy tentacles connected in various plausibly deniable ways to the organized stalking of targeted individuals . The agency's alleged involvement in the stalking of individuals is not surprising, says the author .
 There are reasons to suspect that the NSA is not entirely innocent . As with the CIA, one can only speculate about the NSA’s possible involvement .
 Edward Snowden revealed in 2013 that the NSA is aggressively involved in spying on its own citizens and lying about it . The NSA unlike the CIA specializes in signals intelligence rather than operations .
 NSA Director Keith Alexander lied about mass surveillance of Americans by the NSA twice . The NSA Director lied about the mass surveillance by Americans twice . Alexander is the director of the NSA who oversees the NSA .
 He denied that the data was being collected, then after it was revealed, he claimed that the program had uncovered 54 terrorist plots . The program has uncovered 54 terror plots, he said .
 When challenged by Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman, Patrick Leahy, he admitted that the number was an exaggeration . Senator Leahy admitted that he was exaggerating .
 The President’s Review Board reported that the actual number of terrorist threats detected was zero . Later the board reported that it had detected zero .
 Another reason to think that some members of the NSA acquiesce in organized stalking is more specific . The NSA has been accused of spying on people in Washington, D.C.
 Another reason to suspect that some members of the NSA must acquiesce in organized stalking is that it would be impossible for them to be unaware of the various electronic communications associated with it . This would apply to the other numerous intelligence agencies .
 Gang stalking must be something of an open secret among much of the intelligence community . Gang stalking is something of a secret among many of the world's intelligence officials .
 Another reason to suspect that NSA officials likely approve of gang stalking is that such operations are consistent with what is now known about the agency’s culture . Finally, another reason for NSA officials to approve of the operation is that it is consistent with their culture .
 Possibly the position was created as part of the massive increase in the “national security” infrastructure following the 9/11 attacks . Possibly the job was created in part of an increase in national security infrastructure . The position may have been created in the wake of the terrorist attacks .
 Surveillance Role Players may fill a variety of roles in surveillance . It is very possible that surveillance Role Players fill a number of roles . Surveillance role players may also be surveillance role players .
 Security drills simulate the role of terrorists and others in various security drills . For example, one of those roles might be to simulate the roles of terrorists, others .
 Another role might or might not be to perpetrate the counterintelligence stalking of targeted individuals . Another role may be to perpetuate the counter-intelligence stalking .
 In the absence of reporting on the nature of SRPs or counterintelligence stalking, it is at least worth considering that the two phenomena might be connected .
 The collusion of corporations and federal agencies in the area of domestic intelligence activities is not new, it's not new . It's not the first time corporations have colluded with federal agencies .
 The U.S. government has been colluding with big corporations to spy on Americans since the dawn of the Cold War . The practice has greatly expanded, but it has been greatly expanded .
 Cointelpro Version 2. apparently makes use of the large supply of Americans who possess security clearances over 5. million people as of 2013 . Almost a third of those who have clearances work for private firms .
 Nearly one-third of Americans with top secret clearances are private contractors rather than government employees . Nearly one third of the Americans with clearances have top secret clearance are contractors .
 Online job listings by defense/intelligence contractors for SRPs seek applicants with active secret clearances and training in counterintelligence . Applicants with active clearances must also have counterintelligence training .
 In at least some cases, the client for the Surveillance Role Player contractors is the Department of Defense . The surveillance Role Player contractor is also a client of the Defense Department .
 The job announcements do not indicate which U.S. government department or agency is the client . Often though, the job announcements don't indicate which United States government department is hiring .
 It seems likely that some of the contracts would be with the Department of Homeland Security . Some contracts are likely to be with DHS .
 These ads could be evidence that federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies support outsourced organized stalking operations .
 SRPs would have the tactical skills, technological assets, funding, and law enforcement connections needed to perpetrate nationwide stalking operations involving counterintelligence methods . SRPs are known to have the technological skills and technological assets needed to keep tabs on the movements .
 SRPs would also have a powerful incentive to maintain secrecy about such operations . SRPs have a strong incentive to keep quiet about the operations, say experts .
 Members of the intelligence community including contractors are exempt from the Whistleblower Protection Act . The act applies to members of the Intelligence community . Contractors are exempt under the law .
 So even if an intelligence-security contractor were to mistakenly hire someone who has moral integrity, that employee would still be reluctant to expose misconduct . Even if a contractor hires someone with integrity, it's unlikely they will expose misconduct to the public .
 Revealing secret practices even practices which are legally dubious would involve a high risk of serious legal trouble . Revealing confidential practices even involves a risk of legal trouble would be difficult to do .
 The SRP job is relatively low on the food chain . It is a plausible explanation for how organized stalking is perpetrated by organized stalking .
 If organized stalking is widespread as anecdotal and media reports seem to suggest the street-level work is certainly not being performed by FBI agents .
 Victims of organized stalking seem to be rather ordinary individuals who are not connected to criminal or terrorist organizations . Victims are often ordinary people who are often not connected with criminal or terror organizations .
 In many cases, targets seem to have no idea how they came to be targeted . In many of the cases, they seem to be unaware of how they were targeted .
 Some of them perhaps most might have crossed someone with connections to the law enforcement industry . Others might have simply crossed someone who had connections to law enforcement . Some of those crossed the line .
 Such targeted persons do not have the resources and skills that would require serious “tradecraft” on the part of the perpetrators, says the author . Such targets do not need serious "tradecraft" to be targeted, he says .
 Any brown-noser who can follow orders and keep a secret could perform this level of dirty work . Any brown noser who follows orders and keeps a secret would be able to do this .
 Most SRPs state that one element of the job is training others . Training the lowest-level perps is training the lowest level perps . SRPs say they want to train others .
 Stalking is consistent with observable activities associated with organized stalking, police say . That too, it's consistent with observatory activity associated with stalking .
 Acts of harassment done for psychological operations purposes are often perpetrated by someone having only a single momentary interaction with the target .
 Someone unknown to the victim makes some particular comment or performs some act of rudeness, or simply glares at the victim . For example, someone unknown to victim makes comment, or performs act of rude behavior .
 Such persons are probably ignorant of why the victim is supposedly even being targeted, such as why they are being targeted . The victim is probably ignorant about why she is being targeted.
 The Stasi referred to as “zersetzung” the process of systematically degrading the target’s morale . SRPs orchestrate and delegate those minor acts of “no-touch torture” which collectively make up what the Stasi called “zerzetz
 Surveillance Role Player job ads such as the one below indicate that the work is part-time . Many surveillance role players are not available for full-time jobs .
 Part-time job would be easier to conceal from the public, he says . For one thing, part-time jobs would be better, he adds .
 It's possible that harassing people full-time might be a bit demoralizing for all but the most purely sadistic CI agents . Also, it is possible that harassed people full time might be demoralizing .
 Some cops frequently behave as bullies, but few people could spend all 40 hours of their work week perpetrating acts of harassment . Some cops have been accused of harassing people in the past .
 Part-time status reduces the obligation to provide benefits for part-time employees . Part-timed employees can also reduce the burden of providing benefits for them, says the author .
 If SRPs are stalking people, they would inevitably need to sometimes coordinate their activities with police . SRPs would inevitably have to coordinate their activity with police, police say .
 Law Enforcement Intelligence Units could be involved in some ways . Quite possibly, Law Enforcement . Intelligence Units may be involved .
 SRP job announcements do not indicate which U.S. government department or agency is the client . The job announcements are made by government departments or agencies .
 Participants are motivated by the financial benefits, but also by the notion that they are part of a secret group which is essentially above the law . The group imposes what they see as a moral punishment on dissidents, he says .
 They are America’s more cowardly and more secretive version of the Taliban . They are more cowardly, more secretive than the Taliban, says CNN.com's John Sutter . The Taliban is America's more cowardly version of Taliban.
 Surveillance Role Players Players in this game are not exactly members of the premier league in the intelligence business . The professional caliber of Surveillance Role Player Players Players is not exactly a top intelligence league .
 spying is traditionally regarded as a more prestigious job than counterintelligence work . Spying is more prestigious in the intelligence community than counter-intelligence work, according to experts .
 Domestic counterintelligence operations are less challenging than foreign operations, says the author . Domestic counterintelligence operations are also less challenging, he says . Counterintelligence operations in the U.S. are less difficult than foreign ones, he adds .
 Even those who argue that counterintelligence work deserves to be taken more seriously, such as Roy Godson, acknowledge that distinction . Counterintelligence work should be taken seriously, he says .
 Many SRPs require only a high school diploma . Some ads for SRPs list a college degree among the qualifications, but many require only high school .
 Former enlisted military personnel with counterintelligence training can easily make some good money relative to their education level as SRPs . This means they can make good money by harassing and spying on their fellow citizens .
 Job market is a tough time for a certain type of person during any period, but especially in today’s relatively weak job market . That would be tempting for any type of job seeker, especially in the job market, to be tempted .
 Counterintelligence subversion which targets amateurs (non-intelligence professionals) who have very limited assets is by definition the easiest work of all . Counter-intelligence subverts are by definition of all. They target amateurs who have limited assets .
 Organized stalking involves overt harassment, so the level of “tradecraft’s required is relatively primitive . Unlike covert operations which must be conducted without being detected by the targets, organized stalking is overt harassment .
 Being a gang stalking perp is several rungs down the ladder from being the protagonist in a John le Carré novel . It's a few rungggs down from being a John le Carré perp on the ladder .
 Sometimes it is better from an employer’s perspective to hire people who do not think too deeply about the business in which they are involved . SRP Job Ad Ad BAE Goldilocks’ porridge temperature IQ .
 One of the mistakes made by the National Security Agency that led to the scandalous revelations of its Big Brother spying programs in 2013 was that the agency permitted one of its contractor firms Booz Allen Hamilton Inc. to hire an employee who was exceptionally intelligent .
 Edward Snowden was smart enough to not only understand the information technology aspect of the spy agency, but also to perceive how morally corrupt and unconstitutional the surveillance system was . Snowden exposed the whole slimy business to the public .
 Corporations who employ Surveillance Role Players may hire people smart enough to carry out orders, but not smart enough for a Stasi-type system of political enforcement . Corporations may want to hire surveillance role players who carry orders, not just people who do so .
 A federal lawsuit was filed by a police department applicant in Connecticut . One example is a federal lawsuit by a Connecticut police department application .
 A man was denied the opportunity to apply for a job with the New London Police Department on the grounds that he was too intelligent . He was denied a job because he was 'too intelligent'
 In August 2000, a federal appeals court ruled that the policy was legitimate . The policy was upheld by an appeals court .
 Admittedly, the possible participation of SRPs in counterintelligence stalking is purely speculative for now . The moral character of security contractors is still being questioned .
 There are well-documented cases of lawlessness and minimal oversight among military, security, and intelligence contractors . But one does not have to wonder about the plausibility of such involvement of such contractors .
 The mercenary soldier corporation formerly known known as Blackwater operated with legal impunity in Iraq . The article documented how the mercenary soldier company formerly known Blackwater .
 U.S. State Department had begun investigating Blackwater's misconduct and lack of oversight . Blackwater personnel killed 17 civilians in Baghdad in 2007, killing 17 civilians .
 American Embassy officials pull the plug on that investigation . Investigators ordered investigators to immediately leave the country . The investigation was launched by the U.S. Embassy .
 The death threat was made by a former member of SEAL Team 6, witnessed by another investigator . Another investigator witnessed the death threat made by another ex-NINE member .
 State Department never even interviewed either of the investigators during its inquiry . Despite having the statements of investigators as well as a long list of other examples of serious misconduct by Blackwater employees, the State Department did not interview them .
 Americans should be curious why their government is constantly hiring counterintelligence training and secret clearances for unspecified activities within the United States . Journalists especially should investigate this mystery if only out of professional curiosity .
 The most obvious source of personnel would be former military counterintelligence agents . Since the qualifications include counterintelligence training and secret clearances, the job is likely to be done by former military agents .
 For someone who is a former military CI agent, domestic spying offers an opportunity for easy money and power . Domestic spying offers a chance for easy cash and power, says the former CI agent .
 Agents in each of the branches are federal law enforcement officers . United States Army Counterintelligence Office of Special Investigations Naval Criminal Investigative Service . Agents in the branches of each branch are federal officers .
 They conduct operations and investigations in their respective branches aimed at disrupting such crimes as espionage and sabotage . They also handle other criminal matters .
 Imagine you are told that you can work either full-time or part-time for an intelligence-security contractor and make good money for relatively easy work . Now imagine you are working for a security contractor in the U.S.
 Imagine the kind of person likely to be working in military counterintelligence to begin with someone who can follow orders and keep a secret . Imagine further that you are the type of person who follows orders and keeps a secret, and who does not question the morality of his or her work .
 The job proposal offers the allure of participating in a secret program that operates outside the law . Keep in mind that the job proposal working as a “surveillance role player” is a low-rent spy club .
 The opportunity would be especially appealing to anyone whose marketable job skills are limited . The opportunity is particularly appealing to those with limited marketable skills .
 CI agent’s job training emphasizes things such as lying convincingly . CI agents are trained to lie convincingly in order to keep a lie to the public eye .
 That kind of skill set is not always in big demand outside of fields such as used-car sales and politics . It's not always big demand for such skills outside of politics .
 Imagine that just like J Edgar Hoover and his thugs you subscribe to the kind of reactionary authoritarian political outlook that enables you to rationalize perpetrating various unconstitutional actions against your fellow citizens . Further imagine that you are like J. Edgar Hoover . Imagine that .
 Morally, you can live with what you do because you have an authority figure your boss at the security-intelligence firm (and more generally, the military-intelligence industrial establishment) sanctioning your activities . You have to live with your activities because your boss is a top security official .
 In short, you’re a minion of a larger program run by people smarter and more powerful than you, and as such you are not inclined to question the morality of it all . As such, you're not likely to question whether or not you question morality .
 You can see why a job as a ‘Surveillance role player’ might be very attractive to such a person . You can also see why such a job is very attractive .
 If an individual is fundamentally a bully as well, he or she will have found the promised land . If the individual is a bully, it will have been found to be a bully himself .
 U.S. military CI agents sometimes cash-in on their experience by working as intelligence-security contractors after they leave the military . Some of them do some spying on American civilians while they are still on active duty .
 Most Americans assume that the targets of spying by the U.S. military are exclusively foreign enemies . Most Americans probably assume that foreign enemies are only foreign enemies.
 For example, one of the scandals which led to the Church Committee investigations during the 1970s involved U.S. Army intelligence agents getting caught spying on anti-war protesters .
 A decade ago, news reports began to emerge about efforts by the Defense Department to quietly loosen restrictions on its ability to conduct domestic spying . About a decade later, the Pentagon was quietly loosening restrictions on spying .
 Allegations of political spying by military contractors have also been in the news in recent years . Allegations have been made about the use of military contractors to spy .
 A lawsuit in Washington State accused two civilian employees of the U.S. Army of spying on anti-war protesters . The lawsuit was filed in Washington state .
 The case was dismissed in June 2014, but the plaintiffs are appealing the decision . The plaintiffs say the case should be heard in court .
 Larry Hildes, the lead attorney for the plaintiffs, had some interesting comments about the case, as reported in this write-up . He said, "I'm sure you can't wait to see what happens next"
 Hildes and Hendricks say there are dossiers and PowerPoint presentations on some of the demonstrators that made the rounds at domestic terrorism conferences . They say they have a list of demonstrators that they say were at domestic terror conferences .
 Hildes says another Army official bragged about their effectiveness in disrupting the lives of PMR demonstrators to her bosses in the Pentagon . She says there was a PMR task force at McGuire Air Force Base in New Jersey .
 If Judge Leighton’s current ruling stands, Hildes says, “the Army can take any peace group, where any member of it has ever engaged in civil disobedience, and spy on them as much as they want,” she says . “The Army
 Just being an anti-war activist was enough to get someone designated as a surveillance target . Security personnel also had to gather information about the activist’s friends and relatives .
 There is at least one credible published report of intense gang stalking being used by a U.S. military counterintelligence agency against an American citizen . The report is based on a published report by a published published report .
 Most accounts of organized stalking include reports of sophisticated electronic surveillance, black bag operations, and exotic weapons . Strange Tales of Homeland Security by Robert Guffey .
 Former CIA analyst and expert on the history of spying in America, George O’ Toole, offered an insight into how such tactics and equipment are acquired by police department intelligence units .
 In March 2014 the Washington Examiner reported that the Naval Criminal Investigative Service maintains a huge database which tracks civilian law enforcement records . Even minor offenses such as parking tickets can be tracked down .
 My comments on this subject are mostly speculative, but are based on first-hand experience as a target of illegal harassment by members of America’s security industry . Criminal “Informants” rat My comments are mostly .
 Criminal “informants” are the pawns on the counterintelligence chessboard . Criminal ‘informant’s’ are the key to counter-intelligence . The U.S. has been accused of spying on Russia .
 In “gang stalking,” the perpetrators are expendable . In a legitimate counterintelligence operation, an informant might have useful information and contacts . But in ‘gang stalking’, the perpetrators become expendable, he says .
 Ex-convicts over whom authorities have leverage are used for some of the acts of overt stalking of counterintelligence targets . Very likely, ex-convicts may be used to stalk counter-intelligence targets, author says .
 Potential pawns of this sort are never in short supply in America . America has one of the world’s highest per capita rates of incarceration .
 SRPs probably delegate much of the street-level harassment to rodents even lower on the food chain than themselves .
 This creates a perfect system of plausible deniability . The perpetrators seen by the target are unknown to the target, and the identities of the SRPs are known to the informants . The identities of those who are involved in the attacks are unknown .
 The security agent simply gives some cash to the perpetrator for executing some one-time harassment such as making a comment which would be meaningless to anyone except the target, such as a reference to something learned by illegal surveillance .
 The perpetrator might cut-off or bump the target in pedestrian traffic as a form of psychological warfare . In other cases, the perpetrator may cut-offs or bump-offs as a way to get around .
 The contacts would be meaningless to outside observers, and virtually impossible to prove . Again, the contacts would have been meaningless to outsiders, and would be virtually impossible .
 The streetlevel perpetrators have minimal credibility because of their backgrounds, so they pose little threat of exposing the operations . The street level perpetrators pose little risk of exposing operations, police say .
 This type of perpetrator is basically expendable from the perspective of the security agency which uses him or her . Finally, this type of person is essentially expendable, says the author of the book .
 If the “student” gets injured or killed, or captured, no one in a position of power will really care . If the "student’s" gets injured, killed or captured it won’t really care. If the student is killed, it’
 The fate of “informants’ and other non-professionals recruited to participate in counterintelligence stalking cases is not easily ascertained because of the secrecy which surrounds such activity .
 Many low-level perpetrators are apparently rotated by the agents and contractors coordinating the harassment . So the target is not confronting the same individuals repeatedly .
 Even though a victim might be harassed daily, many of the stalkers only have a single instance of direct contact with the victim . Many stalkers are stalkers who only have one instance of contact with a victim . Victims are often stalked daily by stalkers .
 If you are a victim of this cowardly psychological terrorism, you should pay very close attention when perpetrators are used who are not anonymous .
 If someone whose identity is known to you has clearly been recruited to harass you, you should exploit that fact by making it very clear to that person in a way that does not constitute an illegal threat that you know he or she is perpetrating crimes against you . If acts and comments by
 Even if that particular individual’s participation in the harassment discontinues, you should “stay in touch” with the person, and make clear that you remember exactly what he or she did for the Stasi .
 You could even hand a copy of the flyer to him or her, just mention that you saw it and thought it was interesting .
 Both the pawns and their puppet-masters will not be comfortable with spreading information about what they are doing . That will create problems for both of them, neither of whom will be comfortable spreading information .
 Whether some TLOs might also be directly involved in counterintelligence harassment is impossible to say .
 It is not hard to imagine such involvement though for the kind of person who would volunteer to be the designated reporter of “suspicious” citizens to Big Brother .
 Historically, many of the spying and subversion operations of Red Squads targets political dissidents rather than organized crime groups . Historically, the spying operation targeted political dissidents .
 Money from the DHS creates a massive pig trough excuse the pun for local law enforcement agencies . Money from DHS has greatly contributed to the militarization of police departments . The DHS has contributed to militarizing of police forces .
 DHS funding enables towns such as Keene, New Hampshire, to purchase armored personnel carriers, for example . DHS funding allows towns such a small population to purchase military vehicles .
 Having police departments arm themselves with military weapons is disturbing, but the far more dangerous trend is the expansion of spying on citizens by local police, which is being encouraged at the federal level . The federal government is encouraging local police to spy on citizens .
 Local police departments participate in organized stalking of targeted individuals . Local police have been involved in organized stalker activities .
 In some cases stalking operations are purely for local personal agendas instead of as part of an unconstitutional, but ostensibly security-related program . In others cases they perpetrate stalking operations for personal purposes .
 The clearest example of this was the 2011 case in Stockton, California, which was covered in local media reports .
 Cops stalked the city manager to punish him for not granting them a sufficiently generous compensation package . The city manager was punished for not giving the cops a generous package .
 The local police officers resorted to creepy psychological operations tactics is significant; it did not happen randomly . That is significant, it is not the first time police officers have resorted to psychological tactics .
 The cops in Stockton were apparently familiar with psyops tactics, and they were used to get away with such behavior . The cops were apparently used to getting away with getting away from such behavior.
 Sometimes the role of local police in gang stalking operations is to simply look the other way while others perpetrate their crimes . Sometimes police in the U.S. can't stop the gang stalking operation, they say .
 Jacob Appelbaum and his girlfriend were terrorized by the feds in June 2011 . The feds were terrorizing the couple in New York City, New York, New Jersey .
 The U.S. intelligence community is not fond of him since he is in the business of exposing their crimes . Not surprisingly, the United States intelligence community does not like him . He says he is not afraid of him .
 The cops initially refused to even take a report about the incident, let alone investigate it . The cops refused to take a police report about it .
 After several attempts, Appelbaum was able to force them to take a report, but only after the ACLU got involved on his behalf . The ACLU helped him get the report .
 I personally experienced several unmistakable instances of local uniformed police officers in California overtly stalking me . Although I cannot prove it, I cannot . I personally . experienced several . unmistakable . instances of . local uniform police officers overtly stalking .
 I can imagine that the ACLU must receive similar reports, although they refuse to publicly discuss the issue . The ACLU must get similar reports from the ACLU .
 ACLU helped expose first version of Cointelpro, but played no role in exposing it . ACLU was extremely helpful on a range of civil rights issues . ACLU has been critical of the government's handling of the first version .
 The assassinations of black political organizers Fred Hampton and Mark Clark in 1969 were part of counterintelligence operations . Fred Hampton, Mark Clark were both assassinated by police in 1969 .
 As part of the FBI’s Cointelpro activities, 14 Chicago police officers raided the apartment in which the two men were sleeping, and shot them to death . The men were shot to death by police officers in the apartment they were sleeping in .
 Anyone who is skeptical that widespread gang stalking could occur without America’s vigilant news media calling attention to it and the public becoming outraged should also consider that assassinations were barely noticed by the public .
 As noted above, firefighters sometimes participate in intelligence sharing as Terrorism Liaison Officers . Firefighters sometimes participate as terrorism liaisons officers .
 Some accounts by victims of organized harassment suggest that firefighters also sometimes participate in the systematic harassment of targeted individuals . Some accounts were reported on ABC News TV program 20/20 .
 In the case of police officers, I have first-hand knowledge that some participate in organized stalking . Some police officers are known to be part of organized stalking, he says .
 In the case of firefighters, the extent of their involvement is less clear, but several facts make it plausible that they sometimes function as gang stalking perps . The extent of firefighters' involvement in gang stalking is not clear .
 A pilot program to have firefighters gather and share security intelligence was launched by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security in 2006 . The pilot program was launched in 2006 by the department .
 A national framework for “suspicious activity reporting” by first-responders has not been fully worked out, but some fire department officials have taken a great interest in the program .
 If you have a traditional view of America, you might have difficulty wrapping your mind around the notion that firefighters, paramedics, and utility workers are spying on let alone stalking and harassing .
 For an example of the thinking behind using first-responders as spies you can read the following document . The document provides an overview of the main elements of the intelligence-gathering infrastructure .
 Joshua Dennis is a Chicago Fire Department chief . He wrote a master’s thesis at the Naval Postgraduate School .
 In his thesis, Mr Dennis seeks to clarify the role of the U.S. Fire Service in intelligence community .
 The Naval Postgraduate School is apparently something of a firefighter spy academy . Incidentally, the Naval Post Graduate School is also a spy school .
 If you perform a Google search for similar theses, you can find several of them . If you find one, you'll find several similar ideas .
 Hat-tip to the blog Cryptoscatology for highlighting that document . Fire Service Intelligence .
 Firefighters visit your apartment building some day for safety inspection, or in response to a false fire alarm . Don't be surprised if you notice them taking a keen interest in your reading material as they pass through .
 Fire departments also participate presumably both as providers and users of information in the nation’s system of data fusion centers . Fire departments may both participate in the system .
 Some fire departments apparently have subpoena powers . Fire departments are part of the new Big Brother version of America .
 Corrupt Firefighters Harassed Ohio Couple in May 2014 . Firefighters involved in organized stalking .
 The Ohio case was done for personal vengeance . As in the previously-mentioned incident involving gang stalking by local police in Stockton, California, in 2011, this case was a case of revenge .
 In Hubbard, Ohio, a couple was systematically tormented for 7 years in a harassment campaign orchestrated by the town’s fire chief . The town's fire chief orchestrated the campaign to harass the couple .
 The man was angry at the couple because of a real estate dispute . He was angry because he was angry about the couple's relationship .
 He enlisted other firefighters, police officers, and local residents to terrorize the couple by having people drive by the victims’ home at all hours honking their horns .
 There is a significant bad element that tends to be underestimated in many professions . The professions contain their share of good people and even heroes, but there is a lot of bad people .
 InfraGard and DSAC have partnerships with the FBI and Homeland Security to share intelligence . DSAC members are excellent members of the FBI, Homeland Security and other agencies .
 Counterintelligence agents call “an insider threat” meaning an employee is suspected of being likely to steal proprietary information . As a practical matter, this very likely means that if one of these elite members of the business community decides to have someone targeted for an “investigation”
 A May 2013 report from the Center for Media and Democracy reported that certain corporations exploited this partnership to use the FBI as a weapon against their political adversary, the Occupy Wall Street Movement .
 If you suspect that your boss or former boss might have arranged to have you blacklisted, you should definitely watch this video .
 Conspiracy Theory with Jesse Ventura, Episode #4, “Big Brother,” originally broadcast on December 23, 2009 . Jesse Ventura: "Big Brother"
 If the members of the TAT are also members of InfraGard or DSAC, it would presumably not be unlikely that the suspicious individual would find his or her way onto a watch list of some sort . If they have informal connection to a law enforcement or security agency, it
 The United States law enforcement business is now so secretive that it's often the only option to try to understand it . Of course, it’s purely speculation how such a process might play out regarding organized organized stalking .
 The government also makes extensive use of citizen informants . DHS posters include snitches, snitches and snitches .
 Such programs could have a corrosive effect on the inclination of Americans to trust each other . Naturally, such programs could be corrosive .
 The general level of trust in the U.S. government has declined in recent decades . That's a concern for everyone, since it has declined steadily .
 An Associated Press poll published in November 2013 found that the segment of America’s population which believes that ‘most people can be trusted’ had fallen from half to one-third .
 Public awareness programs designed to encourage people to become snitches are bad enough . Even more disturbing are secret programs in which citizens are paid to function as part-time spies to gather information .
 Chicago Daily News Columnist Mike Royko reported on one political activist targeted in Chicago in 1970 who obtained information from the FBI about her record . In 1970, a political activist in Chicago obtained information about her records .
 She discovered she had been spied upon by the "Welcome Wagon" lady who had met her when she moved into a new neighborhood . She was spied on by the lady who met her in a new home .
 Mike Royko whose quote appears at the top of the homepage of Fight Gang Stalking was also a target of government spying . Royko's quote appears in the top photo of the website .
 Royko’s columns sometimes criticized the agency . The FBI did not approve of Royko's columns, which sometimes criticize the agency.
 Most Americans are unaware of the U.S. government’s history of using its citizens to spy on each other . The American Protective League was founded by the American Protection League .
 Wearing badges that looked official, volunteers soon expanded their mission . Volunteers soon expanded the mission to raise money for the first time .
 They conducted surveillance, harassed, intimidated and “arrested” people whose loyalty was questioned, perhaps because they refused to buy Liberty Bonds . People who questioned loyalty were arrested because they didn’t purchase Liberty Bonds, the author says .
 APL staged raids on factories, union halls, and private homes . Detained more than 40,000 people, including draft dodgers, for the War Department . The APL was a government agency tasked with detaining draft-dodgers .
 Nazi Boy Scout Volunteer members of the American Protective League were issued United States government ID cards . Boy Scout Volunteers were issued with United States Government ID cards. Boy Scout Merit Badges for Snitching Nazi Boy Scouts were issued .
 It involved twenty thousand boy scouts living in the vicinity of Rochester . Boy scouts were involved in the incident .
 Abzug found to be insufficiently fascistic, therefore someone on whom the agency should definitely spy . Abzog is considered a potential target for the CIA .
 Hat tip to Matt Stoller, who highlighted this document in his blog in March 2014 . Click on image to read this article .
 Some of the people who participate at least in small ways in the stalking are civilians . They are presumably told they are assisting in an investigation or a ‘neighborhood watch’ type program .
 No doubt such neighbors of the targeted individual would not think of themselves as ‘vigilantes” even though they are in fact participating in an illegal conspiracy to inflict extra-judicial punishment . No doubt .
 The motivations of a particular stalker are probably often unrelated to the reason the targeted individual was blacklisted in the first place . Stalker's motivations are probably not the reason he blacklisted the person .
 Victim may have been targeted simply because he or she crossed someone with connections and money . The perpetrators including the victim’s neighbors, associates, relatives, etc. can simply be told various lies about the victim .
 Those lies can be tailored to fit the particular person or groups of persons being recruited to participate in the harassment . The lies can also be tailored for the person or group of people being recruited .
 In some cases, these persons are apparently recruited under the pretense that they are participating in an “investigation” or a neighborhood watch program . Some cases of recruiting are under the guise of being part of an investigation, police say .
 Gang stalking perpetrators include corrupt politicians, corrupt corporate executives, corrupt federal agents, corrupt cops, snitches, bullies, liars, bullies and liars . Gangsters are an assortment of politicians, corporate executives and snitches . They include snitches and bullies, brown-nosers,
 This is exactly what you would expect in a program refined by a communist secret police agency . The program was refined by the communist police agency, according to the report .
 People like to believe that the evil and stupid obedience displayed by people such as Hitler’s followers is far-removed from their own nature and culture . “Blind belief in authority is the greatest enemy of truth” Albert Einstein .
 Anyone wishing to understand gang stalking or even to assess the plausibility of such a conspiracy should briefly review the interesting historical and scientific evidence on conformity and obedience .
 History is filled with shocking manifestations of group-think such as the Salem, Massachusetts witch trials . The Salem witch trials were held in Salem, Mass., Massachusetts, Massachusetts .
 Examples of blind deference to authority include attrocities such as the “Rape of Nanking” in the 1930s . Japanese soldiers, sanctioned by their leaders, raped, tortured, and murdered thousand of Chinese civilians .
 Many infants were killed in front of their mothers in the massacre . Sometimes the soldiers gouged-out the children’s eyes before killing them .
 Literature is filled with examples of the evil and idiocy associated with group-think and obedience . Literature is similarly filled with helpful examples of evil associated with obedience .
 Psychology experiments show that it would be easy to recruit people to participate as paid thugs or as vigilantes in organized harassment of targeted individuals . Be this guy. Be the guy .
 In fact, that was the conclusion of a previously-mentioned article in the September 2004 issue of the Sociological Forum .
 The authors found that agents in the original version of the FBI’s Cointelpro operations targeted individuals for surveillance and harassment even when those individuals were not engaged in subversive activities . The authors say agents targeted individuals even when they were not engaging in subversive activity .
 The targeting was done to please authority figures higher up in the agency’s food chain . The targeting of the agency's food chain was intended to please the authority .
 Study sought to find how the unsuspecting students would be influenced by the behavior of the others . The other participants were accomplices of the experimenter, and the study was carried out by a student .
 When asked to assess the relative lengths of lines displayed on cards, unsuspecting students were frequently influenced by the responses of the accomplices around them . Unbeknown to them, students were often influenced by their friends' responses .
 In other words, people often changed their beliefs about what they had seen when a group expressed an opinion at variance with their own . People often change their beliefs when they see a group expressing a different view .
 In a control group, with no pressure to conform, few of the subjects gave incorrect answers . Few of those in the control group gave incorrect responses to the questions .
 A majority of the subjects gave an incorrect answer to at least one question when surrounded by others expressing the wrong answer . The subjects were asked to answer the question .
 Milgram’s experiments were part of a series of experiments by psychologist Stanley Milgram . Participants were led to believe that they were administering small electrical shocks to a person being tested, and that the voltage was being incrementally increased with each delivery .
 The experiment found that most people (61 to 66 percent) will administer a fatal electrical shock to an innocent person purely out of deference to authority . The experiment was conducted by the University of Minnesota .
 The video features a private investigator-type person (not unlike the people who manage Cointelpro stalking operations presumably) portraying himself as a law enforcement officer, and easily persuading people to participate in crimes against strangers .
 The fascist element of the U.S. intelligence community, law enforcement community, and military-industrial complex, says former member of the military . Many of the people in those professions have both integrity and intelligence, he says .
 FBI and CIA have more than their share of the type of folks described here by journalist Chris Hedges . Unfortunately though, such career fields and I’m sure this applies to intelligence and law enforcement agencies such as the FBI, CIA as well .
 CNN's John Sutter has been a war correspondent for more than 30 years . He understands the mentality and character of authoritarian careerists .
 Hedges’ observations apply not only to military officers, but also to related professions of law enforcement and domestic spying . Hedges' observations apply to law enforcement, domestic spying and law enforcement as well .
 In the military, whether at the Paris Island boot camp or West Point, you are trained not to think but to obey . In the U.S. military, there is no easy way to get around the world, but it's not easy .
 What amazes me about the military is how stupid and bovine its senior officers are. I'm amazed at how stupid the military can be, writes David Frum .
 Those with brains and the willingness to use them seem to be pushed out long before they can rise to the senior ranks . Those who have brains are pushed out of the ranks .
 In his book, he makes clear that his references to “right-wing” authoritarian followers is a psychological not ideological category . In his new book, Mr. Obama says he's not interested in the right-wing authoritarian followers .
 Citizens in communist East Germany who served as informants for the Stasi were “authoritarians’s” just like farright kooks in America today who participate in organized stalking . The Stasi informants were just like U.S. far right kooks who participated in
 Such people are subservient to authority figures, such people are easily manipulated by those in power . Because of their subservience to authority, they can easily be manipulated by power .
 Authoritarians Authoritarian Tribalism Versus Respect for Legitimate Authority . A fundamental distinction deserves to be made here explicitly . Authoritarian tribalism versus respect for legitimate authority .
 The perspective of “authoritarian” perpetrators of organized stalking has nothing to do with respect for legitimate authority, author says . "Authoritarian’s perspective of perpetrators of ‘stalking’ is nothing short of respect for authority .
 Corrupt members of U.S. intelligence agencies, law enforcement agencies, and their security contractor associates are not motivated by concerns about public safety or national security let alone respect for the law . Corrupt intelligence agencies are motivated by public safety and national security concerns .
 They mostly value the paychecks they receive for “work” that involves minimal effort or risk . They value paychecks for ‘work’ that involve minimal effort, risk or effort .
 "To the extent that they have any loyalty, it is not to their country, but to their fellow corrupt pigs," he says . "They have no loyalty to the country, it's not to them," he adds .
 It probably is true that a fair number of the perpetrators do have right-wing political views . But it would be giving them too much intellectual credit to ascribe their bullying to some philosophical vision even un-American .
 Perpetrators of COINTELPRO/MK Ultratype harassment are just criminals with badges . They’re drunk with power and they serve their own interests .
 As Stanley Milgram’s experiment found, people who can be induced by authority figures to commit acts of unwarranted cruelty are as common as manure at a cattle ranch . Subservience is a common form of subservience, says Milgram's experiment .
 People who seek employment in counterintelligence agency such as the FBI or DHS are especially likely to fit this profile . People seeking employment at counterintelligence agencies such as DHS or FBI are likely to be particularly likely .
 The Sociological Forum article regarding the original Cointelpro program seemed to confirm this . The previously-mentioned Sociological forum article . The article was published by the Sociology Forum .
 A person would not necessarily have to be a coward to participate in the kind of harassment associated with the current version of Cointelpro . However, he or she would also not need to be courageous .
 Counterintelligence agents such as ‘Surveillance Role Players’ are bullies, but they like to play close to mommy’s apron where it's safe . Counter Intelligence agents are bullies but they’re not bullies, they're bullies .
 Security expert says people in such professions have the imagination, sense of humor, deep thinking capacity, and empathy of a cinder block . He says a lot of people in the security industry have imagination and humor of a 'cinder block'
 Having such a personality is not a sin of course, but it has consequences, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 People who are unable or unwilling to question what they are told by higher ranking authority figures are dangerous when serving in a corrupt power structure are dangerous . People are unable to question their authority figures .
 The difference between constitutionally legitimate law enforcement and being a thug is too subtle for some people to grasp . The difference is not subtle, but it's too subtle, to some people, for example .
 Christopher Hitchens: "The connection between stupidity and cruelty is a close one" Sadism is a form of cruelty .
 The tactics of organized stalking are intended as psychological torture, and the perpetrators are often just as stupid as you would expect such people to be . The tactics are intended to be psychological torture .
 Counterintelligence programs in the U.S. in the past and currently, are frequently immoral and illegal . Dishonesty Deception can be an ethically legitimate element of a counterintelligence operation . Counterintelligence in the United States has been immoral and often illegal .
 The FBI’s campaign to destroy the actress Jean Seberg by slandering her was a case in point . The FBI tried to destroy Seberg with the help of the FBI . Seberg: "I’m not surprised that the FBI is trying to destroy me," she
 A rogue agency’s classified internal memo that purports to sanction something that clearly violates the United States Constitution and morality does not make the activity legal . The agency's classified memo does not mean it is legal, but it's a violation of the U.S. Constitution .
 People who engage in such deception and get paid for it are just criminals, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "People who engage with such deception ... just criminals"
 Counterintelligence stalking does not require technically complex operations . Laziness is the result of counter-intelligence stalking . Counter-espionage is a form of covert operation .
 America’s current version of Cointelpro mainly involves harassing individuals who lack the kind of resources and connections that would make them challenging or dangerous targets . America's version of the anti-terrorist movement is based in New York City .
 There are essentially no objective goals for security contractors who perform this kind of work . Also, there are essentially . No objective goals . There is not expected to produce anything tangible, says the author .
 They receive their cash flow from the national security budget pig trough regardless of whether they do anything productive . They receive the cash flow regardless of any of their efforts .
 Boondoggles are common in the military-industrial complex of course . Most contractors have to at least produce something, such as a tank or an airplane .
 Intelligence-security contractors sometimes only have to pretend that they are monitoring and countering actual threats . Contractors sometimes only pretend to be monitoring actual threats.
 Only the stupidest perpetrators of gang stalking are under any illusion that they are doing anything useful and legitimate . They’re just thugs for a government which opinion polls show is regarded as corrupt by most Americans .
 Gang stalking perps are among the many parasites feeding at the massive “homeland security” pig trough . Gang stalkers are among many perps feeding on the massive "Homeland security" pig troughs .
 A fish rots from the head whether it’s the Vatican covering up decades of child sex abuse by priests or the U.S. Justice Department sanctioning secret operations which violate the United States Constitution . The moral character of the DOJ has been questioned .
 In recent years, the DOJ has been criticized for its aggressive prosecution and intimidation of whistle-blowers and journalists who expose abuses of power .
 In 2012, the Justice Department secretly seized two months of telephone records of reporters and editors of the Associated Press .
 ACLU points out that such behavior is consistent with a long-established history . The ACLU says it's consistent with the long-standing pattern of discrimination .
 Robert F Kennedy authorized some of the original COINTELPRO operations, such as wiretaps on the home of Martin Luther King, Jr. When he was the U.S. Attorney General (i.e., head of the DOJ) in the 1960s, he authorized wiretaps
 Corruption at the U.S. Department of Justice is a bipartisan phenomenon . Corruption is bipartisan phenomenon, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In 1971, U.S. Attorney General John Mitchell tried unsuccessfully to persuade the Washington Post’s executive editor Ben Bradlee not to disclose the documents . Mitchell later served prison time for his role in Watergate scandal .
 Assessing the plausibility of the claim that the DOJ countenances a modern version of COINTELPRO requires looking at various examples of the moral character of the agency . The DOJ has been accused of being too cozy with the FBI .
 Eric Holder, U.S. Attorney General from 2009 to 2015, is a good example of the kind of people who work at the DOJ, and more generally, who often infest the highest echelons of America’s power structures .
 The approval of unconstitutional secret counterintelligence operations would not be out of character for Holder . Holder is accused of approving unconstitutional secret operations . Holder's approval of such operations would be not out character for someone like Holder .
 When he was President Clinton’s Deputy Attorney General, he approved the pardon of Marc Rich a wealthy investor who was indicted on 63 counts of tax evasion and other charges . Marc Rich fled to Switzerland to avoid prosecution .
 The Washington Post said the pardon should have precluded Holder from becoming Obama's Attorney General . Even the Washington Post opinion writers for The Post said Holder should have been prevented from becoming Attorney General.
 Even the Justice Department’s own internal affairs office the Office of Professional Responsibility reports that hundreds of federal prosecutors and other DOJ employees violated laws, rules, and ethical principles over the decade .
 These included things such as failure to provide exculpatory evidence information to defendants, violation of Constitutional rights, and abuse of investigative authority . These included violations of constitutional rights, among other things .
 The Project on Government Oversight reviewed the DOJ’s findings . The DOJ also conceals some of its bad behavior from the public, it says .
 Federal Judges Report Frequent Lying by DOJ Prosecutors . Most Americans give little thought to Department of Justice, except perhaps for high-profile cases with partisan political implications .
 Evidence of the DOJ's lack of integrity does not usually show up on the public’s radar . The DOJ has been accused of corruption in the wake of the Obama administration .
 Federal judges often see examples of moral rot at the DOJ . Federal judges have warned for decades that frequent misconduct by prosecutors undermines Constitutional protections of individuals' rights .
 Judges blasted prosecutors for “flagrant” or “outrageous” misconduct . In case after case during that time, judges blasted prosecutors . In the past, prosecutors were found guilty of misconduct .
 Since the DOJ oversees the FBI, it is not surprising that the DOJ also takes a very elastic view of its obligation to abide by the United States Constitution .
 Islamic organizations and individuals filed a FOIA request in 2006 to determine if the FBI had engaged in illegal surveillance of them . The FBI concealed the existence of much of the material requested, the FOIA request was concealed .
 The 9th Circuit Court of Appeals found that the FBI lied to the plaintiffs and to the court about the existence of the documents sought . In a lawsuit which followed, the 9th circuit court of Appeals said the FBI had lied to plaintiffs and the court .
 The FBI argued that it should not be required to tell the truth in court if they feel that doing so could compromise national security interests . When confronted with their deception, the FBI argued, in effect, that the agency should not have to tell all the truth .
 Anyone wondering about the plausibility of claims that federal law enforcement agencies acquiesce in gang stalking should consider the fact that such agencies sometimes assert that they are above the law .
 Members of the Anonymous movement hacked into the emails of the cybersecurity firm HB Gary Federal in February 2011 . An executive at that firm boasted in the Financial Times that his company had infiltrated Anonymous and started exposing them .
 One of the reports contained in the emails was a plan for HB Gary to work with several other security firms to destroy WikiLeaks . WikiLeaks is a whistle-blower organization .
 News reports indicated that Wikileaks was planning to publish documents showing possible corruption and fraud at Bank of America . The bank funded a “counterespionage” campaign against Wikileaks . The campaign included hiring the large intelligence contractor firm Booz Allen .
 One of the proposals was to create and plant fake documents to discredit Wikileaks . WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange said the documents were intended to be planted to discredit WikiLeaks .
 Another proposal was to “attack’ and “disrupt” the career of journalist Glenn Greenwald to pressure him into abandoning his public support of Wikileaks . The proposal was also proposed to pressure Greenwald into abandoning support of WikiLeaks .
 Manufacturing fake documents with the intent they be published likely constitutes forgery and fraud . Manufacturing and submitting fake documents to be published with intent they will be published is likely to be fraud .
 Threatening the careers of journalists and activists in order to force them to be silent is possibly extortion and, depending on the specific means, constitutes other crimes as well, as well . Threatening journalists' careers could be extortion or extortion, according to the author .
 Attacking WikiLeaks’ computer infrastructure in an attempt to compromise their sources undoubtedly violates numerous cyber laws . Attacking the WikiLeaks' computer infrastructure is a breach of cyber laws, WikiLeaks says . WikiLeaks has been accused of attempting to hack into their sources .
 Bank of America and Hunton & Williams have proposed such measures to the bank . Yet they had no compunction about proposing such measures, they wrote them down .
 It’s impossible to imagine the DOJ ever, ever prosecuting a huge entity like Bank of America for doing something like waging war against WikiLeaks and its supporters . The DOJ is unlikely to ever prosecute a large bank of America over WikiLeaks .
 WikiLeaks was hit by a cyber-attack weeks earlier, knocking them offline . But weeks later, a far more damaging and serious cyber attack was launched at WikiLeaks, knocking it offline . WikiLeaks has been accused of being a cover-up for the attack .
 Whoever did that was quite likely part of either a government agency or a large private entity acting at its behest . Whoever did it was probably part of the government agency .
 The DOJ has never announced any investigation into the attacks or vowed to apprehend the culprits . It's impossible to imagine that ever happening . Yet the DOJ has vowed to investigate the attacks .
 A report by Gary Ruskin, director of the Center for Corporate Policy, was the main subject of the segment . Essential Information is a project of Essential Information .
 Corporations engaging in this kind of espionage reportedly include Wal-Mart, Monsanto, Bank of America, Dow Chemical, Kraft, Coca-Cola, Chevron, Burger King, McDonald’s, Shell, BP, and others as well as the U.S. Chamber of Commerce .
 A confluence of developments over the past couple of decades has led to a more militarized and secretive form of law enforcement in America . America’s Post-Constitutional Law Enforcement Paradigm constitution on fire .
 A counterintelligence subversion strategy of organized stalking is among the most extreme manifestations of the new paradigm . The U.S. government has been accused of a counter-intelligence subverting strategy . A counter-espionage subvert strategy is a form of a new paradigm, the author says
 Advances in technology have made possible highly invasive surveillance tools which create a constant temptation for abuse by people in the intelligence, law enforcement, and security industries . At the same time, advances in technology has made possible .
 Another development has been an erosion of traditional jurisdictional boundaries in law enforcement .
 Federal and local law enforcement and intelligence agencies now work more closely with each other . Private contractors provide much of the infrastructure, such as defense industry firms and security firms .
 United States law enforcement agencies rely heavily upon criminal informants despite the obvious conflicts of interest that involves them . United States police rely heavily on criminal informants in order to keep track of the truth .
 Gang stalking apparently makes extensive use of criminal informants, author says . "Gang stalking" apparently uses criminal informants to keep tabs on gang members .
 Those snitches are not being used by the FBI just to spy and inform . They are perpetrating acts of criminal harassment for the purposes of counterintelligence subversion . The FBI is not just using snitches to spy or inform .
 The U.S. Department of Justice has done everything possible to enable the executive branch to increase its secrecy and power at the expense of Americans’ civil liberties . Rather than working to ensure the protection of Americans' rights in this new Big Brother surveillance environment, the Justice Department has done
 Orwellian legal weapons have emerged always based on claims of national security . Orwellian laws have emerged based on national security claims . A variety of Orwellian tactics have emerged in recent years .
 Old-fashioned concepts in the Bill of Rights like obtaining search warrants from judges have been tossed aside . The government is trying to change the way the Constitution was written by the courts .
 The public can only speculate about other elements of the now-massive U.S. spy network . Concerning other elements, the public cannot speculate .
 No one has yet said publicly what is being done by “surveillance role players” with secret clearances and counterintelligence training who are employed by intelligence contractors .
 If anyone challenges the legitimacy of any of these suspicious policies, the matter is referred to the U.S. government’s “Star Chamber” the secret FISA Court . FISA Court simply rubberstamps the policy to maintain the facade of legitimacy .
 The U.S. justice system is driven by political agendas, careerism, greed, laziness, prejudice and bureaucracy, bureaucracy, technological opportunism, corporate interests, the arrogance of people in power .
 In some quarters, the notion that criminal suspects should be given a trial is seen as quaint . In some parts of the world, the idea of a trial for a criminal suspect is considered quaint .
 Law enforcement agencies aggressively gather and analyze data to try to anticipate threats before they emerge . One example of this new attitude is “predictive policing” also called “proactive policing’
 SARs and other intelligence are managed by a network of 78 data fusion centers across the nation . The information is shared by local and federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies .
 Among the disturbing and un-American aspects of SARs is that they can be used to initiate investigations as a way around the old-fashioned Constitutional requirement of reasonable suspicion or probable cause . SARs are often used in the U.S. to initiate an investigation .
 May 2015 issue of Harper’s Magazine featured an article, “Beyond the Broken Window,” about spying on Americans by the Los Angeles Police Department .
 This vague standard means that behavior that is both protected by the First Amendment and entirely benign can be labeled as suspicious . It's a vague standard that means behavior that's protected by First Amendment is labeled suspicious .
 Fusion Centers and Suspicious Activity Reports takes place in a shadowy structure which has been the subject of much criticism by civil rights advocates . Lack of Oversight and Accountability for Fusion Centers has been criticized . The system of Fusion Centers is a Big Brother Big Brother system .
 Anyone familiar with the ethics and tactics associated with the U.S. intelligence business knows that deception of the public, undetected criminality, and creative abuses of power are often merely viewed as examples of professional competence .
 In that context, it is reasonable to suspect that a policy framework which dodges accountability did not arise by accident . It is not by accident that the policy framework is inherently dodging accountability does not arise .
 Contempt for the opinions and rights of U.S. citizens is pervasive in the law enforcement and intelligence community, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Contempt for Americans is pervasive"
 The tone is set by the Department of Justice, but other agencies federal, state, and local are just as bad . Arguably the tone was set .
 The Department of Homeland Security resists efforts by Congress to conduct oversight of fusion centers . The data fusion centers are a key part of the Homeland Security budget .
 The Department opted not to inform Congress or the public of serious problems plaguing its fusion center and broader intelligence efforts . The Department of Homeland Security has been criticized for not telling Congress about problems .
 Subcommittee requested documents that would help it identify these issues . Department initially resisted turning them over, arguing that they were protected by privilege, too sensitive to share, or did not exist .
 Some might still defend it on the grounds that it is identifying terrorist threats except that it isn’t . The system of Suspicious Activity Reporting is a creepy Orwellian program .
 America’s supremely powerful and secretive intelligence community has been described without exaggeration as the “fourth branch” of government . The intelligence community is officially part of the executive branch of the federal government . It has been called the "fourth branch of government"
 The branch is not mentioned anywhere in the United States Constitution . It's the branch that has the least respect for the rules established in that document . It is the branch not mentioned in the Constitution .
 One month after Congress adjourned, the DOJ created its own permanent detective force . Despite such opposition, the force was given the name Federal Bureau of Investigation .
 Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Chris Hedges described the essential nature of the agency in this speech titled “Wages of Rebellion:” “Let’s not forget why the FBI was formed.” Hedges said .
 Primary security concerns at that time, of course, revolved around the Cold War with the Soviet Union . Primary security concern was that the country was at risk .
 A decade or so later, a similar expansion of the law enforcement intelligence community began . A decade later, the intelligence community was expanding .
 In 1956, two things happened which are related to America’s current ‘gang stalking’ phenomenon . Two things happened in 1956: Gang stalking and gang stalking . Gang stalking is a modern form of gang stalking.
 Counterintelligence crimes perpetrated against Americans by red squads and the FBI over the next 15 years or so primarily targeted supporters of communism, supporters of the civil rights movement, and critics of the Vietnam War .
 In theory, COINTELPRO ended in the 1970s after it was exposed by activists and investigated by Congress . In theory it ended after activists and Congress investigated it .
 Critics of the FBI allege that unconstitutional practices of the agency never ceased or were only briefly suspended . Many critics allege that the unconstitutional practices were never stopped or suspended .
 The first signs of the militarization of local police departments also began . Just a few years earlier, the first signs had also begun .
 In the 1960s, the first police SWAT (Special Weapons and Tactics) teams emerged . SWAT teams were formed in the early 1960s . The first SWAT team was formed in 1968 in the wake of the Vietnam War .
 A parallel development was the expansion of the size and power of the executive branch of the federal government . The White House has expanded the power of its executive branch in the past .
 The Justice Department has been accused of abuses of power by the law enforcement industry associated with the drug war . The drug war is not the only example of abuses by law enforcement agencies in America .
 America is a country in which possession of two dollars’ worth of marijuana can result in police officers shooting you to death inside your own home . Currently, America is in a country where possession of a small amount of marijuana is illegal .
 In reality, the threat from terrorism is wildly exaggerated by those whose careers benefit from scaring the public about the issue . Counter-terrorists benefit from the public's fear of terrorism, writes Peter Bergen .
 For agencies such as the DOJ and the FBI however, the war on terrorism has been an opportunity for a massive power grab at the expense of Americans’ freedoms . For defense/security contractors, it has been a big opportunity for big profits for defense contractors .
 The FBI needs to create the illusion that it is protecting Americans from constant peril . To rationalize the extraordinary secrecy and power wielded by the FBI, the agency needs to be rationalized .
 The FBI has been creating its own terrorists to compensate for the shortage of actual terrorists . Toward that end, the FBI has essentially created its own terrorist groups .
 Human Rights Watch documented sting operations in July 2014 . The sting operations have become an open secret, as documented in a widely-reported report .
 For its part, the Justice Department is happy to play along with this charade . For its own sake, it's not surprising that the government is trying to cover up this .
 The DOJ closed its inquiry into the matter in 2012 without bringing any charges . The DOJ also closed its investigation into the CIA's use of torture techniques .
 U.S. Senate Intelligence Committee was investigating torture . CIA spied on the senate committee investigating the torture . The committee was investigating the CIA's involvement in torture .
 In July 2014, the DOJ announced that it would not be conducting a criminal investigation of that spying . The DOJ announced in July 2014 that it had not been conducting an investigation of the spying .
 To supplement their access to federal systems for monitoring citizens states also create their own watch-lists and databases . The data fusion centers are located in the U.S.
 Federal agencies at the federal level set the tone for state and local elements of the police state . Some of these state level programs are also of an Orwellian nature .
 In April 2014 it was reported that the state was building a database which will contain a “Comprehensive Person Profile” on each resident . The database is expected to contain a database of each state resident's personal information .
 Note a couple of aspects of this program which are typical of the surveillance trend .
 The system was originally designed to detect fraud, but now through a sort of “mission creep” phenomenon, it is being expanded to track data for a range of purposes . One is that the system is now being expanded into tracking data .
 Technology for the database was developed by the software company SAS, which profits from the destruction of Americans’ privacy . SAS profits from destroying privacy .
 Some defenders of ‘predictive policing’ have claimed that civil rights concerns about the philosophy are unwarranted . It mostly involves directing resources to areas with higher statistical probability of crimes rather than attempting to predict behavior of particular individuals .
 The development and implementation of technologies such as Future Attribute Screening Technology tends to undermine such assurances . The development of such technologies can be undermined by the technology, experts say .
 FAST is a program created by the Homeland Security department for the purpose of detecting malicious intent by screening individuals through electronic monitoring of such things as pulse rate, skin temperature, breathing, and facial expression . The program was created by Homeland Security Department for the purposes of detecting .
 I am not suggesting that FAST has a connection to organized stalking or even that such systems would necessarily be inappropriate in certain high-security facilities . I'm not suggesting such systems should be appropriate in certain facilities .
 I merely cite it as an example of the general direction of law enforcement and the fact that opportunities to use such surveillance technologies will be aggressively exploited . Contractors to lobby the United States government to purchase such systems .
 In April 2014 the Electronic Frontier Foundation reported that the FBI expects to have 52 million photographs in its face recognition database by 2015 . The FBI is expected to have a total of 52 million photos in its database .
 This database will be capable of performing tens of thousands of searches per day . It will be shared with other federal, state, and local agencies, and will be able to perform tens of thousand of searches .
 EFF points out that this database will include both criminals and non-criminals for example, people whose employers require them to have a “mug shot” photo taken as a condition of employment .
 In theory, this could mean that innocent people might sometimes be investigated if their photo has facial characteristics similar to those of a criminal suspect .
 This June 2015 article about facial recognition technology by The Intercept explains that Americans’ privacy is threatened not just by careerist authoritarians in the government, but also by greedy lobbyists for technology firms . The Intercept also explains that U.S. privacy is at risk .
 The DOJ's views on the government’s right to track you via GPS GPS IIF . Most Americans assume that the United States Department of Justice exists to promote justice .
 The DOJ takes more seriously its role as a protector of the interests of those in power . The DOJ does some of that, but it does more seriously, as well as some .
 If you want to challenge the U.S. government’s use of GPS tracking to monitor your location, the DOJ will apparently be fighting you on the basis of arguments outlined in memos .
 The DOJ decided that those memos are a secret . A federal court agreed to let the DOJ keep it that way in March 2014 . In March 2014, a federal court ruled that the memos are secret .
 The section that was at issue 1021 essentially authorizes the federal government to indefinitely detain someone if that person is suspected of having supported hostilities against the U.S. or its allies . The section is part of the section that authorizes indefinite detention .
 The U.S. “war on terror” is indefinite, so is the potential period of detention for anyone including a United States citizen who is detained under the law . Because the United States “War on Terror’s indefinite, it is also indefinite .
 Such a person can now be deprived of the right to an attorney and a trial for as long as the “war on terror” lasts . The person deprived of an attorney is now legally deprived of a right to a trial . The “War on Terror’s�
 In May 2012 a United States District Court judge ruled that this was not kosher, but the DOJ challenged the ruling and it was overturned by an appellate court . The DOJ challenged that ruling and the ruling was overturned .
 The case was then taken to the United States Supreme Court, the DOJ asked that the case be dismissed . The DOJ asked the case to be dismissed, but the case was dismissed .
 Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Chris Hedges the lead plaintiff in the case published a column denouncing the Supreme Court’s refusal to hear the case .
 Anwar al-Awlaki was assassinated by a U.S. drone strike in September 2011 . The DOJ's views on the government’s right to assassinate you are below the line .
 Dozens of Americans are executed each year . Traditionally they are given trials first, and are only killed after being convicted .
 Many people questioned the legality of the assassination and inquired about the legal reasoning of the U.S. Department of Justice . The assassination was the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 DOJ declines to share secret legal justification for policy of targeted killings . DOJ declined to share its secret justification for the policy .
 The DOJ's position was that the federal government not only has the legal right to kill American citizens without first giving them a trial . It also does not have to explain to the public why it believes such legal authority exists, the DOJ says .
 In April 2014, a federal appellate court ruled that the DOJ must release its classified memo on the policy . The decision was overturned by a federal appeals court .
 Rahinah Ibrahim, a woman whose name had been placed on the federal no-fly list by mistake, had her name mistakenly put on the list . Ibrahim's ordeal was similar to the ordeal of Rahanah Ibrahim who was placed on a federal list .
 Ibrahim had to spend 9 years battling to have her name removed from that watch-list before a federal judge finally ruled in her favor in February 2014 . Ibrahim spent 9 years trying to have that list removed before a judge ruled in February .
 Ibrahim litigated without knowing the information in the United States government’s case against her . Ibrahim had to litigate without knowing what the U.S. government had accused her of lying . Ibrahim: "I'm not going to lie. I'm not lying. I want to
 The president can refuse to produce evidence in a court case on the grounds that its public disclosure might harm national security . Based on it, the president can decide whether to withhold evidence in court .
 The government has, in the past, used this “privilege” to withhold information and dead-end legal challenges . Government has used this "privilege" to withhold info and withhold it from the public .
 Once “state secrets” are in play, there is literally nothing left to talk about in court . Once state secrets are revealed, there are no more to discuss .
 A related DOJ dodge was also brought to bear in an attempt to derail Ibrahim’s case: the use of made-up classification categories that dispatch even routine information into the black world of national security .
 Much of the information on the no-fly list was labeled Security Sensitive Information and so was unavailable to her .
 SSI is among hundreds of post-9/11 security categories created via memo by various federal agencies . SSI was created by the Department of Homeland Security and the National Guard .
 Congress never passed a law establishing anything called SSI, nor is there any law prohibiting the disclosure of SSI information . There is no law establishing SSI or requiring SSI disclosure .
 An estimated 445,220 individuals reported being stalked by three or more perpetrators in 2006 . The DOJ’s own crime survey statistics showed that in 2006 an estimated 4,000 people were stalked . The Department of Justice's Index of Crimes is based on the crime index .
 The National Center for Victims of Crime which is funded by the DOJ apparently receives “thousands of calls per month” about such crimes . Claims about gang stalking are also supported by the fact that the center receives ‘thousands’ of calls a month’
 Organized stalking is conspicuously absent from the DOJ’s Index of Crimes . Yet organized stalking is not listed as a crime in the Index of Crime .
 Robert L Snow, a retired police captain from the Indianapolis P.D., wrote a book called Stopping a Stalker, in which he devoted a chapter to the subject of organized stalking by multiple perpetrators .
 The program name was still in the index the last time I checked, but the information for that section which was part of something called the “Community Capacity Development Office” no longer existed .
 If you read it without the context of first-hand experience or an awareness of the historical background, it might seem innocuous . If you don't read it, it may seem innocuous, but it's important to remember .
 If you are familiar with the FBI’s Cointelpro operations, the system of targeting individuals to be ‘weeded out’ of society, it takes on a much darker character .
 Operation Weed and Seed is a strategy within the U.S. Department of Justice’s Office of Justice Programs that incorporates community-based initiatives . A strategy in the United States Department of . Justice Programs is based on community .
 It is an innovative and comprehensive multi-agency approach to law enforcement, crime prevention, and community revitalization . It is a multi-a-team effort to prevent crime, crime and crime from occurring .
 Operation Weed and Seed aims to prevent, control, and reduce violent crime, drug abuse, and gang activity in targeted high-crime neighborhoods across the country . Operation Weed is foremost a strategy-rather than a grant program- rather than a grants program .
 Weed and Seed sites range in size from several neighborhood blocks to 15 square miles . Weed and seed sites range from several blocks to several acres . Sites range from blocks to acres of land .
 A community-orientated policing component bridges weeding and seeding strategies . The community-oriented policing component is key to the success of the program .
 Officers obtain helpful information from area residents for weeding efforts . Officers also help residents obtain information about community revitalization and seeding resources .
 This law enforcement model can be exploited not just by government agencies, but also by private groups and individuals for their own agendas . Note that this model is not just for government agencies but for private groups .
 Private organizations and individuals who have the relevant skill sets, connections to law enforcement and intelligence agencies, can either create illicit ‘neighborhood watch’ programs to monitor and harass their targets . They can exploit existing programs by feeding information about their targets to law .
 The “Weed and Seed” program is the most explicit official statement of the institutional philosophy behind gang stalking . The victims are deserving of persecution because they are potential criminals, socially marginal dissidents, drug-users, whistle-blowers, trouble-makers, etc.
 Carefully contrived misinformation prepared by an intelligence or CI service for the purpose of misleading, deluding, disrupting, disrupting or undermining confidence in individuals, organizations, or governments . The U.S. government is using this information to undermine confidence .
 In a national program of counterintelligence subversion such as America’s version of the communist Stasi network, some public exposure is inevitable . In a program such as U.S. version of Stasi Network, some of the Stasi networks are exposed .
 Most people don’t usually even consider that the information they’re encountering might be a batch of deliberate lies . Often the effectiveness of disinformation derives from the fact that most people unlike con artists, intelligence agents, and detectives don't usually consider that they're encountering lies .
 Most Americans are unaware of the history of disinformation campaigns by the U.S. government . Operation Mockingbird is the latest in a series of disinformation efforts by the United States .
 One of the most well-documented programs in which the U.S. intelligence community systematically lied to the American public occurred in the 1950s . The program was part of an effort to keep the public out of the public eye eye on the truth .
 Operation Mockingbird was a secret Central Intelligence Agency campaign to influence media beginning in the 1950s . The campaign was launched by the CIA in the early 1950s and '60s .
 The organization recruited leading American journalists into a network to help present the CIA’s views . It funded some student and cultural organizations, and magazines as fronts as fronts .
 The usual methodology was placing reports developed from intelligence provided by the CIA to witting or unwitting reporters . The CIA used to place the reports on the newswire .
 The Office of Policy Coordination was funded by siphoning of funds intended for the Marshall Plan . The Office was funded in part by siphoned funds from funds meant for the plan .
 Wisner was able to constrain newspapers from reporting about certain events, including the CIA plots to overthrow the governments of Iran . Wisner had been able to keep newspapers from covering up CIA plots .
 For additional information about Operation Mockingbird, you should read this article on the subject by Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist, Carl Bernstein .
 CIA's relationship with the Times was by far its most valuable among newspapers, CIA officials say . CIA officials: The relationship with Times is by far the most valuable of all newspapers .
 From 1950 to 1966, about ten CIA employees provided Times cover under arrangements approved by the newspaper’s late publisher, Arthur Hays Sulzberger .
 The cover arrangements were part of a general Times policy, set by Sulzberger, to provide assistance to the CIA whenever possible .
 The mighty didn’t want to know the specifics; they wanted plausible deniability . The mighty wanted to keep quiet about the details of their actions . They didn't want to reveal the specifics .
 Pulitzer prize-winning journalist Theodore H White sold four million copies of his book The Making of the President . White was a prominent reporter on American politics in the 1960s .
 Scott Porch at Politico profiled him in April 2015, and Jon Schwarz at The Intercept posted this summary of the essential point .
 In his published writings, White lavished praise upon members of the political class and the press . White was a prominent critic of the press and politicians .
 One of the reasons that the U.S. surveillance state the FBI, NSA, CIA, DHS, and their army of private contractors and useful-idiot minions keeps a close eye on Americans is to keep a lid on such anger .
 Operation Mockingbird was an example of systematic disinformation, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com senior editor.com .
 An equally serious threat to the American public is the informal disinformation that comes from biased news reporting, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Distortion and deception occur routinely in the mainstream press on intelligence issues because of ideological bias, careerist motivations . Distortion, deception occur regularly in mainstream press because of bias and careerist motives, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Defending the political establishment when it is lying about intelligence matters serves the political agenda of right-wing reporters . It creates opportunities for such reporters to get access to senior officials for interviews, such as senior officials .
 National Public Radio reporter Dina Temple-Raston carries water for the government rather than a professional journalist . She is an example of someone who carries water in government service for a reporter .
 An August 2014 article by Glenn Greenwald helpfully deconstructed a piece of dishonest reporting by Temple-Raston about NSA whistle-blower Edward Snowden . The article was published by Greenwald in August 2014 .
 In the wake of Snowden’s revelations that the NSA was spying on Americans in violation of the Fourth Amendment, various apologists for the intelligence community asserted that the revelations had damaged U.S. national security . The NSA has been accused of violating the Constitution by spying on Americans
 It was claimed that surveillance methods were revealed in a way that enabled terrorists to more effectively conduct their business undetected . It has been claimed that terrorists were able to better undercover their business without being discovered .
 The claim was rubbish, but to the extent people believed it, it served the political interests of those who support Big Brother-type domestic spying on Americans by their government .
 Intelligence agencies can get away with serious abuses of power, author says . That kind of lying is common, and it creates an environment in which intelligence agencies can abuse power .
 An article by journalist Glenn Greenwald in 2010 in January 2010 in Salon.com called attention to the shockingly Orwellian view of news and propaganda in both the George W Bush and Barack Obama administrations .
 Greenwald focused on a member of the Obama administration . In particular, he focused on an Obama administration member .
 Samantha Power, a member of the National Security Council, is Sunstein’s wife . Samantha Power is the wife of Sunstein's wife, and Sunstein is a former White House adviser .
 Not surprisingly, Sunstein seems to be uncomfortable when confronted with his record of explicitly condoning government deception . Sunstein is uncomfortable when .
 He has written articles purporting to reveal what he sees as a threat posed by ‘paranoid” conspiracy theories . In fact, he has written about the dangers posed by such theories .
 As far as I know, Sunstein has never discussed whether it might contribute to the public’s ‘paranoid’ distrust of officials .
 Sunstein’s high profile would have no reservations about publicly advocating systematic lying to the public by the U.S. government . That someone with Sunstein's high profile speaks volumes about the arrogance and moral corruption of America's political class, he says .
 For many people, simply invoking that term will shortcircuit any critical thinking about an allegation . For many, invoking the term 'rape' shortcircuits critical thinking . For others, invoking such a term shortcircuaries critical thinking is short-circuited .
 Mainstream media institutions routinely embrace intellectual conformity masquerading as skepticism . They are encouraged in that view by mainstream media institutions, such as the New York Times .
 An April 1977 article in Reason by economist and historian Murray N Rothbard offers a clear explanation of the political establishment’s relentless dismissal of analyses which take into account the self-interests of those in power .
 When Cointelpro stalkers slander targeted individuals and tell other lies that enable them to perpetrate counterintelligence subversion against Americans, they are following the same ethical standards set by those at the very top of their industry .
 The long history of lying associated with the U.S. intelligence and law enforcement agencies is too extensive to chronicle here . You can get a sense of the culture by considering just a few of the recent scandals .
 In 2013 and 2014, three of the most senior intelligence officials were caught lying, and none of them suffered any consequences . None of the officials were punished for lying, but none of the consequences were given .
 CIA Director John Brennan denied that his agency was spying on the U.S. Senate while it was investigating the agency’s use of torture . The inspector general revealed that the spying did in fact happen .
 Subsequent revelations by whistle-blower Edward Snowden showed that mass surveillance which Clapper denied was happening was in fact taking place .
 The President’s Review Board reported that the actual number of terrorist threats revealed was zero . Later the board reported that it had found zero terrorist threats .
 He kept his job until March 2014 and then retired to take a job in the financial industry which paid $600,000 per month . Just kidding actually he kept his . job until . March 2014 .
 A secretive unit within the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration gathers information through wiretaps . The Special Operations Division gathers information from foreign and domestic wiretaps and forwards it to various agencies .
 Documents obtained by Reuters showed that agents who receive tips from the SOD are instructed to lie about the origins of their investigations . The SOD’s involvement is kept secret from defense lawyers, prosecutors, and judges .
 An agent might be told to stop and search a particular vehicle based on a tip . For example, an agent might decide to search a car based on an anonymous tip .
 If that search results in an arrest, the agent will lie in accordance with official policy and say that the search was the result of a routine traffic stop . The agent will then lie in to say that it was a traffic stop, according to the official policy .
 ‘Parallel construction’ exploits a moral version of a parallel universe one in which lying is ethically sound . Presumably ‘parallel construction' exploits a morality version of the parallel universe .
 Government agencies and corporations sometimes use intelligence-security contractors to do their dirty work, such as spying on and slandering critics . U.S. government agencies use contractors to spy on and smear critics .
 The group proposed creating a “fake insider persona” to infiltrate Chamber Watch . In addition, the group also suggested creating a fake insider persona to infiltrate the group .
 The leaked emails showed that similar disinformation campaigns were being planned against WikiLeaks and Glenn Greenwald . The emails also showed that a similar disinformation campaign was being planned .
 Many people would dismiss allegations of such activities as tin-foil hat conspiracy theories . If operations such as that one were not proven by the documents obtained by hackers, they would be dismissed as tinfoil hats .
 A reporter and editor at USA Today investigated one of the Pentagon contractors being paid to spread propaganda . The Pentagon contractor began a secret smear campaign against them . The smear campaign began when the reporter was investigating the contractor .
 Four main tactics are used by the United States intelligence-law enforcement industry to conceal its counterintelligence operations against U.S. citizens . The four major disinformation tactics used by America’s Stasi are used to conceal counter-intelligence operations .
 Each tactic is a variation on the same general strategy, to discredit organized stalking targets by casting doubts on their sanity and intelligence .
 Victims of gang stalking are encouraged to turn to them rather than form advocacy groups . Victims should lobby Congress and the media to investigate gang stalking, the author says .
 Everything about the groups is designed to convey the impression that people claiming to be gang stalking victims should not be taken seriously . The groups are designed to make people think they are being gang stalked, rather than gang stalkers .
 Another type of front group deception used in counterintelligence operations is when agents persuade a legitimate organization to let itself be used to stage activities which are actually orchestrated by a counterintelligence agency . The deception is often used to convince a legitimate group to let themselves be used in a staged operation .
 An example of that apparently occurred in 2013, when a U.K-based film company was apparently used as a front under the pretense that it was considering the production of a documentary about gang stalking .
 Representatives of the company began to solicit the participation of targeted individuals of organized stalking in what was apparently a fake project . Representatives asked the individuals to consent to video chat interviews about their experiences . The interviews were ostensibly for the purposes of gathering material for a documentary .
 The videos would be used to gather information about the victims’ perceptions of being illegally stalked by the feds . In reality presumably the videos would gather information .
 Agents purporting to be representatives of Firecracker Films had used the same ploy previously . Online searches of Internet forums about organized stalking revealed the same tactic .
 The objective is to discredit all self-proclaimed organized stalking victims by making them appear that they are paranoid idiots, the author says . The author of the book, "Stalkergate," says the book was published in October .
 Many of the sites emphasize mindcontrol but often do so without reference to MK Ultra . No one disputes the facts about that CIA program, and the U.S. intelligence community would prefer to avoid it .
 CI perps calling them “agents” would be giving them too much credit seem to fancy themselves as some kind of evil James Bond movie villains . CI perp calls them ‘agents’ and ‘agent’ .
 The phenomenon is similar to the embrace of military hardware and tactics by police officers who imagine themselves to be special warfare unit soldiers . Police officers imagine themselves as special warfare soldiers .
 Even lowly web page designers and sock puppets in the counterintelligence business embrace the cultural flavor one sees on the insignia patches of military units .
 You can download the poster-size version of the above image from the United States government here .
 An identity used in cyberspace to obtain information or influence others, while dissociating the actor’s true identity or affiliation . An identity is often used to obtain or influence other users .
 Reports of gang stalking almost invariably attract sarcastic but ultimately unconvincing statements by forum trolls . Forum trolls register their skepticism, registering their skepticism .
 The relatively obscure topic of gang stalking attracts such a dedicated army of detractors . One expects that sort of verbal warfare on Internet forums about politics, but you have to wonder why it attracts such an army of critics .
 A former CIA clandestine service trainee and DIA analyst revealed that the FBI and CIA use trolls to monitor social media and interact with users to discredit information disseminated online .
 Some news sources are not on the federal government’s leash . Fortunately, some news sources aren’t on the leash .
 As I write this, hacker-activist Jeremy Hammond is serving a ten year prison sentence for his role in exposing how this shadowy industry of professional liars and spies operates on behalf of large United States corporations .
 Journalist Barrett Brown is in jail in Texas facing charges which could potentially lead to a life sentence for his role in exposing the information yielded by the hacked emails . Brown is being held in jail .
 Brown founded a group called Project PM to sort through the numerous emails that had been revealed . Brown founded the group after the emails were revealed .
 A web page by a group which summarizes the disinformation schemes organized by the intelligence-security contractors. Here is a fascinating web page .
 One of the main tactics described in the secret documents is spreading false information online to destroy the reputations of targeted individuals and groups .
 Social science principles were used to manipulate online discussions and activism . Another main tactic was to use social science principles to control online discussions . The social science-based tactics were used in the study .
 No one familiar with organized stalking in the U.S. is unaware that western intelligence agencies systematically spread lies on the Internet in discussion forums .
 Among the tactics revealed by the documents is the use of false flag operations . The spy agency posts material online and makes it appear that it was posted by a targeted individual or group .
 GCHQ also creates fake blog posts which purport to be those of victims of the people and groups being targeted . GCHQ creates fake blogs to post about the targeted groups .
 Other tactics include leaking confidential information and emailing colleagues and friends of the target .
 Greenwald: These tactics are not about national security . Greenwald: Stalking is not national security. It's not only about stalking, it's also about stalking .
 These are weapons being used in many cases to destroy people who are suspected of crimes but have never been charged or convicted . People who are engaged in political activism of which the government disapproves .
 FBI whistle-blower Ted Gunderson was a key figure in exposing gang stalking . Gunderson goes unmentioned in the Times piece .
 That should be a giant red warning flag to any reader armed with that information who isn’t retarded . ‘That’s a giant warning flag,’ says the author of the book .
 Gunderson’s claims arose from the fact that he simply became delusional for some reason after a long high-profile law enforcement career, you would think that finding would be worth mentioning . Even if the ‘reporter’ had determined that Gunderson had . determined that .
 The article failed to include any interviews with the licensed private investigators who have written on the subject of gang stalking, such as David Lawson .
 The only “experts” interviewed for the article were four mental health professionals who discussed mental illness and delusions . Instead, the only ‘expert’ interviewed was a mental health professional who discussed delusions .
 Derrick Robinson, a janitor in Cincinnati, is president of a support group for gang stalking victims . The one other person interviewed was someone who supposedly claimed to be a victim of gang stalking, Derrick Robinson .
 Mental health experts quoted were not asked about their knowledge of crimes let alone their views on the plausibility of the existence of a modern version of the FBI’s Cointelpro .
 The article makes no mention of Cointelpro whatsoever . In fact, remarkably, the article does not mention the anti-extradition .
 The one supposedly self-proclaimed gang stalking victim, Mr Robinson, is a janitor and he is the head of the victims support group . Also note that the one supposedly victim of the gang stalking is the janitor .
 The one with the wherewithal to become head of their national organization is a janitor . The intended takeaway is that the most capable member of the community of self-proclaimed victims of organized stalking is a Janitor .
 The reader is left to infer that the rest of the self-proclaimed gang stalking victim community must really be losers if he’s their brightest bulb . The reader also assumes that the other gang stalking victims community must be losers .
 It simply would not have served the objective of the ‘reporter’ to discuss gang stalking victims, such as the FBI special agent, Mr Gunderson, or the attorney, Mr Labella .
 If readers had been directed to any of the sites which I recommend, they would have encountered discussions of gang stalking very much at odds with what they were reading in the Times .
 The Times article is a textbook case of disinformation planted by the government in the mainstream news media . It's the sort of thing people like Noam Chomsky get marginalized for warning people about .
 By remarkable coincidence, ABC interviewed the same psychiatrist who was interviewed by the Times, Ken Duckworth . Duckworth is a psychiatrist who has been interviewed by ABC .
 By remarkable coincidence, the “reporters” in both cases were third-tier shills no one has heard of . Also by remarkable coincidence: The same shillies are not Pulitzer Prizewinning investigative journalists .
 The ABC article failed to include any reference to the important high-profile whistle-blower key witness who supports the claims of gang stalking victims, Ted Gunderson . Also by coincidence, the ABC article like the Times article .
 The ABC News article failed to mention Cointelpro or MK Ultra or any other relevant non-disputed government conspiracies . The article focused exclusively on discussions of delusional thinking .
 Lauren Cox is the author of a ground-breaking, hard-hitting piece of brave investigative journalism by the intrepid Lauren Cox . She is the first person to write a piece of investigative journalism in the U.S.
 It’s interesting that those two rare examples of mainstream news media articles about organized stalking both appeared years ago, and then the subject has been off the radar since then .
 A couple of major news outlets looked into the phenomenon years ago and found it was all rubbish . Anyone searching for mainstream news reports on gang stalking will see that apparently a couple of years ago .
 Further articles even if they were similarly dismissive might call attention to the topic in an unhelpful way 15. 15.
 The Wall of Silence Which Surrounds Gang Stalking Laurel & Hardy is a 1999 film Fight Club . Sometimes people violate the rule and do mention fight club, but sometimes they do mention it .
 A local TV news broadcast in California in January 2011 featured a report about gang stalking in which the reporters used the term . Lieutenant Larry Richard of the Santa Cruz Police Department also used it in the report .
 Richard did not say that the stalking was perpetrated by the government . He seemed to walk-back his comment in a subsequent letter about the TV broadcast obtained by a Freedom of Information request .
 Despite its seriousness, gang stalking is rarely discussed publicly by the mainstream news media let alone by law enforcement officials . Despite its serious nature, gang stalkers are rarely discussed by the media or law enforcement .
 The FBI has kept its counterintelligence operations off of the American public’s radar . The secrecy with which the program is administered and the use of tactics chosen specifically for their lack of incriminating evidence is the reason .
 Civil activists broke into an FBI office and stole the secret documents which proved it . Those operations remained unknown to the general public until some civil activists broke in to the FBI .
 Based upon reports by gang stalking victims, United States intelligence and law enforcement agencies have greatly raised the technological sophistication for domestic counterintelligence just as was alleged by the late FBI official, Ted Gunderson .
 NSA whistle-blower Edward Snowden revealed that the scope of Big Brother’s surveillance is now vast . Edward Snowden also revealed that Big Brother's surveillance now is vast .
 The FBI and DOJ can pretty much do whatever they want, including extra-judicial punishment as “surveillance” and “investigation,’s ‘investigation’ and ‘informants’ by citing a ‘national security’
 As explained previously, “investigations” have been replaced in many cases with “assessments” which have lower standards of suspicion . “Investigations are replaced by ‘assassments’ which have a lower standard of suspicion.
 As a practical matter, organized stalking can be initiated with no concerns about the Fourth Amendment or the state and federal laws against stalking . Organized stalking can't be initiated without concern about Fourth Amendment .
 FBI exemption from Whistleblower Protection Act allows silence to be maintained . FBI is exempt from the act . FBI has been accused of wrongdoing in the past .
 Anyone wishing to expose misconduct at the FBI could face severe legal repercussions . The FBI is under investigation by the Department of Justice .
 Ted Gunderson did not speak out about gang stalking until after he retired . Gunderson says he did not reveal smoking-gun documents to prove his allegations . He did not say what he was looking for .
 Gunderson claimed that his discussion of organized stalking resulted in him being targeted himself . Gunderson also claimed that he would discourage other potential whistle-blowers from speaking out against organized stalking . Gundersen said he was targeted for talking about organized stalking which would discourage others .
 The Silence of Intelligence-Security Contractors . The silence of intelligence-security contractors is bound by secrecy oaths . Contractors involved in counterintelligence activities are bound to secrecy oath .
 In most cases, the potential legal risk is not a factor anyway . The type of people who seek work as domestic spies like the idea of being informants for Big Brother and they presumably like it .
 Witnesses to U.S. government criminality often become the targets of very aggressive efforts to intimidate them to remain silent and to make an example of them so others will remain silent . Witnesses to United States government criminality are often targeted in an attempt to intimidate witnesses to remain quiet .
 4-minute trailer of a 2013 documentary film gives a good sense of the dangers faced by whistle-blowers . The dangers include blacklisting, surveillance, and legal warfare .
 FBI agents can legally order witnesses to keep their mouths shut regarding anything the feds choose to portray as an investigation . The War on Whistleblowers is the result of the government's war on whistleblowers .
 For example, a National Security Letter is an administrative subpoena used by the FBI . It has a gag order attached which prohibits the recipient from ever saying anything about having been served with the letter .
 The U.S. government has issued hundreds of thousands of such letters . The letters have been upheld in court .
 Anyone wondering why landlords, neighbors, co-workers and others recruited to participate in organized stalking never say anything should consider the possibility that they do not want to end up in prison .
 The Silence of United States Political Leaders is Censored . In your high school civics classes, you probably learned about the three equal branches of the federal government .
 In reality, the U.S. is now dominated by a massively powerful executive branch . The United States now has a very powerful executive power .
 The nation’s chief executive must share power with the shadowy U.S. intelligence community . Officially, the White House is at the top of that branch .
 Intelligence agencies can tap the president's phones and create files on the president’s sex life and shady business dealings which can be used as leverage . The president can appoint and fire the heads of the intelligence agencies; on the other hand, the agencies can create files .
 In theory, the United States Congress has oversight authority over the intelligence community . The U.S. Congress is supposed to have oversight of intelligence agencies .
 You need to distinguish between what it says in your high school textbook and what takes place in the real world . Remember to keep up with the fact that it's not just a textbook .
 Declassified documents released in September 2013 showed that the NSA was monitoring his overseas phone calls and cables . The documents also showed that he had been monitored by the NSA .
 America’s founders could never have envisioned the vast network of rogue U.S. intelligence agencies and corporate intelligence-security contractors who now spy on Americans using advanced technology . America's founders were familiar with espionage, but were not aware of the network of spies .
 If the founders could have forseen the development of such a monstrous threat to democracy and privacy, they certainly would never have prescribed the current system of oversight . The founders of Facebook's first social network, Facebook, founded in 2004, have been accused of overindecurity .
 The House of Representatives and the Senate each has a Select Committee on Intelligence . The House and Senate each have a Select Intelligence Committee .
 Between the two committees, there are essentially just three dozen people who are supposed to provide oversight of the U.S. intelligence community .
 Three dozen people are bound by secrecy oaths which prevent them from revealing their knowledge of any unconstitutional and immoral behavior that is being perpetrated by the nation’s intelligence agencies . Even worse, those three dozen people have been bound by secret oaths to prevent them revealing any unconstitutional behavior .
 Committee members can be prosecuted even for revealing information to other members of Congress . Committee members may face prosecution even if they reveal information to Congress members of the committee .
 Congress members’ fear of the intelligence community . It is very possible that members of Congress actually fear the intelligence agency .
 President Barack Obama's apparent subservient relationship to the U.S. intelligence community has been questioned . Obama has been criticized for appearing to be too cozy with the intelligence community . The White House has been accused of over-receiving intelligence reports .
 Despite campaigning for the presidency as a progressive reformer, as president he embraced secrecy, drone strikes, mass surveillance, the attack on Libya, and aggressive prosecutions of whistle-blowers .
 Of course, it is very possible that Obama was never sincere about his views in the first place . Of course it is possible that he never was sincere .
 Ray McGovern, a retired CIA analyst-turned-activist, is willing to comment on the issue . McGovern is a former CIA analyst and activist .
 For those of your listeners who have not read James Douglass’s JFK and the Unspeakable, you need to read that, because it's coming up on 50 years . For those who haven’t read it, read it .
 John Kennedy was assassinated largely by Allan Dulles, the head of the CIA after the Bay of Pigs, and a coterie of joint chiefs of staff, FBI, even some Secret Service folks thought that JFK was soft on Communism by back channel communications with Krushchev .
 John Kennedy signed two executive orders just a month or so before he was killed . John Kennedy's executive orders were signed a month before his death .
 One of them said we’re pulling out 1000 troops out of South Vietnam by the end of the year, the year being 1963 . The year was 1963, and the year of the Vietnam War .
 The other said we’re going to pull out the bulk of the troops by 1965, we're finished in Vietnam, the other said . ‘We’ve pulled out of Vietnam by 1965’, one said, ‘we’ll pull out by 1965
 Los Angeles Police Department operated a lawless spy network for decades without having its crimes exposed . Secret Police , Mike Rothmiller and Ivan G Goldman describe how the L.A. police department operated a spy network without exposing its crimes .
 The LAPD used threats and blackmail to intimidate city council members and the staff of the Los Angeles Times . The LAPD also threatened to intimidate the staff and the council members of the Times .
 A general rule among most people who occupy influential positions is to avoid criticism of others who are similarly situated . The reluctance of people in power to criticize others in power is a problem .
 Most people who are in a position to expose corruption and incompetence rarely do so because they fear being perceived as a threat to others in power . "Most people who do so often do not do so so because of their fear of perceived threats to power," says Peter Bergen .
 Elizabeth Warren is a former Harvard law professor and current U.S. Senator . She is the current Senator for the United States. Warren is also a Harvard professor .
 Just like the members of the Congressional intelligence committees, judges on the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act Court are bound by secrecy oaths which prevent them from revealing anything about the scandalous crimes by spying .
 A good example of how that plays out in America’s Star Chamber occurred in April 2013 .
 The secret FISA court ruled that domestic spying activities at issue involved an unacceptable abuse of the Constitution . It was a rare instance of the court not simply rubber-stamping whatever the feds wanted .
 The Obama administration decided that Americans should not be allowed to know what the Feds were trying to get away with because it would allegedly jeopardize Americans’ national security . However, the U.S. government decided not to release the information .
 The silence of the ACLU Cowardly Lion continues to silence . Picture yourself as an ACLU attorney. Imagine yourself as a lawyer .
 It is one thing to be a legal advocate for a position which annoys people in middle America . It is another thing altogether to throw rocks at a hornets’ nest by exposing Cointelpro .
 ACLU is also inclined to err on the side of caution to avoid risking its reputation . ACLU says it's not sure if it will take legal action to protect its reputation.
 They do not wish to be associated with anything that has not already been conclusively proven by smoking-gun official documents published in the mainstream news media . "Smoking-gun" official documents have already been published by the mainstream media .
 Gang stalking is inherently susceptible to being dismissed as a tin-foil hat conspiracy theory . That is especially true for something like gang stalking, since the tactics render the subject susceptible to be dismissed .
 By all indications, the ACLU’s national office plans to wait until it is safe before they wade in . The ACLU's national office is waiting until it's safe before wading in .
 ACLU has never made any public statements that are dismissive of the claims of organized stalking . ACLU says it has never dismissed the claims .
 ACLU staff members don't respond to reports of gang stalking with skepticism, they just don’t respond at all . The ACLU doesn't respond with skepticism; they just respond to the reports with skepticism .
 Organized stalking goes mostly undiscussed in the mainstream news media . The Silence of the American News Media is the silence of organized stalking .
 The media’s silence on gang stalking can be attributed to laziness, incompetence, and cowardice . Primarily, the media's silence on the issue is to blame laziness .
 As a general rule, major news agencies ignore conspiracies in the absence of incriminating smoking-gun type official documents . Edward R Murrow was the first broadcaster to report on conspiracy theories .
 Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Seymour Hersh revealed the My Lai Massacre in Vietnam War and the abuse of Iraqi prisoners at Abu Ghraib during the Iraq War .
 Intimidation of the press by the federal government adds to the problem . Intimidated of the media by the government adds, says CNN.com editor .
 In May 2013 it was revealed that two months of phone records of the Associated Press were secretly obtained by the Department of Justice, seeking the identities of confidential informants .
 Journalists reported that trusted sources were becoming more reluctant to provide information . The AP phone records incident led to a number of journalists becoming less reliable .
 A survey published in November 2013 by PEN American Center found that many published writers in the United States self-censor on subjects such as military affairs, mass incarceration, drug policies, and criticism of the U.S. government . The survey was published by the association of American writers
 40 percent of writers polled had either curtailed their social media activities or seriously considered doing so . The survey found that 40 percent had considered curbing social media use .
 33 percent of respondents said they deliberately avoided certain topics in phone or email conversations . 33 percent said they considered avoiding certain topics or considered avoiding them .
 Obama administration prosecuted more whistle-blowers than all former presidents combined . The Obama administration is trying to chill criticism of the government .
 Committee to Protect Journalists published article on this disturbing trend in October 2013 by a former editor of the Washington Post .
 Exposing questionable government policies and actions, even if they could be illegal or unconstitutional, is often considered to be leaking that must be stopped and punished . But exposing questionable government actions is often seen as a leak that needs to be stopped .
 In February 2014, Reporters Without Borders ranked America as the 46th best country for journalist freedoms in between Romania and Haiti . The U.S. was ranked 46th in the world for journalist freedom .
 The Pulitzer prize winning Washington Post journalist Dana Priest describes the backlash she experienced when she exposed the CIA’s use of secret prisons to torture terrorism suspects . Watch a 3-minute video clip in which Priest describes how she received death threats from the public .
 Even the “weakest links” do not break in the national security field . Even in corporate and private associations without a formal apparatus of secrecy, even the ‘weakest link’ does not break .
 Failure to Connect the Dots helps explain low-profile of organized stalking in the news media . Failure to recognize a common thread between various related news reports is a failure to connect the dots between news reports .
 The most important of these articles and broadcasts are listed in the “Published News Reports” section of this webpage .
 In 2007 the Washington Post Magazine featured a cover article about gang stalking which portrayed several of the self-proclaimed victims of the crimes as credible, and claims about the types of electronic weapons allegedly being used .
 Several local news reports have documented police officers engaging in organized stalking for personal vendettas . Police officers are known to engage in organized stalker activity for personal reasons .
 In 2011 police stalked Stockton, California, city manager after a break-down in contract negotiations . Police stalked the city manager in 2011 after a contract negotiations broke out .
 In 2012 a police officer was stalked by numerous fellow officers from multiple jurisdictions after issuing a citation to an off-duty police officer for reckless driving . In 2012, an officer issued a citation after issuing the citation to the off duty officer .
 Both cases suggested that the police were familiar with gang stalking tactics and were unconcemed about any legal consequences . Both cases suggest that police were aware of the tactics .
 The Nation and CounterPunch reported on counterintelligence operations by the FBI and by private intelligence-security contractors against critics of corporations . They asserted that Cointelpro has re-emerged .
 There is almost no oversight or legal accountability for these private spooks, most of whom are former or present agents of law enforcement and intelligence agencies . Such reports make clear that there is almost little oversight .
 Over the past decade numerous individuals have reported being harassed and spied upon by perpetrators whose tactics were largely identical to those used by the FBI and other intelligence agencies such as East Germany's Stasi .
 Local newspaper and TV news reports about gang stalking claims have also emerged from across the country in recent years . Local reports of gang stalking claim have emerged in the past .
 Such developments are mostly not recognized as examples of a common phenomenon . Viewed as separate isolated incidents and news reports, such developments are generally not recognized . View is mostly not viewed as a phenomenon .
 The more you delve into the subject of organized stalking, the more you realize that the scope of the crime and its extreme impact upon the victims warrants a very close look by America’s journalists . The scope and impact of organized stalker stalking warrants a close look .
 Many people don't face the reality that institutions we count on to protect us are often seriously corrupt . Another obstacle to exposing criminality by government and corporate officials is to face the fact that they are often corrupt, says author .
 Journalist Russ Baker touched on this phenomenon when looking back at the 1991 book October Surprise by Gary Sick, the National Security Council liaison to President Carter .
 Ronald Reagan’s campaign chief William Casey made a secret promise to give military aid to Hezbollah in return for assurance that the 52 American hostages then being held by Iran would not be released until after the election . Reagan's campaign chief made the deal to make President Carter appear weak in order
 We in Washington are accustomed to the petty scandals of Washington politics . We in D.C. are not accustomed to petty scandals, but we're accustomed to them .
 French poet Andre Chenier describes crimes so great that they make the laws tremble . However, there is another category of offenses described as ‘les crimes puissants qui font font trembler les lois’
 Most mere observers are disposed toward misbelief and are, therefore, willing to disregard evidence that is directly presented to them . They are willing to construct alternative explanations for events that seem just too distasteful to want to believe .
 This all-too-human propensity provides just the margin of safety needed by those who would dare to under take what would otherwise be regarded as just too immensely a risky undertaking to attempt .
 People are enlisted to assist in various ways with ‘investigations’ or whatever the operations are publicly called . No doubt something similar although on a much smaller scale .
 The typical German citizen built for himself the illusion of not knowing, hence of not being an accomplice to the things taking place in front of his very door . Primo Levi, The New Republic, October 23, 16.
 Gang stalking is conducted in secret because, like its predecessors Cointelpro and MK Ultra, it is illegal and unconstitutional . Gang stalking, like MK Ultra and MK U.S. Stalkers, is illegal because it is unconstitutional .
 Stalking described as such, or as “criminal harassment” or ‘criminal menace” is a crime under the laws of every state in America . Stalking is illegal in the U.S. and under the law of all states in the country .
 Stalking is illegal because the vast majority of Americans deem it morally reprehensible and an assault on the basic rights and freedoms of the victims . The vast majority also deem stalking an assault of the basic freedoms of victims .
 Gang stalkers know that most people if they understood the crimes gang stalkers perpetrate would regard them as the human equivalent of cockroaches . So the stalkers skulk around and ply their trade in the shadows in the dark . Most people would regard stalkers as the 'human
 Their tactics are inherently difficult to prove legally, and their crimes are supported directly and indirectly by people with power and money and government connections . They don't have to worry about being caught and prosecuted however, because their tactics are hard to prove, and they don’t have to .
 The historical practice of shaming individuals had the imprimatur of the society . The practice was the 'imprimatur' of society, the historian says .
 If gang stalkers had such a sanction, they would not have to conduct their activities in secret . Gang stalkers should not have been allowed to conduct such a secret activity in secret.
 Gang stalking is largely a game played by people who are wealthy and/or well-connected to the police state infrastructure . Instead of gang stalking, gang stalking is played by those who are rich and connected to police state .
 For their personal vendettas and agendas, they exclusively wield gang stalking as a weapon that is unavailable to most people . Gang stalking is a weapon of choice that is available only to gang stalkers .
 Exposing what is happening is the challenge for victims of gang stalking . America should be a constitutional free nation instead of a quasi-police state run by plutocrats and neo-fascist members of law enforcement .
 "The balance of power is completely tipped in favor of the perpetrators of organized stalking," says the author of the book .
 " cowardice and careerism by politicians and members of the mainstream press make it unlikely that much help will spontaneously emerge from those quarters," says Julian Zelizer .
 Civil activists managed to derail the FBI’s Cointelpro operations, so there is precedent for eventual victory by the good guys . On the other hand, the FBI has been hit by the civil rights activists .
 Activists had to break into an FBI office to get documents which exposed the crimes . Mind you, those activists had to get the documents from the FBI office .
 If you can help expose illegal spying and harassment of Americans by intelligence agencies, law enforcement agencies, and private security contractors, please do so. Please do so .
 America needs more patriots like Daniel Ellsberg, Edward Snowden, Jeremy Hammond, Barrett Brown, Russell Tice, William Binney, Ray McGovern, Thomas Drake, Frank Serpico, Thomas Tamm, Hugh Thompson, Jr., William C Davidon, John Raines
 Lockshin, A., and Lockhin, L. Hockin, 1988, Silent Terror, One Family’s History of Political Persecution in the United States, Novosti Press Agency .
 Gang Stalking is a systemic form of control, which seeks to destroy every aspect of a Targeted Individuals life . Gang Stalkers seek to destroy all aspects of a targeted person's life .
 “Tn the service sector this may require identifying to employees persons who have a history of aggressive or inappropriate behavior in the store, bar, mall or taxi . Community health and safety is at stake .
 The identity of the person and the nature of the risk must be given to staff likely to come into contact with that person . The identity and the risk of that person must be revealed .
 While workers have the right to know the risks, it is important to remember that this information cannot be indiscriminately distributed . It is important not to give out information indiscriminately .
 A woman named Jane Clift in the U.K. went through a very similar type of flagging system . A similar system was used in the UK .
 A warning marker was placed against her name designating her as potentially violent . She was placed with a warning marker on her name .
 In many countries these community notifications might fall under community safety and health laws . In some countries, community notifications may fall under health laws such as community safety laws .
 It seems that employers, educational facilities, and community centers are flagging innocent individuals as a means of retaliation, silencing, or controlling members of society . Employers and community leaders are flagting innocent individuals .
 The only psychiatric symptom Buffa displayed was anxiety, a doctor said . Buffa was found to have suffered from anxiety, according to a report .
 Dorsey's report said that the referral came from Ford’s medical department and was at least in part due to her complaints of sexual harassment . Dorsey said that Ford's medical department referred the referral to her .
 In April 1999, Buffa’s boss fired her “for the good of the company,” she recalled being told . Buffa: "For the good, she was fired for the good" Buffa's boss said it was for the company's good .
 The individual is then placed under overt and covert forms of surveillance . Psychiatric Reprisal is a form of surveillance that can take place in the U.S.
 In a big city this could mean that thousands upon thousands of people are getting a notification about the target . The target is a target of up to 10,000 people in the city .
 Foot patrols and vehicle patrols are used to follow the Individual around, as part of the monitoring process . Foot patrols will be used in the monitoring of the individual .
 During these patrols a one handed sign language is used to assist the citizen informants with communicating to each other . The one-handed sign language was used during the patrols .
 The covert methods used to harass, persecute, and falsely defame the targets often leave no evidence to incriminate the civilian spies . The methods are often left no evidence of incriminating spies .
 It’s similar to workplace mobbing, but takes place outside in the community . It's like workplace mobbed, but it takes place in a community, not workplace .
 It called Gang Stalking, because groups of organized community members stalk and monitor the targets 24/7 . Gang Stalk is a term used to refer to 'Gang Stalkers'
 Many Targeted Individuals are flagged, harassed and placed under surveillance in this way for months or even years before they realize that they are being targeted by an organized protocol of harassment .
 What happens during this monitoring and surveillance is very similar to what happened to many innocent individuals in the former East Germany or Activists and Dissidents in Russia. What happens to what happens to many of those innocent individuals .
 Many innocent people in the former East Germany would be targeted by the state, and then their friends, family, and the community at large would be used to monitor, prosecute, and harass them . The state would then use their friends and family to monitor and prosecute them .
 The same persecutions and harassment’s are now happening in democratic countries . The same persecution and harassment is happening in democracies .
 Once a person is flagged or has a warning marker placed on their file, the community becomes hypervigilant . Within this structure there is a targeted and illegal protocol of harassment that happens .
 When the target tries to describe what is happening to them, it sounds as if they have had a mental breakdown . The target is believed to have suffered a 'mental breakdown' during the attack .
 The reality is electronic means are being used to make it appear as if the target has had a breakdown . The target is being made to appear as though the target is having a breakdown, say police sources .
 Creates A Protective Shield Of High Pressure Complex Ultrasonic Shock Waves . Creates a protective shield of high pressure complex Ultrasonic shock waves .
 The Mosquito device is being considered for banning by the European Union . The device infringes on the human rights of children . The European Union is considering banning it .
 The PCC30 puts out 140db of sound (135db for the PPF40) measured at 30cm . The frequency range is adjustable from 7kHz to 25kHz .
 Intended to mounting to vehicles for potential crowd control applications . Intended for mounting to vehicle .
 Many of these devices are easy to access, and almost impossible for an unaware target to describe in a credible manner, without sounding as if they have had a mental breakdown . The devices are almost impossible to use without sounding like they are having a breakdown .
 Unauthorized intruders are exposed to a feeling of intense paranoia, discomfort, disorientation, nausea and other undesirable effects . The effects of unauthorized intruders can include discomfort, discomfort and nausea .
 The closest thing to Gang Stalking that democratic countries have seen before this is McCarthyism, Cointelpro, and RED SQUAD programs . McCarthyism and RED Squad programs have been used in the past .
 Red Squad programs were used for monitoring, and harassment of various groups . The Red Squad was used to monitor, and harass, groups .
 They have been in place for over a hundred years, and they also employed Informants . They have a history of using Informants. Informants have been used in over a century .
 Civilian Spies, who can also be termed ‘Covert Human Intelligence Sources” come from every level and sector of society . Civilian spies come from all levels and sectors of society. Civilian spies are also known as ‘Human Spies’
 Remember anyone the Targeted Individual comes into contact with gets a warning about the target . Remember anyone you come in contact with will get a warning .
 Everyone in the target's life is contacted, advised as to why the individual has been flagged, advised not to discuss the notification and asked to be a part of the ongoing, never ending monitoring process .
 This process is covertly designed to control the targets, keep them in line, or destroy them over time, leaving them with no form of support . The process is designed to keep the targets in line and destroy them .
 These actions are specifically designed to mimic a psychological operation . These actions were specifically designed for psychological purposes only .
 This psychological harassment of the target is designed to destroy them over years, making them look crazy and leave them with no form of support . This psychological harassment of the target will leave them looking crazy and leaving them without support . The psychological psychological harassment is designed to
 The individuals around the target carry out actions and tasks as they are instructed, without realizing that the structure is psychologically designed to break the target down .
 Worldwide programs of control and conformity have been used with equal success and lethality . Control and conformity are key to the success of the programs .
 What we are seeing now is a co-ordinated and organized effort of control and conformity . What we're seeing is now is an organized effort to control and conformate, says CNN.com .
 It focuses on instilling a sense of community within a geographically located neighborhood . The project is designed to instill a community in a geographic location within the neighborhood .
 Communities come together to discuss what values they would like to have in their community, community development, and it’s also a time to discuss any problems that might be happening in a specific area . Communities discuss values they want in their communities .
 These local programs in many countries have been forming partnerships with other government run programs at, provincial, state and federal levels .
 "It’s all part of a system of control and conformity that has been in place for many years," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Many targets report that their information is passed and shared between country boarders . The surveillance continues even when they travel, according to the targets .
 The official goal is listed as a notification for the community, to alert them of individuals who have been flagged, or have had a warning marker placed on their file . The goal is to alert the community of individuals .
 It’s officially used as a means of investigating or monitoring individuals who have displayed inappropriate, or violent behaviours . It's officially used to investigate or monitor individuals who display inappropriate behaviour .
 The real goal in some cases however seems to be to isolate the target from all forms of support, so that the target can be set up in the future for arrest, institutionalization, or forced suicide . The real target is to be isolated, institutionalized or forced to commit suicide .
 Other goals of this harassment is to destroy the targets reputation and credibility . Other goals are to destroy a target's reputation, she said .
 Other goals involve sensitizing the target to everyday stimuli’s as a form of control, which is used to control targets when they get out of line .
 Citizen Informants have an easier time identifying the Targeted Individual in public . Once the target is sensitized, the Citizen Informant will be able to identify the target .
 The structure of this type of notification makes the targets vulnerable, says the author of the book . "It's not the only way to get around the world," he says .
 Once a community goes into monitoring mode, they unofficially work towards driving the target from the community . The community will be monitoring the target in an effort to get it to work .
 The primary goals seems to be to drive the target to forced suicide . Secondary goals include making the target homeless, jobless, and giving them a breakdown .
 This is the same thing that was done to targets of the Stasi and Cointelpro investigations . This is a repeat of what happened to targets in those investigations . It is not the first time this has been done to target targets in the past, it has been revealed .
 Under the Gang Stalking label you will also find such terms as Community Mobbing, Community Stalking, Stalking by Proxy and Organized Stalking . But it’s all part of the same community notification harassment protocol .
 Gang Stalking is just one appendage of this systemic form of control, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Gang Stalk is one of the largest forms of control in the U.S.
 There are other forms of control used to repress, and keep individuals in line . There are also other ways of control .
 Mobbing, Cointelpro, The Buzzsaw, Covert War, Electronic Harassment, etc. etc. Mobbing is a form of sexual harassment . Mobbing has been used in the past for decades .
 Governments are playing a very old game, once again being played by governments on their unsuspecting citizens . These are the just some of the names being given to the old game .
 Officially targets can be flagged and investigated for suspected, or reported behaviours . Officials can also be flagged for suspected behaviour .
 They can be chosen because they asserted their rights at work, or filed a complaint . They can choose because they assert their rights, or file a complaint at work .
 Were considered to be too outspoken, unwittingly investigated something that the state did not want investigated, signed a petition, wrote a letter . Signed a petition and signed a letter to the governor .
 They were deemed as suspicious by a civilian spy/snitch and their names were handed over . The names of the men and women were handed in to the police .
 It’s becoming apparent that targets might be chosen for this systemic form of control, if they are not already in some way a part of this controlled system .
 Many Targeted Individuals seem to be unaware of this community notification, flagging and monitoring system . The system is designed to monitor and monitor individuals' online behavior .
 Some targets also seem to be unaware that large chunks of our society are now being used as Citizen Informants . Some targets are unaware of the fact that large parts of society are being used to spy .
 In the past primary targets of programs such as Cointelpro have been minorities . The program's primary targets were minorities .
 Individuals are often targeted for being outspoken, whistle blowers, dissidents, people who go up against wealthy corporations, woman’s groups, women, minorities, extremists, conspiracy theorists, anti-war proponents .
 The majority of the targets are often not aware that they are being targeted in this way . The most of these targets are not aware of the fact they are targeted .
 When a target moves, changes jobs, the harassment still continues, because they are still flagged, and the notification is still going out to everyone they come in contact with . The harassment is still ongoing, even if a target changes jobs .
 Every time the target moves, the same information, lies, and slander will be spread out into the new community . The systemic monitoring and harassment will continue. Every time a target moves .
 People from all walks of life are a part of this system . Once flagged, their information is distributed to a wide range of people, organizations, and communities . Once a target is flagged, information is shared to a range of organizations, communities .
 General laborers, the wealthy, bikers, drug dealers, drug users, street people, punks, hip hop culture, etc. The KKK, KKK, black activists, church groups, youth groups, police officers, lawyers, health care workers, store keepers, maids,
 Workers and the community at large do have a right to be notified if they are going to encounter persons who have violent, inappropriate histories . Workers and community should be notified of those who have history of violent history .
 Citizens want to be able to protect themselves and their communities, however what is happening is that this program is also being used to falsely target innocent people, says CNN.com .
 Many do not understand or care that the end consequence of this flagging, this harassment protocol is to destroy a person . Many don't understand that many people don't care that this harassment protocols are to destroy people .
 Many people in today’s society are scared, they are willing to give up personal freedoms, for a false sense of security . If that means that means taking away the rights of another individual to accomplish this, they have no problem doing this .
 Many wholeheartedly believe that this let’s them know who is bad and who they need to protect themselves and their communities from . Many believe this lets’t them know that they need protection from bad people .
 They love that special feeling of monitoring and protecting their community . They say they love that feeling .
 Many in society use the one handed sign language to communicate and it’s very effective in breaking down race, gender, age, social barriers . Sign language can be used to break down social barriers and break down barriers .
 Many believe that it also let’s them know who is on their side, vs who could be the potential target . Many believe they also know who will be the target in the future if they want to sign .
 Others are forced or blackmailed by the State or the police into taking part . Some are forced to take part by State or police, others are blackmailed .
 They are told that they are being used to help keep and eye on dangerous or emotionally disturbed individuals . They are said to be used to keep an eye on people who are emotionally disturbed people .
 Others are just local thugs or Informants who are already being used for other activities, and their energies are just diverted over into these community health and safety programs . Others are simply local thugs .
 Some may be given the choice of monitoring a Targeted Individual for the community or the police vs going to jail . Some may have the choice to monitor the community for the sake of the community .
 Others are told outright lies and slander about the target to get them to go along with ruining the target's life . Others tell outright lies or slander to get the targets to go with the target .
 Many caring families are told that the individuals has displayed mental health issues, or other socially unacceptable behaviours and might be a danger to themselves or the community at large . The notification is necessary for keeping the community safe .
 Many are just average citizens who in the course of going about their day to day jobs, are being used to keep an eye out . If a flagged target does come into their vicinity, they are asked to watch and observe the target .
 A few of the most common techniques are listed below: Classical conditioning . Classical conditioning is one of the techniques most commonly used to train your dog .
 The targeted individual over a period of months, or even years, is negatively sensitized to an everyday stimuli, which is then used to harass them . The targeted individuals are then exposed to everyday stimuli which is used to target them .
 It’s used out in public to let them know they are constantly being harassed and monitored . It's used out of public to show them how they are being monitored .
 This will involve flagging and following the target everywhere they go . Red, white, yellow, strips, pens clicking, key jangling, loud coughing, loud whistling, whistling and whistling . 24/7 surveillance will involve flags and following them everywhere .
 Getting close to the target, moving into the community or apartment where they live, across the street . The target is often moving in to the community, living in the same community as the target .
 Flagging is meant to warn the community, but they act as little more than slander campaigns . The flagging is intended to warn people, but it's meant to be part of a slander campaign .
 "They present a one sided assessment of the targets behavior and activity," says the author of the book . The book is published in the U.S. and Canada .
 The target is never allowed to tell their side of the story or to clear their name . The target of a person accused of being a police officer is not allowed to speak out . The victim is never able to clear her name .
 This one sided assessment can include false reports, lies, and legitimate incidents where the target was set up . This one-sided assessment can be one sided .
 People in the target community are told that the target is crazy, dangerous, a thief, into drugs, a prostitute, pedophile, in trouble for something, needs to be watched . The target's community is told that he is dangerous, dangerous or into drugs .
 This very flagging in and of itself is capable of creating paranoia, and false interpretation of everyday incidents . This is not the first time flagging has been flagged in the U.S. history .
 It’s been shown that community notifications of any kind can and do create a sense of paranoia within a community . Community notifications can create paranoia within the community, according to experts .
 Community Notification Community Notification . Community notification serves to heighten fear of victimization . People would feel more secure if they were aware of the identities of dangerous offenders in their neighborhoods .
 In a large metropolitan area, hundreds of thousands of people are notified of a dangerous offender’s release, while only hundreds will come into contact with him in the community . In large metropolitan areas, only hundreds of people will come in contact with the dangerous offender .
 This blanket notification propagates the belief that there are more ‘predators’ in the community than ever before,’s author says . “Fearful attitudes among members of the public are reinforced,” he says .
 We would also argue that the use of inflammatory language such as ‘predator’ by politicians and officials also works to heighten fear and increase calls for more punitive action . d) Noise and mimicking campaigns are also being used as part of the campaign .
 Loud power tools, construction, stereos, doors slamming, etc. Disrupting the targets life, sleep with loud power tools . Loud construction, construction and stereos can disrupt the target's life .
 Daily interferences, nothing that would be too overt to the untrained eye, but psychologically degrading and damaging to the target over time . e) Everyday life breaks and street theatre. e). Everyday life breaking and street theatres. e) Daily life breaks .
 Drug-drugged food, flat tires, sleep deprivation, drugging food, putting dirt on targets property property .
 f) Electronic Harassment. These strangers might get text messaged to be at a specific time and place, and perform a specific action. e.y. text messengers might text message strangers to perform specific actions . e.Y. list includes text messages, photos, videos and
 Electronic means can be used to create the illusion that the target is having a mental breakdown . The target is being targeted and harassed by a community that is trying to get them to move, because they believe that the person is a danger or an undesirable .
 This flagging system allows the community to treat the target as less than, someone they are allowed to harass, and victimize . It allows the target to be treated as a less than person they are able to harass .
 "It gives them a license to do unspeakable things to innocent targets, and their families," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 This is the ultimate revenge book-high tech recipes for madness concocted by the author in collaboration with the experts . This is a high tech revenge book with the help of the experts.
 A collection of electronics, chemicals, and common sense designed to push anybody over the edge . What he came up with is a collection of . electronics, . chemicals and . common sense .
 Discover how to induce insanity with lasers, shockers, breakers, blowers and blowers . Clear beaches with “silent sound”; zap computer disks from a distance, bypas computer passwords and blast boomboxes .
 In short learn to harass the forces of science and technology and excercise your God-given right to get even with anybody, anytime, anytime . Learn to harass scientists and technology .
 Citizen Informants may be causing great psychological trauma for the target . These actions might seem harmless to the Citizen Informant, but could be causing psychological trauma .
 The systemic harassment that Targeted Individuals refer to as Gang Stalking is immoral and unethical in nature, but programs such as this in democratic countries, and none democratic countries have always been funded by the Government .
 "They are the only ones with enough money, coordination, and power to keep such a system in place," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 These Co-ordinated efforts then join hands with others for this systemic form of control and harassment . These efforts are then joined hands with other efforts to control and harass people, says the author .
 If you know someone who is being targeted in this way please don’t go along with it . Please don't get involved in this .
 "Many innocent people are currently being targeted, and people are being told lies," says President Obama . "People are being targeted," says Obama .
 This form of harassment is systemic and it’s about state control and conformity, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "This form of harasser is systemic," he says .
 "The express goal of this harassment is to destroy the individual over time," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 You can subtly suggest that your local newspapers or community papers print articles about Targeted Individuals . You can even write an objective piece about Gang Stalking .
 Target targets who are flagged in this way have proper notification letting them know that they are flagged . Ensure targets who were flagged should be notified .
 Communities are getting away with serious human rights abuses, and complaints are not being heard . Communities are still getting away from serious abuses, according to Amnesty International .
 Authority figures such as the police in many cases are not taking the reports seriously due to the type of warning markers attached to a targets file . Authority figures like the police often do not take reports seriously because of the warning markers .
 If you are a lawyer our community needs lawyers who are skilled in helping targets access Freedom Of Information files . We need lawyers who can help us access Freedom of Information files. We are happy to provide legal advice to our community .
 Lawyers who can work with the existing privacy laws to limit who and where the targets information is disseminated to . Lawyers can also work with existing privacy law to limit where and where information is distributed .
 We need human rights lawyers who can address the complaints of abuses that are happening to people listed or flagged in this manner . Human rights lawyers should be able to respond to the complaints made by those listed .
 Illegal surveillance, illegal access of mail and electronic communications, and torture via electronic monitoring, are among the crimes committed in the U.S.
 Mental health professionals can recognize that there is illegal harassment happening to individuals who are flagged, listed or have warning markers placed against their names . Mental health . professionals can also recognize that . individuals who have warning marks placed on their names are being harassed .
 This notification makes targets prime for harassment, and community mobbing, and makes them prime targets for mobbing .
 They can become familiar with the means of monitoring and harassment that are being used, they say . They can objectively investigate complaints, and become familiar .
 Europe is considering a ban on the mosquito device, because it infringes on the human rights of children . Europe is also considering banning the device from children .
 You can subtly offer your support to someone who is being unfairly treated, in very small little ways . You can help someone who has been unfairly treated by the media .
 When on the street or in cars patrolling, the police use a one handed sign language .
 The former East German Secret Police the Stasi used used signals to communicate with the public . Here is a list of signals that the former East Germans Secret Police used .
 Subject is moving on, going further, or overtaking stroke hair with hand, or raising hat briefly . 3. If subject is moving further, the subject is overtaking the hair .
 Observing Agent wishes to terminate observation because cover threatened bend and retie shoelaces 5.5.5 . Observing agent wishes to terminated observation because . cover threatened bending and reining in .
 Observing Agent wishes to speak with Team Leader or other Observing Agents take out briefcase or equivalent and examine contents . Subject returning both hands against back, or on stomach, or sitting on stomach Observing agent .
 Neo a target wakes up and realizes not only is he being watched without knowing why, but that the world is a lie, that has been created to pull the truth over people’s eyes . Neo wakes up to realize he is a target and realizes he is being watched . Neo
 Service sector may require identifying people who have a history of aggressive or inappropriate behavior in the store, bar, mall or taxi . “Tn the service sector this may . require identifying to employees persons who have history of . inappropriate behavior .
 Maria Buffa was sent to a psychiatrist after she filed a sexual harassment complaint against a co-worker in 1999 . Buffa, a former Ford World Headquarters employee, said she, too, was sent a psychiatrist .
 Hightech Harassment ttp://www.amazon.com/High-Tech-Harassment-Scott-French/dp/0873646169 This is not just another revenge book. It's not just a revenge book .
 Observing Agent wishes to speak with Team Leader or other Observing Agents take out briefcase or equivalent and examine contents . Subject returning both hands against back, or on stomach D> Observing agent returns both hands on stomach .
 I also think a lot of you people put a bit too much faith in your five senses . I think you put a lot too much trust in your senses. I'm not sure what I think of you .
 A lot of your experiences could be explained by hallucinations, paranoia, and synchronicity . It's possible to explain hallucinations and paranoia in your own life .
 I think people are being manipulated like puppets to give the illusion of involvement or human conspiracy . People being manipulated 'like puppets' to give illusion of a human conspiracy, I think . I think it is a conspiracy to manipulate people into thinking they are innocent .
 I can quarantee you it’s not as far fetched as thinking hundreds of ordinary people are consciously involved in a purposeless conspiracy against another ordinary person, including his parents and friends .
 There are thousands of such cases all over the world, and have been at least since the 19th century . And that there is thousands of . such cases . all over . world, they say .
 Your own theory is so far-fetched that people will believe in God and other nonsense but they won’t believe what you believe . Your own theories are so far fetched that people won't believe your own .
 Your crusade is futile as long as you keep employing the tactics you do. That’s partly why your crusade was futile, he says . That's partly why you can’t win, he adds .
 No one will believe your story, because it’s unbelievable AND about things they are familiar with . No one believes your story because it's unbelievable and about things you know nothing about .
 If you want to make something unbelievable seem believable, you have to talk about things that are outside everyday reality . "If you want something unbelievable to make it seem believable," you need to talk to people outside of everyday reality, says author .
 They know your everyday interpretation is nonsense because you are trying to talk about something they know from personal experience and that something is completely unambiguous to them . They know that they know something from personal . experience .
 People are being mind controlled and they haven’t got a clue what you are talking about because they’re all victims, you're just the person who is supposed to notice something is a bit off about all this . People are not aware of the fact that they are being
 You might want to try reading my blog post at my blog and acquiring a competing viewpoint . I don’t think the entity that does this controlling is super interested in what you believe so much as it may be toying with you .
 After reading your detailed and lengthy side of the issue, let me pose some comments .
 Look past the media hype, the government lies, and you will see the FACTS of what these criminals do, and what they are capable of . Look around you, and I mean look REALLY hard, and . I . mean look really hard, past the . media hype and the
 "They follow the conspiracy of evil, and they don’t even hide it most of the time," says President Obama . Obama's administration "follows the conspiracy" of evil .
 It's never ridiculous to believe in God being the creator and our Savior, whom is love and truth . It is never ridiculous for God to be the creator of the creator .
 It is more ludicrous to believe we all came from monkeys and amoeba since they all exist apart from us as humans to begin with . It's more ludicrous than to believe monkeys and monkeys came from apes or amoseba .
 You either have and side with them, which is where the misinformation can come in to posts like this you write . Or you simply have no idea about any of it, and thus need to really see what is going on here .
 They are human beings with lives and feelings who have been severely used, harassed and had their minds and lives practically altered and destroyed . They are people who have had their lives altered and their feelings severely used .
 The deprogramming techniques and tons of Christian faith and love are the only things that will ever truly free them, he says . And this is why the deprogrammers techniques and . tons of faith and . love are . the only thing that will never truly free . free them I
 "Please do not come in here and act like you know what you're talking about, because believe me, you clearly do not," she said .
 You have not been through half of what these people have, or you would not have written this post . And you have not had half the things you need to know about these people .
 The facts are these people have been victims of cult stalking and mind control harassment, some even murdered . Some even murdered, so please be more careful what you say .
 In fact I think it is best you just do not post here anymore, because you will not be respected at all . In fact, I think you just don't post anymore. In fact you will be respected if you do .
 There is PLENTY of evidence besides the people themselves supporting all of this does happen to them . There is plenty of evidence that happens to happen to the people involved .
 The moderator should not allow these comments at all because they do not serve the purpose here, and they have no bearing on what is going on here with all of the people involved and the victims they hurt .
 Please read the articles on informants, lawsuits, Freedom of Information, and Threat Assessment Team files .
 Lawsuits for conspiracy and indictment, might not have been the worst situation . Lawsuits were filed for conspiracy, indictment and indictment .
 Steven, Steven, What you are saying is not uncommon, and I want you to know you are not alone . What you're saying is actually not uncommon .
 Sexual character assassination and defamation of character is what they do more than you realize, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 "They take away your dignity and make it almost impossible to have any kind of normal life," says the author of a new book .
 Thank you, these situations are interesting, if that makes sense, if you make sense .
 I would say interesting is not the world, for that makes it sound positive. Interesting is not interesting, but it's interesting to the world .
 "The more this gets exposed the more it will be harder to bring it all out," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com . The more exposed, the more difficult it is to bring out, he says .
 The people involved are well aware of those that want to expose to them, trust me on that. The people . They are aware that they are being exposed to those who want to bring expose .
 How can on gather evidence if he/she is gangstalked and if people are spreading rumours and slandering the person? How can you gather evidence? How do you know how to gather evidence for a person who is being attacked?
 I think I am being gangstalked by an mnc bank and theres are some people who are spreading lies about me. I think there are people who want to smear me, I said . I think this is not the first time I have seen a person who wants to
 Fill out a reporting form, that is what a lot of people are doing, then following it up, then follow it up . Fill out your reporting form. Fill out the reporting form .
 Tactics of Predatory Gangstalking include highly coordinated surveillance (hidden cameras, conversation bugging in private aswell as public) harassment, and psychological, psychosocial, financial, and sometimes physical assaults on an individual by a large group of people .
 Predatory Gangstalking group is a well-run organization comprised of members who are unidentified as gangstalkers to the outside world . Predatory gangstalking groups are comprised of people who are unknown to the public .
 The practitioners of predatory gangstalking are people who, for the most part, go about their business of daily life appearing like everyone else, except for their activities involved with Predatory Gangstalking . The practice of predatory stalking is a form of stalking that involves stalking and stalking .
 Predatory gangstalking activities take priority over everything else in the lives of Predatory Gangstalkers . Gangstalking is a priority in the life of the gangstalker .
 Predatory gangstalking is actually a lifestyle for those who participate in it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Predatory stalking is a lifestyle, says Sutter.com.com .
 Dominion Theology is a religious interpretation of the Bible . These groups believe it requires them to “take dominion over the earth” which they believe is the precursor to the return of Jesus to earth .
 This may sound quite vague, and it is only because the precise reason for its use deals with a more incredible phenomena than hasn’t been touched up yet .
 In the first instance, we mustn’t be so Naive as to assume that our governments and those that have the power and authority to run our world are acting from a selfless perspective .
 The secrets of the universe, God and true power have always been the Holy Grail of man, and the desire to achieve and own them by some . The desperate desire to own them is the desperate desire of some .
 The understanding of the human mind, soul and will and how these can be controlled and used far more readily than man has been able to achieve so far . To this effect the studies and research that has been conducted since time immemorial have been immense .
 More covert experimentation has been undertaken on people targeted for this work . And it is for these reasons that extensive and more covert experiments have been undertaken .
 Our minds are complex structures, our memories, our thought processes, our fears and so on . Our minds can be complex structures and complex structures .
 This of course sounds like insane rantings but assuredly this is the reality humanity faces today . This is a reality that humanity must face today, says the author .
 There is a dark agenda to control all minds by controlling the energetic fields of existence, our physical bodies, dna, etheric fields, mental and emotional fields and so on . The dark agenda is to control our physical and emotional bodies, our dna and etheric .
 Imagine for a moment if a ‘Lucifer’ were also created from one of the targeted individuals, more than just the social pariah they started as . What if society is lead to believe that they are actually a satanic entity or individual?
 In doing so, a common enemy is created with which to blame all eventual chaos upon . In doing this, the U.S. has created a common foe to blame for the chaos .
 Dark prophecy or conspiracy theory is actually ancient agenda in it’s final stages of being played out . It is in the end the stuff of nightmares and what has been called dark prophecy is actually a conspiracy theory .
 "On a personal level, participating in any form of gangstalking is not only insane but utterly immoral, and spiritually and criminally corrupt," says the author of the book .
 If you care, choose never to participate, inform the target . Make a united stand with friends and neighbors not participate . Log all the evidence you can take down all information you can .
 Be smart, technology and the capability of those that have orchestrated these world terrors are immense . Be smart! Be smart. Be smart . Technology and technology are immense, technology .
 Remember that the ‘fear matrix’ within the collective consciousness of humanity is an overall target . Remember that most of all remember that the fear matrix is a target . The ‘Fear Matrix’ is a ‘target’ of humanity .
 Stand firm in a belief of your divinity and eternal being (whether you believe in a God or not) you are still part of Omnipotent Grace experiencing on earth .
 This book asserts a Matrix of illegal operations fabricate desperate solution to Aristocracies greatest vulnerabilities, errors, and liabilities by Abuse of Power . Black Money Black Budgets Black Operations is a book by John Avlon .
 A formula of the predicate calculus is in prenex normal form if it is rewritten as a string of quantifiers and bound variables, called the prefix, followed by a quantifier-free part called the matrix . The matrix is the matrix of the formula of a formula .
 The ""rules"" written into the Matrix largely revolve around denying ""Conspiracy Theories"" while pursuing world objectives which if completed create outcomes in which the end-state protects the Deep State from being revealed .
 The Donegan family is one such long term victim of MKULTRA and has a secret genomic history which is being used for the matrix outcome desired . Edward Paul Donegan is being funded and the value and truth of his family history slandered and denied .
 Both monetizing Donegan family value INTO the mafia as the mafia destroys and erodes my life are several facets of the Mafia operation . Both monetization and monetization of family value into the mafia are key to the mafia operation .
 'As a profit matter people benefit from this it has been unstoppable thus I have had to search deeper and find out why my genome is being used on the black market in State backed illegal operations unjustly attacking me'
 The oil business wanted to groom future leaders out of test fertilizations study out of wedlock celebrity DNA . An even deeper more secret reason the DNA was being studied is the reason the genome history is secret is it contains a minor, a minimal, brain defect which runs it if families of
 Blatantly illegal attacks on me are feeding a mafia operation at my own assets and reputation's expense . Blatant illegal attacks are feeding the mafia operation, he says .
 The Mafia techniques are State sanctioned, use under-cover State actors and State misconduct . The Mafia is State sanctioned by the State of the State .
 The milieu of actors including the politically powerful who ask for and gain press cooperation in denials of the milieu . The politically powerful ask for cooperation in denying allegations .
 Obstruction of justice is considered a crime against justice itself . Obstruction is considered an act of obstruction of justice against justice . FindLaw staff reviews Evan Fisher's work for FindLaw .
 By obstructing justice, one is seeking to thwart the process of justice and the operation of the justice system . The case is not the first time a person has been charged with obstruction of justice in the country .
 Those facing obstruction of justice charges could face major consequences . From presidents to street criminals, those facing obstruction charges could suffer major consequences.
 This article describes obstruction of justice, some examples of obstruction, and the types of penalties one could face . This article also includes some of the penalties that could be imposed .
 Nixon resigned after articles of impeachment were brought to the House floor, which alleged obstruction of justice, among other crimes . Nixon resigned from the presidency in 1972 .
 President Bill Clinton also faced charges for obstruction of justice and perjury for lying about a sexual encounter he had with a White House intern . President Clinton was charged with perjury in the case in 1998 .
 He was ultimately acquitted by the Senate and served the remainder of his term . He was convicted of a crime that led to his death .
 The code section made infamous by Presidents Nixon and Clinton is punishable by a fine and imprisonment of up to five years . Obstruction of proceedings before departments, agencies, and committees" (18 U.S.C. section 1505), is punishable .
 Neither president ever faced the possibility of criminal penalties, however . Neither president faced criminal penalties for their actions .
 The elements required for a conviction on an obstruction of justice charge differ by code section . Elements of an Obstruction of Justice charge include elements of a conviction .
 For a person to be convicted of obstruction of justice, they must have acted with the specific intent to create an obstruction . For a conviction, a person must have created an obstruction with the intent of creating an obstruction, the judge said .
 The statute criminalizes ""endeavors to influence, intimidate, or impede" the legal process, even if those endeavors are unsuccessful . The statute also criminalizes "endorsement, intimidation, or interference"
 Seemingly innocuous acts could become criminal activity if they have the intended effect of impeding justice . Seeping innocuous acts may become criminal if they are intended to impede justice, say experts .
 Whoever procures another to commit any perjury is guilty of subornation of perjury, and shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than five years, or both .
 Subornation of perjury is the crime of persuading or permitting a person to commit perjury . It is the swearing of a false oath to tell the truth in a legal proceeding, whether spoken or written . In American law, Scots law, and under some English-speaking Commonwealth nations,
 The term subornation of perjury further describes the circumstance wherein an attorney at law causes a client to lie under oath or, allows another party to lie . Subornation is a circumstance where an attorney causes an attorney to . lie under . oath or causes another . party, to lie
 Subornation of perjury constitutes an act of ""moral turpitude"" on the part of the attorney, and thus is cause for their disbarment, or for the suspension of their license to practice law . In California law, per the state bar code, the subornation
 In legal practice, suborning perjury applies to an attorney who presents either testimony or affidavit, or both, to a judge or to a jury, which the attorney knows to be materially false, and not factual . Suborning is a condition of perjury in practice .
 In civil law and in criminal law, the attorney's knowledge that the testimony is materially false must rise above mere suspicion to what an attorney would reasonably have believed in the circumstances of the matter discussed in the testimony . In criminal law and civil law, an attorney must know that testimony is false
 The attorney cannot be wilfully blind to the fact that their witness is giving false, perjurious testimony . Hence, the lawyer cannot be blind to a witness giving false testimony, he says . The attorney must not be blind, he writes .
 An attorney who encourages a witness to give false testimony is suborning perjury . The crime is punishable with formal disciplinary action, disbarment, jail, or jail .
 A false statement by an attorney in court also is a crime similar to subornation of perjury and is punished accordingly . False statements by a lawyer in court are similar to perjury and are punishable accordingly .
 In the professional conduct of an attorney at law, there is a fine delineation between assisting a witness to recall events and encouraging the witness to give materially false testimony . In this case, the attorney should not be encouraged to give false testimony.
 The practice of ""horse shedding the witness” is an example of such perjurious criminal conduct by an attorney . Anatomy of a Murder is depicted in a true-crime novel and a film about a rape-and-murder case .
 Jury tampering is the crime of unduly attempting to influence the composition and/or decisions of a jury during the course of a trial . Juror tampering is a crime that unduly attempts to influence a jury's composition or decisions .
 The means by which this crime could be perpetrated can include attempting to discredit potential jurors . It could include trying to discredit jurors to ensure they will not be selected for duty .
 Once selected, jurors could be bribed or intimidated to act in a certain manner on duty . Jury could be intimidated or bribed to act a certain way on duty on duty.
 It could also involve making unauthorized contact with them for the purpose of introducing prohibited outside information and then arguing for a mistrial .
 In the United States, people have also been charged with jury tampering for handing out pamphlets and flyers indicating that jurors have certain rights and obligations, including voting their conscience . In the U.S. jury tampering is a form of jury tampering where jurors are given instructions by the judge .
 A conviction is a felony that carries a penalty of up to 3 years in jail or state prison . A conviction carries up to three years in prison or a prison sentence .
 This is considered to be an Obstruction of Justice crime in California . It is considered a felony obstruction of justice in the state .
 e altering a will with the intent to use it in probate court . e making a false receipt with the idea to introduce it at a personal injury trial . e creating an inaccurate picture of an intersection to give to police investigating a hit and run case .
 An accused can beat a preparing false evidence charge with a legal defense . The defense can include a legal team of lawyers .
 Shouse law California criminal defense attorneys includes practice these areas . Shouse is a law firm that specializes in criminal defense lawyers .
 Using currency not tracked by the Treasure Department by large sums of cash or by assets of value as barter or by an specially created currency are how Black Markets often survive since the assets used escape or avoid banking notice .
 Findlaw.com retrieved from FindLaw Staff | Reviewed by Evan Fisher, Esq. FindLaw.com .
 Using threats or force to prevent, or . obstruct, or interfere with the performance of a court order 2. Using threats to prevent or . interfere with court orders 2. Use of force to stop, or obstruct, the . performance of an order . 2. If you have a court
 All states address obstruction of justice in some form . Obstruction of Justice Under State Laws . All states do this in some way .
 State codes focus more on acts that interfere with the day-to-day work of the police . State codes tend to focus more . than state codes .
 Some state laws define several specific acts, while others are more broadly written . Florida's law defines several specific laws, such as Florida's .
 One section of Florida's obstruction of justice code prohibits the unlawful possession of a concealed handcuff key . For example, one section of the law prohibits the possession of such a key .
 California law makes it a crime to willfully ""resist, delay or obstruct" a police officer or emergency personnel while performing their job duties . California law also makes it illegal to willfully "resist" or "obstruct" police .
 The statute includes the specific acts of interfering with radio communications over a public safety radio frequency . The statute also includes acts of interference with public safety communications .
 The law makes it clear that simply photographing or video recording police is not a violation . The law says photographing police officers or recording them is not an offense .
 Attempting to influence a juror through written communication is punishable by a fine and up to six months in prison . But if the crime also involves an attempted murder or the commission of a class A or B felony, the defendant may be sentenced to up to twenty years in prison. e
 Threatening or attempting to intimidate a juror is punishable by a fine and up to ten years in prison . Threatening to intimidate jurors could be punishable by up to 10 years in jail .
 If the crime also involves an attempted murder or the commission of a class A or B felony against a juror, the defendant may be sentenced to up to twenty years in prison . The defendant could face up to 20 years in jail if convicted of attempted murder, or a third-degree
 Attempting to influence a juror through written communication is punishable by a fine and up to six months in prison . Attempts to influence the juror by writing are punishable by up to 6 months in jail .
 State laws usually classify obstruction of justice offenses as felonies, although they differ widely on how they define the crime . State laws differ widely as to how to define the crimes, but some are felonies .
 Illinois law prohibits destruction of evidence classifies it as a Class 4 felony . Destruction of evidence is punishable by one to three years in prison . The Illinois law that prohibits destroying evidence is classified as a felony .
 DNA molecule consists of two strands wound around each other, with each strand held together by bonds between the bases . DNA molecules are made up of two DNA strands, each strand being held together . DNA molecule is made of two molecules, each being made of a single strand .
 A ""Black Currency"" made out of rerpoducable ""Genetic Codes"" as unlimited value . A "Black Currency" made from rerpoucable "Genetic codes"
 The real value of it is the secret history and desirability of the genome, says Dr. Andrew Hammond . He says the real value is the history of genome creation .
 No one other than Edward Paul Donegan who IS qualified to represent himself is entitled to that genome . Donegan's genome is a form of self-determination that should be made public .
 This small unit of currency was more affixable to letters of post than metal coins . The small unit was affixed to letters and post rather than coins . It was used to make money from letters and advertisements .
 The denominationss were not intended for utility in most commerce but would be useful for postage payments . They were intended for postage purposes only .
 Market capitalization is the total dollar value of all the shares of a company’s stock or, in the case of Bitcoin or another cryptocurrency, all the coins that have been mined . Bitcoin or other cryptocurrency has a market capitalization of around $1 billion .
 In crypto, market cap is calculated by multiplying the total number of coins that have been mined by the price of a single coin at any given time . Market cap is based on the value of a coin at a given time and the amount of coins it has mined .
 This book speculates Malcolm X objected to so many MKLUTRA experimental births because it undermined the uniqueness of his own child . Malcolm X was one such experimental birth, one such birth was one of the experiments .
 A racial hate crime COIINTELPRO operations has been organized against me which is supposed to define me and defeat me . This is likely because my genome has been used in blacks and whites who do not wish to be associated with the Kutscheras by attributes .
 The primary system has been subjected to intense racial assault, including black adults planting white minor children near me or my home as a black nationalist statement about me, and vows from black males to use my genome on their white female partners .
 The destruction of my atomic veteran genome which was from lawful marriage and lawful family life achieves a benefit to the genome coopting criminals and organizations . This should be easy to defeat by elites all through society black and white, he says .
 Those high power well placed elites use their influence to get necessary programs in place to destroy or co-opt assets already my own . "Roadblocks all property and achievement I attempt which is rooted in my law abiding Atheist family"
 This is called “road blocking” or also Surveillance Ambushes where Espionage can intercept and co-opt my positive activities of health and community activities of normal life and opportunity . This is also known as “Road blocking’s” and “Surve
 Bad policing can allow the criminal to proceed if the crimes are not solved . Bad medical services can fake medical needs for involvement in a said to be patient and even conduct physical batter of a person by creating hostile context or treatments .
 Maladministration is the actions of a government body which can be seen as causing an injustice . The actions of the government body are considered to be an injustice by the public .
 The law in the United Kingdom says Ombudsmen must investigate maladministration . The law says Ombudsmanmen must probe maladministrators . Ombarment is a form of investigation by the Ombudsman .
 Entities such as property managers, police and fire, county prosecutors, state prosecutors, State gov or FBI DOJ, or other businesses which allow for activities of the Racket to proceed . The Racket Racket is an international criminal organization .
 Wire fraud, welfare fraud, physical assault, sexual assault by planted operatives who have access to common property of sole possession property . Wire fraud and physical assault are among the crimes committed by planting operatives .
 The machinery is built to use pretexts that are manufactured acts of fraud to gain rights to assets to which the parties acting fraudulently are not entitled . It is not the first time the machinery has been set up to try to gain access to assets .
 Silencing Micheal Hastings and others keeps the Mafia unchallenged by the disinfecting Sunlight . Silencing Michael Hastings and other keeps the mafia unchallied by the sun .
 Conservators can entangle, forced-team with me and assets belonging to me or my trust fund if I appear to need an asset manager . Hostile and self enriching Conservators are able to entangle and team with me . Conservators may entangle me and my assets belonging
 If a manager of assets can insert itself as a conservator in layer of finances to become co-mingled with me and my asset by forced team, they can assert they are required by law to continue to entangle, forced-team, with me . This is actually predatory and
 The term ""child abandonment"" is broadly categorized and used to describe a variety of behaviors . The term is used to refer to a range of behaviors such as abandonment .
 This book asserts criminal breaking and entering of my home to create false but ; actionable legal claims against me or rather my trust fund, that those claims are fenced ‘ via a Sting operation run at a child porn peeping house . The book asserts that the claims were fenced
 This book asserts criminal breaking and entering of my home to create false but actionable legal claims against me or rather my trust fund, that those claims are fenced via a Sting operation run at a child porn peeping house . It asserts that deals made with my . trust fund satisfy false
 The incitation to violence is people believe the claim against me was real and settled an a manner agreed to me or agreed to by a representative acting in my interest . People believe the claims against me were real, and settled in accordance with the terms of the settlement .
 Insider knowledge on Brain Genes and awaiting markets through sham moves . Insider knowledge of the markets . The markets .
 Black Markets often traffic items not legal to traffic in but are of value to those who desire them . Black Markets are often, usually, traffic items that are not illegal to traffic . Black markets are often used to traffic illegal items but value items .
 Note that Jerome Adams *, Surgeon General, Dept Of Defense Non Combatant Military Dept of Defense Service Public Health Service * is likely in the Brain program as director and can get brain genes .
 The book title refers to this is long term activity of the Vatican/CIA/Iluminati and continuing activity is trying to hide previous activity by creating consistent in the total world genome picture . Acts of world terror and assassination also are part of the global cover-up conspiracy of 1961 .
 Berkeley declared a historical and cultural landmark in 1984 . The City of Berkeley declared it a cultural and historical landmark in 1985 .
 East Bay Food Not Bombs is often viewed as a sanctuary for Berkeley’s low income and large homeless population . Although open to all, it is often seen as an open sanctuary for those who receive meals .
 Many homeless utreach organizations, like the Suitcase Clinic, visit the park regularly .
 Squatters have surrounded my private property and trespassed as though we have common assets, are a community, etc. None of which is true, he says . "Squatters" have surrounded his private property, he writes .
 Squatting is the action of occupying an abandoned or unoccupied area of land or a building, usually residential, that the squatter does not own, rent or otherwise have lawful permission to use . Squats are squatting in an area that is not owned, rent, or otherwise
 Work goes into destroying any property I lease. From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia is a work of destruction .
 Racketeering Influenced Criminal Organizations can conceal misconduct (with a sufficiently created cartel of people operation in collusion) to act fraudulently but conceal acts of fraud with a cover layer of respectable business . The organizations can also conceal misconduct .
 A few people colluding is harder to catch and constitute organized crime . Usually one party in an illegal act is fairly easy to catch but a few colluding are harder to do than a few .
 An interest in my genome tying into CIA history, DARPA, and a long line of illegal usage of my DNA has created in interest in hiding previous acts . The original illegal DNA science will continuing rather than abandoning the original goals .
 The Central Intelligence Agency, FBI, Department of Defense and others have so long been criminally involved in secret family lines study and expploitation black operations . Behavioral and DNA research continues as illegal abuses involving my family line and genome continue . CIA and FBI assassinations program is of more interest
 Asoft warm fabric with a texture similar to sheep’s wool, used as a lining material . Verb 1: “as the sheep came on board, we grabbed their long shaggy fleeces”
 Informal obtain a great deal of money from , typically by overcharging or swindling them . “Money that authorities say he fleeced from well-to-do acquaintances” 2. “money” that authorities “fleeced” from
 ‘the sky was half blue, half fleeced with white clouds’ A fleece is a sheep’s coat . ‘a fleece’ is a fleece .
 A person’s coat can be called a fleece, too, if it comes from a sheep or goat or a yak or even if it just looks like it did . A person's coat can also be called fleece .
 Mary tricked the lamb into trusting her, then robbed him of his fleece . She turned it into a bomber jacket and a pair of boots .
 A Black Market system has been designed in which “Black Money” rights to my DNA is used in the adult entertainer industry . A Black Money’s rights are used in adult entertainment industry . The system is designed to allow the use of "Black Money" rights to
 Ed not authorized to agree to asset seizure using improper accounting for the assets taken in by an institution and not reported to the person with rights to the assets . Black Money as assets seized from a dopple of Ed not . Ed .
 Ed Donegan's appearance puts retardation services advocacy group as mice guarding the cheese . Creating the appearance of a mentally challenged man creates an unlikelihood a retardation service would trade his genes .
 A fence, also known as a receiver, mover, or moving man, is an individual who knowingly buys stolen goods in order to later resell them for profit . A fence is a fence, or a fence buyer, who knowingly purchases stolen goods .
 The fence acts as a middleman between thieves and the eventual buyers of stolen goods who may not be aware that the goods are stolen . The fence is used as a way to connect thieves with the eventual buyer .
 As a verb, the word describes the behaviour of the thief in the transaction with the fence . The word is used as a verb in the conversation with a fence .
 Fencing Operation in the RICO Architecture I Fencing has Racketeering Influence Criminal Organizations . Fencing is part of a RICO architecture in the U.S. Fencing operation in the United States .
 One the financial infrastructure is in place and it commits its first money launder operation, at least the Second Criminal Act of Criminal Racketeering has occurred . The financial infrastructure has been put in place for the operation .
 Multiple felonious steps are needed in furtherance of the Racket fraud . As if a drug manufacture operation in abandoned aircraft hanger in abandoned hanger multiple felonious . steps are need in furtherances of the fraud .
 Identity Theft must be conducted to financially switch as asset holder or liability holder such that switching between accounts can create a debit added to an account which is not in debt . The falsifications of identities in the financial management layer enable the confusion of assets and liabilities .
 B Manufacture of fraudulent liabilities such as creating child porn the liability of which will be compensated by restitution . The liability of such a fraudulent liability will be paid out by restitution.
 C Transfer of assets in the above created framework to parties not entitled to benefit from fraud and not entitled . Not entitled to the source of assets which will be used for the fraudulent pay out . Transfering of assets to parties who will not benefit from the fraud . Transferring of assets not
 The word in this context is derived from the word defence . As is the case with the word fence and its derivatives when used in its other common meanings .
 The fence originated in thieves’ slang tracing from the notion of such transactions providing a “defence” against being caught . Among criminals, the fence originated from thieves' slang .
 This process often relies on a legal business (such as a pawnshop, flea market, or street vendor) in order to “launder” the stolen goods by intermixing them with legally-obtained items of the same type . Racketeering Influences:
 The fence is able to make a profit with stolen merchandise because he pays thieves a very low price for ‘hot’ goods that cannot be easily sold on the open markets . The fence makes a profit by secretly paying thieves a low price .
 Fencing is illegal in all countries, but legally proving a violation of anti-fencing laws can be difficult . Fencing can be illegal in many countries but it's illegal in the United States, Canada and Germany .
 Defense of the act of fensing is to conduct the asset transfer at what I call Elements B and even C, B is a location I am not at, do not have scrutiny of where a forger of me will sign over my assets . C is a organziation forging my
 Element D which is the reputation damage of what occured when C pleaded me guilty to an offense I did not comit, then paid restitution I would not have agreed to, may be the final goal of the chain of events, harming my reputation in a way bringing about damate to
 In violation of law including use of fraud such as using keys to an apartment for access not permissible under the lease is trespass . Use of fraud is also a violation of the law .
 If the trespass is the basis for a criminal act on the accessed property the property had undergone Breaking and Entering, its sanctity as a property broken, even if not by force . If the trespassing was the basis of the act, it would be illegal to break into the property
 An unneeded mental retardation advocacy of me creating by my mother’s will creators enables this loot of my DNA rights by sabotaging my normal life circumstances such as metropolitan apartments . Long Con Terminology retrieved from Wikipedia .
 He is the leader of a group of children (the Artful Dodger and Charley Bates) whom he teaches to make their livings by pickpocketing and other criminal activities, in exchange for shelter . He teaches them to make a living by pickingpocketing .
 Money Laundering RICO uses its position of operating multiple accounts to switch unlawfully between them so that in the accounting shell game the accounts appear to be correct . While a Protection Racket creates a danger and then charges to protect against it, a RICO RICO creates a . danger and
 KITE any of several small graceful hawks of the family Accipitridae having long pointed wings and feeding on insects and small animals . To soar away with value or rights which do not belong to the person who is kiting them from the launch area . The State of Texas
 A Mark is some person or asset who is the “bullseye” of the operation . Mark is someone or asset targeted to be defrauded . The Mark is the target of the defraud operation .
 Stages of the con (Confindence Trick including Long Con using sets and actors) In Confessions of a Confidence Man, Edward H Smith lists the “six definite steps or stages of growth” of a confidence game .
 The victim is contacted in some way by proximity by proximity at least if not actual communication . Co-operation of a population area of organization may be gained covertly .
 The assault part of Assault and Battery in some cases BUILD-UP . The victim is entrapped and is given an opportunity to profit from a scheme .
 People are told if they join the Con they can gain from it and some proof is shown . The are now sued as Shill in a long con perhaps PAY-OFF OR CONVINCER .
 The enlistee receives a small payout as a demonstration of the scheme’s effectiveness . The enlistees are rewarded for their part in the scheme .
 PsyOps the murder of a patsy to silence him or her or an excuse to prevent people from talking to each other stops Rational Analysis which would expose the con . A conspirator puts an amount of money into the same scheme as the victim to add an appearance of legitimacy .
 In Free Masonry systems, random people create a wave of opinion which overpowers or nudges existing crow sentiment or information of events . The Office Mob is a group of random people who create an opinion that overpowers existing crow sentiments .
 This usually includes the use of an accomplice who plays the part of an uninvolved (initially skeptical) third party, who later confirms the claims made by the con[man]. The conman usually uses a third party to play the role of an initial skeptical third party .
 In some cases, predatory journals will use fictional editorial boards or use respected academics’ names without permission to lend a veneer of credibility to the journal . The scam requires assistants to manage the purchases and money exchanges .
 A curated database of predatory journals can be found at “Scholarly Open Access” Journal hijacking refers to the brandjacking of a legitimate academic journal by malicious third party .
 Consistent Quackery sets up the need for a Conservator who rob rather than protect assets . Consistency is the promotion of fraudulent or fraudulent medical practices .
 The con artist will then claim various exaggerated injuries in an attempt to collect from the victim’s insurance carrier despite having intentionally caused the accident . The victim's injuries will be exaggerated to try and collect money from the insurance carrier .
 I was hospitalized in 2009 when I said I was exposed to radiation and had radiation burns . I was hospitalized with radiation burns in 2009 . I have radiation burns and was hospitalized with radiation exposure in 2009, according to the hospital .
 Little was known or discussed about radiation weaponry on citizens of the USA including those tied to national security and I was not believed . I was told about the dangers of radiation weapons on citizens .
 Ted Gunderson a high ranking FBI agent with strong beliefs about the murder of JFK and others and JFK and attorney General anti mafia right hand man to the FBI anti mafia team was alleging he was being poisoned, while in his 80s .
 I remain under constant threat today, surviving, but with serious harassment including break-ins and theft of my computers, records, even cars by clear Government assets and sometimes using FBI, CIA, Secret Service or other agency identifications .
 The needs of that network is a string of CIA murders to protect if those elements wish to keep their criminality secret and hidden from history . The CIA needs to protect from those elements who want to hide their criminality .
 The press generally backs the policy goals of the Cabal and the U.S. Espionage agencies request for secrecy . The press is of no use so far outing the conspirators that are now in firm grip of government .
 The National Security Agency, CIA, FBI, and others are promoting a growing New World Order of liberalized post racial Commonwealth largely led by England and Feudal European Masons . The Free Mason theory as secret family of marriages wars will be eliminated .
 That's known in most encyclopedias and libraries of historical information . That's true in most of the world's history . It is known in libraries of history .
 The FOXP2 gene runs in European family lines and as ruling elites select themselves in black-registry (not visible to the public) Known Registry families silence those who either express the gene while being unwilling to remain silent . Government officials or reporters aware of the program are silenced .
 The Donegan family and Kennedy family are on the outs and Bush, Schwarzenegger, Obama Jr, and other families are “in’ and share the Neocon goal of global post racial and post liberalism Feudal backed commonwealth .
 Richard Belzer has a book Hit List detailing 50 murders or unusual deaths of witnesses tied to JFK's assassination . Belzer believes a WETDIVISION of Mafia activities has tarted me to create a justification for retaliation against me for harms I did not commit .
 Tom Donegan my brother and would be other witness to events of our family is deceased of a suspiciously arising cancer case early in his life . I remain alive but under intense harassment, I remain under intense pressure .
 Genereal Patreus on U.S. Media networks and no reporting of the available ansswers to who killed Micheal Hastings or why he was killed or you hear shrill ranting about Russian planted comspiracy theories about West European aggression against Russia . The Cab
 This shot was taken from 7th street North Clarendon courts apartment Arlington Virginia . It was taken in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 I would correct that and back and froth my correct address was modified to a false address in the read back to me. The correct address is now being sent to the correct address . I would be happy to clarify that .
 Twice I went to incarceration and psych ward commitments, almost to state penitentiary for effectively life in prison over my confronting a call girl bordello operation not me but intoned to be me . Twice I had to go to psych wards . Twice he went to prison and psych wards
 Arlington Services is run by Tom Donegan and Arlington County Services, and evicted for fighting with neighbors about it, he says . "I arrive in Texas homeless trying to get way from Arlington Services"
 John Sutter is a political commentator on MSNBC and NBC News . He contributes to NBC News and MSNBC regularly as a political analyst .
 He is also a contributor to Crooked Media contributor, and co-host of the foreign policy podcast Pod Save the World .
 Rhodes was born on November 14, 1977, in the Upper East Side neighborhood of Manhattan . Rhodes was also born in New York City .
 In July 2021, he was hired to lead international business development at Sky . Sky is a subsidiary of U.S. cable company Comcast .
 He was the youngest network news president in the history of American television . He was also the youngest news president of a network network .
 FBI asserts Ed Donegan was under Russian influences . FBI says he was influenced by Russian influence . Donegan says he is not Russian .
 Trump was not personally under investigation until May 2017, when his firing of FBI director James Comey raised suspicions of obstruction of justice, which triggered the Mueller investigation . Trump's firing of James Comey triggered the investigation .
 In 2014 or so I was informed while a mental health inmate by a black inmate that Barrack OBama Jr was running an operation out of the United States military . As he prepared to leave the U.S. Presidency he wanted to create his policies deep into the United State military as
 I believe the investigation both planted incriminating information on me who has legal viewpoints but liked Goth music . "I was an eye in hurricane of illegal acts which surrounded me, paid actors staging events I am not a part of," he says .
 'I believe the policy basis is to use appearances generated by paid actors run by the British and use that information to shake down my trust fund'
 The manufacture of records of my being pled guilty to staged acts by unwanted conservatorsators of my assets allows great political damage to me and allowed hostile conservatorship to defame my reputation and incite against me . The manufacture records of . my being . pled guilty allows . hostile . conserv
 GangStalk system is based on several architectural foundations including making sure Due Process IS short-circuited or circumvented in some way and with rights of the stalked person cripple in mechanisms to assert my right abuse of my rights . Gangstalk system aims to make sure Due
 "Harassment of living conditions forces me into among other things that which counts as organ damage," she says . Harassment of conditions forces her into among others that counts as "organ damage" "Harrassment" is considered a form of organ damage .
 The use of Rough Noise as infliction of distress of thinking causes short term cognitive injury to the brain and that can cause additional injury .
 The Defense Intelligence Agency like system of recognizing what might cause me distress and subjecting me to that stimuli is used to cripple efforts of my writing my book, etc., In fact often the acts of Stalkers are genuinely believable use of death threats and other acts that are denied by
 George Papadopoulos, codenamed “Crossfire Typhoon” by the FBI, left the Ben Carson campaign in February 2016 . He worked as a foreign policy adviser for the Carson campaign . The FBI has been investigating the allegations .
 Also in early February, he moved to London to begin working for the London Centre of International Law Practice .
 On March 6, Papadopoulos accepted an offer to work with the Trump campaign . Papadopolopoulos accepted a job offer to help the campaign in March .
 Trump told Maltese professor Joseph Mifsud about his joining the Trump campaign . Trump told the professor about joining the campaign in Malta .
 On March 21, the Trump campaign told the Washington Post that Papadopoulos was one of five foreign policy advisers for the campaign . The Trump campaign has said Papadopolopoulos was a foreign policy adviser for them .
 Mifsud traveled to Moscow in April 2016, and told Papadopoulos that Russian government officials were in possession of “thousands of emails” that could be politically damaging to Hillary Clinton, he said .
 Mifsud told the FBI in February 2017 interviews that he had no advanced knowledge of Russia having emails from the Democratic National Committee, and did not make any offers to Papadopolous Papadoprov .
 On May 6, Papadopoulos met Alexander Downer, the Australian High Commissioner to Britain, in a London bar . He told him about the Clinton emails over drinks, Downer says . Downer is the Australian ambassador to Britain .
 Downer and Papadopoulos met after WikiLeaks released hacked Democratic National Committee emails on July 22 . The Australian government on July 26 advised U.S. authorities of the encounter .
 FBI launched investigation into Crossfire Hurricane investigation July 31 . FBI says it received information that led to the investigation .
 CIA director John Brennan convened a group of officials from the CIA, NSA and FBI to investigate Russian interference . CIA director Brennan testified before a House Intelligence Committee in May 2017 .
 Brennan gave the FBI leads involving “contacts and interactions between Russian officials and U.S. persons involved in the Trump campaign” that were beyond the CIA’s mandate to pursue, he testified . Brennan said the FBI had leads but were beyond their mandate to follow .
 Black Budget Operations are running a Dopple of me who confesses to Call Girls that he is a threat to women and the community . Black budget Operations are . running a . Dopples of me . I confessed to Call girls that he was a threat . and that he
 In fact he is a peeping tom caught in the act and is willing to pay-up or be arrested, and likely agree he should not be around women .
 Bush influenced mistakes made during Reagan administration that Reagan later regretted . Reagan administration made mistakes that Reagan regretted later regretted. Reagan administration's mistakes were made during his administration .
 Other sources of funding for goals based operations is asset siezures used for things like minority causes when a corporation loses a class action suit to the DOJ . A private business may fund the activities or family members of politicians who are in State offices .
 Oil and Banking interests have closely connected political families and run private funding illegal operations which are under the same hat as people like President, VIce President, DOJ FBI, or Congresional or Courts office holders . The oil and banking interests have run private . funding illegal . operations .
 Such is Operation40, Blackwater, and many other companies based on East India Tea Company . Operation40 is based on Operation40 .
 In the case of Oil money often the oil company or defense contractor owners have their profits and global business in minds while also working in Government . Even assasinationg government officials to keep their global business goals underway .
 Most of the crimes against me and the trust fund of mother were unneccessary except for the harm done to me which was the real effect desired by the high power criminals . The crimes against her and her trust fund were unbecoming necessary, she said .
 The Secret Society or alternatively Secret Team are high power genetics eugenics grooming lines corssing world history and now covering up the global scale of grommed planted leaders by Scotish Rites and others . Adverse Impact on Victim | Benefit for the criminal the agregion of the
 Moses visits recently sold expensive, personalized Bibles to their deceased husbands . Widows pay him for the Bibles inscribed with their names . Moses is in a state of poverty and needing car repairs .
 A Long Con focuses on a single Mark, such as my trust fund and Glorian Donegan, : shaking it down in with long term preperation, resources, and complex sustaining : efforts to keep the Con running . A Long con focuses on the single Mark .
 This book Was Rumor Has it a similar story line . When my father picked out Moraga California I think he had seen much of the area before . This book was Rumor .
 Herman Melville was an American novelist, short story writer, and poet of the American Renaissance period . He was born in 1819 and died in 1891 .
 This book is about a press and a . Epsioange controlled law enforcement organization dedicated to corruption, crime, and CIA mafia work . It is about the intense and deep threat law enforcement in the United States is to the world and the USA itself .
 Evan Ban, I think surrogate mother of biological half twins Edward Paul Donegan and Barrack Obama Jr. is the mother of the half-twin . Evan Ban: "I think she is a surrogate mother for the president"
 At the height of the Cold War in the 1950s, law enforcement and intelligence leaders like J Edgar Hoover at the F.B.I. and Allen Dulles at the C.LA. aggressively recruited onetime Nazis of all ranks as secret, anti-Soviet "assets"
 Kathleen Agnes Cavendish was an American socialite . She was the sister of JFK Kennedy . She is the daughter of the late President Kennedy .
 Robert Sargent Shriver III, Maria Owings Shriver, Timothy Perry and Timothy Perry Shriver . Mark Kennedy Shriver and Mark Kennedy . Anthony Paul Kennedy . .
 Arnold Schwarzenegger's father was the local chief of police . A daughter in that family seems to carry FOXP2 and seems tied to Berlin Austrian Olymics and Kutshscheras of 1936 and 1938 .
 The system uses my DNA to pay for sex workers and sex workers to detect alleged child porn interests of mine, I do not have, he says . "The system uses law enforcement in conjunction with sex workers" to create phony case and record against me," he writes .
 I have researched this to MKULTRA and Atomic Testing and abuse of my family line for DNA reasons. I'm not sure if this is true, but I'm sure it's a case of abuse from my family . I'm a member of my own family line .
 I try to enforce my rights in and defend my and my mother’s genome Boeing B-29 Superfortress iad . My father likely flew as a P-51 recon pilot or perhaps as early camera unit target locator and bomb damage assessment .
 The B-29 was also the world’s heaviest production plane because of increases in i range, bomb load and defensive requirements . I 1 was the world's heaviest aircraft .
 He left active duty in 1946 with the rank of lieutenant colonel and with a Legion of Merit . Lovett declined but recommended McNamara for the Truman administration; Lovett .
 Robert McNamara was the United States’ longest-serving Secretary of Defence . He was one of the few members of the Kennedy Administration to work and socialize with Kennedy . McNamara became close to Attorney General ; Robert F Kennedy .
 U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara with . United States Air Force Chief of Staff . General Curtis LeMay at The Pentagon on April 10, 1963 .
 During World War II, i McNamara served under LeMay’s command as a Statistician for the United States ‘ Army Air Forces . During World . WWII, i. McNamara was a Statistian under the command of the Army Air Force .
 On March 28, 1961, McNamara guided McNamara in the reorientation of the defense program . I ; Initially, the basic policies outlined by President Kennedy in a message to Congress were outlined by Kennedy .
 Nowhere was the assassination of Kennedy more acutely felt than in his ancestral homeland of Ireland . The assassination of JFK was felt acutely felt in Ireland .
 There should be self-policing in the Vatican, Windsors, Israel, FBI DOJ, and elsewhere that panic moves were made, and now the nebula of WWII allies should remain strong .
 The a of England has a special love for Emmerald diamonds and wants them . President attends the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation economic summit in Honolulu .
 President Obama pardons two turkeys, “Liberty” and “Peace” during the National Thanksgiving Turkey Presentation . November 28 President Obama hosts a White House summit for leaders of the European Union to discuss the European sovereign debt crisis .
 The Boeing B-29 Superfortress served as the basis for the late-World War 2 F-13 long-range reconnaissance conversion model . The B-13 is a long-distance reconnaissance conversion to the F-14 .
 It is alleged that, in addition to having been sexually abused, they saw witches fly, traveled in a hot-air balloon, and were taken through tunnels . It was alleged that they saw witch witches fly and traveled in hot air balloon .
 He had also been seen reading a Russian publication, Krokodil, in the cafeteria .
 His work has had a considerable influence on mathematics, logic, set theory, linguistics, artificial intelligence, cognitive science, computer science and analytic philosophy . He has also influenced philosophy of mathematics, philosophy of language, epistemology and metaphysics .
 Russell met Barry Fox (later Barry Stevens) on a tour through the United States in 1927 . Russell met Fox, who became a well-known Gestalt therapist and writer in later years .
 Garrison says since he first got a tip shortly after JFK that Lee Harvey Oswald and David Ferrie had been associated together in the Civil Air Patrol, he has been the victim of a slander campaign . Garrison says he first ordered his DA’s staff to begin its own investigation, and
 The concept of the screenplay by Ted Griffin is that Sarah Huttinger, (Jennifer Aniston) learns that her mother and grandmother may be the inspiration for the 1963 novel The Graduate by Charles Webb . The film is directed by Rob Reiner .
 Much of the stalking and life sabotage I have experienced has centered on harassing my positive attributes . I have been stalked by people who try to provoke negative cognitive attributes by picking fights .
 The group of tourists in a remote Forrest now realizes that the vines around a pyramid are predatory . The RUINS is a 2008 SUPERNATURAL HORROR FILM .
 The Church Committee was a United States Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities . Operation Mockingbird was a systematic propaganda campaign with domestic and foreign journalists operating as CIA assets and dozens of United States news organizations providing cover for CIA activity .
 By the early years of the 1970s, a series of troubling revelations had appeared in the i press concerning intelligence activities .
 Windsor Secret Princedoms] and covert attempts to subvert foreign governments were reported for the first time . The Windsor Princes were reported to have been involved in subverting foreign governments . This was the first attempt at subverting governments .
 Many had been longtime members of the Nazi party and the Gestapo . Many had conducted experiments on humans at concentration camps and commited other war crimes . Many of the Nazis had done experiments on human bodies .
 The scientists s ended wi in ‘ihe United States military industrial compley, worked for the CIA, NASA & more . The scientists ended up working for the U.S. military .
 One of ; tc thr tie ’ le 1at continued in America was mind control... ki NOVEMBER 19, 2012 .
 Donald Barr held experimantal monkey in the White House November 22 1961 and likely again somewhere in November 22 1963, father of William Barr, both CIA Agents who conducted the assassinations programs and destroyed the Donald Barr records .
 Leo Ryan investigated these activities as well such as MKULTRA at Folsom Prison and Jonestown Guyanna, CIA research locations . His maternal grandfather was Edward Donegan Jr .
 My father was part of the “first nuclear wing of the Air Force (at one time the Army Air Corps which he had joined and later became the . Air Force’s first nuclear wing . The first Atomic Bomb was built and tested at Lawrence Livermore Labs .
 Many families including Shrivers and Obamas share my DNA, now a CIA dirty secret . I was bor at Manhattan Beach Los Angles under the Manhattan Project ongoing testing, in 1961 .
 Senator Sheppard helped lead the fight for military reparedness before the attack on Pearl Harbor . Sheppard led the fight against the Japanese invasion of the U.S.
 As the » Army Air Corps became the Army Air Forces, facilities were completed sufficiently to allow the first class of 22 aviation mechanics to enter training that October; the a class graduated 23 February 1942 . 7 oe TWA Pilot Barry Seal was probably tied to my father’s age
 An Illuminati story unfolded as this. oe § 4 Ge ia) PN) ‘Glorian Donegn Born Dec 13 Edward Donegan Feb20 Nov18 1961 . I believe this an international for profit racket of multiple benefits to the racketeers . Some of the goals
 The Illuminati have a cyphertext they use, religious prophecy in which they are “Galactic Aliens” in bright shining stars overlookingn Earth, and managing Earth’s affairs for world prosperity . The Illuminati use this cypher text to communicate with their religious prophecy .
 Breaking the Cypher Text, and the CIA Diagraph Illuminati Divinci Codes of February 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 and ties to Obama are the central story of this book .
 Wernher Von Braun (partially hidden), NASA Deputy Administrator Hugh L Dryden, and military aide to the President Chester V Clinton . Clinton . Dryden and Von Braun .
 Kenny O’ Donnell was born in Worcester, Massachusetts, and raised in Boston, Massachusetts . Kenny O' Donnell is a multi-decade veteran musician .
 O'Donnell arranged President Kennedy’s trip to Dallas in November 1963 . O’Donnell was 1 in a car just behind the president's limousine when Kennedy was assassinated .
 I believe this is Obama’s birth as well as my own . I further research and speculate that 2 years after Nov 18 1961 JFK is assassinated because he will not comply with the Illuminati plot and through my life a protection racket built around racial assault of me .
 The controlling motivation for the Judge Roll murder was that family genome databases could detect usage of various family lines from around the world . Without co-operation which could hide things like FOXP2 genetics affects and family registries the CIA sleeper agents would be detected, and further, asset seizures could
 Those who are guilty run the FBI and are running under Cover Story of Law, the CIA Legend is they are DOJ FBI Law Enforcement . In reality they are CIA backed criminals trying to abuse state power to cover up the Espionage misdeeds that continue . Coverup method is plausible den
 The idea of the USAID Plan was to use the Peace Corps through Stanley Anne Dunham to overthrow the Indonesia Government and prevent the Peoples Republic of China from controlling Polynesia, Indonesia, Korea, and Vietnam . uharto was an Indonesian military leader and politician .
 Espionage agencies such as the CIA and Secret Service created Barack Obama Jr to infiltrate Indonesia politics during the missile crisis of the Pacific . JFK nixing some of the plans for MKULTRA plans was assassinated .
 JFK assassination kept MKULTRA going for a while, but progress in genetics and tracing of FOXP2 now has created a Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Human Brain Program, and espionage agency .
 You will see me work from this table at several upcoming points in the book . The table will be used to help with some of the book's main points .
 All of this leads in the destroyed files of the CIA and MKULTRA, racial genetics, racial testing, involuntary guinea pigs of the . CIA and Illuminati, and family databases and . family databases . Race and IQ under the law, race and IQ and Autism in ongoing Ilul
 Only a select few Connecticut residents can use the digits 042 . Because of that, his SSN begins with the digits "042," it is reserved for Connecticut residents .
 Trinity marks its beginning on December 3, 1961 Trinity United Church of Christ is a predominantly A fricanAmerican church with more than 8,500 members . Unidentified man with a research monkey in an unidentified room in the White House .
 At 0 months FEb 1961 Barack Obama Sr Weds 3 mos pregant CIA Agent Madelyn Dunham, or he is fertilized on FEb 20 and 9 months later born .
 Study: Twins do a lot of testing . Findings: Twins are very good at testing . Twins are good at socializing and socializing . Twins have a good relationship with each other, study finds .
 Snow Mountain Ed and Gang banger both hit Skid row . Mountain Corpus Christi, Texas, leaves. Gang bangers leave. Mountain Christi .
 Edward Paul Donegan can not break away from MKULTRA CIA Gangstalk, brain study, DNA animal husbandry, PsyOps, retardation firms he wants nothing to do with . No opportunity zone for Ed who remains in useless Corpus Christi opportunity Gang Bangers Bird Dogging
 The cops tell me NOTHING is going on and no perps are in any area and no allegation exists against me or anyone else . When the COpl or DOpl say to a domina “guess what ED DID” the domina will punish the cop,
 Rome Statute Violations and PCR Amplication and Manufacture of Reproductive Biology . An Ovum or Sperm of a person can be created now be it Ovum Spermatozoa, etc., Taken to the black market, such reproductivity is for sale for �
 Goth merged Western society even Eastern Europe, with Europe as white, and this was good for Europe, and also the course of my life of being assaulted by blacks had led me to white supremacy . He was pretentiosly manufacturing a show that he and I were ‘family�
 That is not me and that is a Doppelganger long con set, not where I live. That is Tx not me, not me . That is . not me. Not me . Not me and not me."
 The father King George V was King Edward VII of Wales who had the FOXP2 Syndrome . Edward VII had the same syndrome as his father .
 While ALbert younger brother of Edward held the throne as King George VI he was somewhat hidden from diplomatic field work . Edward of Wales Duke of Wales was more presentable in less controlled circumstances .
 On 9 November 1901, George V was created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester . He was created as Prince of the Wales and Prince of Chester in 1901 . George V also became the Duke of Wales in 1903 .
 I am heart-broken and overwhelmed with grief but God will help me in my responsibilities and darling May will be my comfort as she has always been. "I am heartbroken," she said .
 "May God give me strength and guidance in the heavy task which has fallen on me," she said .
 George objected to the anti-Catholic wording of the Accession Declaration that he would be required to make at the opening of his first parliament . George was forced to make the statement at the start of his parliament .
 He made it known that he would refuse to open parliament unless it was changed . He said he would not open parliament again unless it had been changed .
 Accession Declaration Act 1910 shortened the declaration and removed the most offensive phrases . Accession declaration Act 1910 was shortened the Declaration Act and removed some of the phrases .
 Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife Sophie are shot to death by a Bosnian Serb nationalist during an official visit to the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo on June 28, 1914 .
 The killings sparked a chain of events that led to the outbreak of World War I by early August . The killings were the first to lead to the start of the conflict in Germany and France .
 On June 28, 1919, five years to the day after Franz Ferdinand’s death, Germany and the Allied Powers signed the Treaty of Versailles . In surveying Wikipedia it seemed to match the normal polarized Europe .
 England to the West was trying to keep Serbia and Archduke Franz Ferdinand was their guy . Ferdinand was the man who helped keep Serbia from becoming Serbia . Ferdinand died at the age of 92 in 1903 .
 On 4 August 1914, the King wrote in his diary, “I held a council at 10.45 to declare war with Germany.” The King declared war against Germany in August 1914 .
 From 1914 to 1918, Britain and its allies were at war with the Central Powers, led by the German Empire . From 1914-191919, the British Empire was one of the most powerful powers in the world .
 The German Kaiser Wilhelm II was the King’s first cousin . For the British public, he came to symbolise all the horrors of the war . The King's first cousin was his first cousin.
 The King and his children bore the German titles Prince and Princess of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha and Duke and Duchess of Saxony . The King’s paternal grandfather was Prince Albert of . Saxony, the King's paternal grandfather, Prince Albert .
 George V (George Frederick Ermest Albert; 3 June 1865 20 January 1936) was King of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions, and Emperor of India, from 6 May 1910 until his death in 1936 . In the “Windsor” Royals ran a defective
 Those with Minimal Brain Dysfunction often have lower academic outcomes, etc., and are most likely to live on the creative side rather than button down collar lives . It is always good to play things close to the tree trunk not to far out on the limb .
 Prince John was youngest brother of Edward Wales and Edward of York . Albert of York was the fifth son and youngest of the six children of King George V and Queen Mary . Prince John and Albert were the youngest of six children .
 King Edward VIII probably had FOXP2 Syndrome . King George VI probably had similar syndrome . King of Wales later King Edward of Wales .
 Tbe Barrons need British Imperialism to open the door for Tea Company activities in India, oil company activities, banking, and other NWO pursuits under the flag Great Britain . Murder of Geroge V also hidden from the public .
 Propganda claims of King Edward VIII being in love with a commoner and having affairs was likely propaganda . Edward VIII's marriage to commoner was likely to be an affair .
 Edward shared a widely held racial prejudice against foreigners and many of the Empire’s subjects, believing that whites were inherently superior . Though widely travelled, Edward believed whites were superior to foreigners .
 In 1919, Edward agreed to be president of the organising committee for the proposed British Empire Exhibition at Wembley Park, Middlesex . In 1919 he agreed to organise the exhibition for the first time in his life .
 He wished the Exhibition to include ‘a great national sports ground’ and so played a part in the creation of Wembley Stadium . Wembley Stadium was the first Wembley Stadium to be built in the 1930s .
 If fact Edward VIII was morally a louse by financial operations standards and he loved Fasicisst among others . If fact, he was a morally a moral louse .
 Edward VIII encouraged and participated likely with Albert may out of wedlock children around the world . Edward VIII coping on the one hand with the genetic quirk in ALbert and his father Geroge V, the shrinking Great Britain, and the need for outside blood and out .
 Bertrand Edward Dawson, 1st Viscount Dawson of Penn, GCVO KCB KCMG PC FRCP was a physician to the British Royal Family . He was President of the Royal College of Physicians from 1931 to 1937 .
 He appears a close ally of Edward VIII and may have helped asssinaste Geroge V and others in a palace intriuge set of moves . His own family was opposign but Edward VIII embraced as Prince Edward of Wales .
 For the British Royal Family they were fighting the anti monarchism of Socialist Germany . The Royal Family were fighting against the anti-monarchism of the German monarchy .
 A play be Prince Edward is allow Hitlers’ rise into a Fuedal Fascist Rule which would create a crown for Edwards VIII in Britain, posibly, or some other scenario . Edward VIII and the Royals generaly didi not want to publicly struggle for help with u
 The Royal were wedding in Mary Tek and Walis Simpson and Royals from other royal families to strengthing the Commonwealth gene pool . The wedding was in honour of the Queen and the Commonwealth .
 Newspapers were backing them because it was the big businesses who need a Great Brittian to be the ogvoernming force of international trade . Outgoing the royals was not in their business interest, the newspapers said .
 Catherine Black was born in 1878 in Ramelton, County Donegal in Ardeen House on the outskirts of the town . The Murder of King George V, 1936 YouTube channel They Got Away With Murder (ee Black)
 County Donegal in the Republic or Free Ireland part of Ulster was the home of the once-mighty Clann Dalaigh . Its best-known branch was the Clann O Domhnaill, better known in English as the O’Donnell dynasty .
 Until around 1600, the O’Donnells were one of Ireland’s richest and most powerful native Irish ruling families . The O'Donnells are now one of the country's richest native Irish families .
 Only the Ui Néill (known in English as the O’ Neill Clan) of modern County Tyrone was more powerful . Within Ulster, only the O' Neill clan was the most powerful in Ulster .
 The O'Donnells were Ulster’s second most powerful clan or rulingfamily from the early 13th century through to the start of the 17th century . The O’Donnells are the most powerful family in Ulster from the 12th century to the early 16th century
 Private nurse of King George V Black was working as a private nurse in Royal London Hospital when the outbreak of World War I was declared . Black was the private nurse of the King at the time .
 Hospital where she treated soldiers suffering from shell shock . Hospital in St Omer where she was treated soldiers .
 Black was sent as a replacement for a nurse killed at a casualty clearing station at Poperinghe, Belgium, and subsequently went on to serve at the 41st Stationary Hospital at Sailly-Lorette, nursing soldiers with self-inflicted wounds .
 General Hospital in Rouen and various other clearing stations until the end of the war . General Hospital was used as a clearing station in the French capital .
 Sister Black was the private nurse of King George V from 1928 until his death in 1936 . She was a private nurse from 1928 to 1936 .
 She began her service in late 1928 following a serious bout of illness for the King . The Queen was forced to give up her job in 1928 .
 Black was made permanent in 1930; she was given her own chambers within Buckingham Palace . Black was also made permanent at the end of the 1930s .
 Black objected to the actions of the King’s doctor Lord Dawson of Penn in administering a lethal combination of morphine and cocaine to hasten his death . The King's doctor used the combination of the drugs and morphine . Black objected .
 In reflecting on the experiences of nurses in the war, Black recounted “you went into young and light-hearted.” She recounted ‘you had to be very careful and very careful’
 Rockefeller free Mason Little Rock free mason Pike / Mason are and the genome and divinci codes . This book Cabal Structure and Social Control is published by Cabal .
 George W. Bush gave his NWO speech in about 1983 and PCR genetics just came onto the shelf of medicine . PCR genetics is a form of genetics .
 The United States Military and missle command and Navy Seals and Air force were involved . The U.S. military was involved in the shooting .
 It was also in that set of blog entries of alien experimentation on her that ‘clones’ who were clones of others would drop like house flies . “Clones” would drop ‘like house flies,” she wrote .
 At least one has the name Jean who may have had knowledge of some experiments . Jean may have known some of the experiments .
 Certain dates in the chronology like they are tied to the basic dates of February 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 . Nearness to those dates is hard to miss but it still likes less than random dates of events .
 Kirk Lane and Jay Campbell are named as the suspected killers of Kevin and Don . The Mena Connection’s "Mena Connection" is based on the murders of Don and Kevin Mena .
 The protests began weeks ago when it became apparent that Holland was considering his “best friend, Kirk” for the job . Holland's "best friend" was considered to be the next president .
 Holland had said he was not going to choose Lane over Christmas break . He did so over Christmas over Christmas . Holland said he would not choose Lane .
 Some counsel members called for a vote to override Holland’s choice . In an unusual procedure, some counsel members call for an override . The vote is a rare move in the Senate .
 On the evening of January 10, there was a standing-room-only crowd . Many spoke passionately about not wanting Lane as police chief . Lane is the current chief of the Fort Worth Police Department .
 Councilmen met in private to vote with the outcome of 5 to oust Lane and 4 to keep him . The outcome fell short of the 2/3 required number to outs Lane . Lane was ousted from the council .
 Lane declared a great victory, but it's hard to see how great it was when more than half the council present wanted him gone . Lane declared it a victory but it was a defeat for the council majority .
 During interviews before the council meeting, the subject of his being a suspect in the murders always came up . The council meeting was the first time he was interviewed by police .
 Lane brings up the defamation law suit he and Campbell filed against the “Obstruction of Justice” documentary producer, Pat Matrisciana . Lane and Campbell also filed a defamation lawsuit against the documentary's producer .
 12 jurors agreed with him that he was defamed . He says that the lawsuit served to restore his credibility .
 The trial judge did not not allow the jury to hear all of the evidence that pointed to Campbell and Lane as the killers . One reason was because the jury was not allowed to hear the evidence . The trial was over two weeks long .
 The appellate court felt that the jurors should have reached a different verdict, so it reversed the verdict . The court said that the verdict should have been overturned .
 No higher authority can take away the 8th Circuit Court findings, so it’1l be on his shoulders as long as we continue to publish the appellate court’s opinion . The appellate court's opinion will continue to be published .
 The Benton Courier reported that the FBI agent in charge of the murder investigation ' testified in the defamation trial that she was “allowed to question Lane and Campbell, ' but this is an error .
 Lane and Campbell have never been questioned or interviewed by anyone . Neither Lane nor Campbell have ever been interviewed or interviewed .
 If he wants to lift the burden, he can take an out-of-state polygraph test . He can answer up to 10 simple questions about the night the boys were murdered . The boys were killed in 2012 .
 The plane was loaded with weapons to be delivered to the Nicaraguan freedom-fighters . The weapons were being supported hrough CIA covert operations at the behest of President Ronald eagan .
 This incident broke one of the ugliest foreign policy Secrets in U.S. history, the Iran-Contra scandal . This incident is one of America's worst foreign policy secrets .
 The inner city of Los Angeles, California, was targeted for raising funds by selling crack cocaine . Police say the inner city was targeted by crack cocaine dealers .
 Barry Seal was given protection by Governor ' Bill Clinton to continue his drug-smuggling, gun-running, money laundering operation . Seal now as a DEA informant and CIA contract pilot, also set up by Bush . Seal is now an undercover DEA informant .
 Black Operations also called Black Budget Special Access Programs are Executive Branch daliances not justified to Congress or the public . They are funded by business operations ROI activities of the Executive, illegal, and denied of exposed .
 The crimes of Reagan, Bush, and Clinton, including reckless disregard for human life, are well documented, indisputable, and certainly not justifiable as evidenced by the extreme efforts of these presidents to keep their involvement secret .
 Even though the ‘liberal and conservative mainstream medics have managed to quieten an otherwise ‘ outraged public with lies,’ the public will not exclude their crimes, ‘as they had hoped’
 Federal authorities, DEA, FBI, and CIA were watching Barry Seal as he set up his drug smuggling operation in Mena, Arkansas . Seal was arrested in 1977 and charged with drug possession in Arkansas .
 Barry Seal makes deal with DEA and CIA and increases his smuggling operations at Mena . Some believe he was already a DEA informant . The ‘Sandinistas’ were declared the ruling party in Nicaragua .
 The Arkansas IRS assess Barry Seal’s income taxes at $29,487,718.00 for smuggling 30,000 kilos of cocaine into Mena from 1981 to 1983 . Seal says nothing of 1984 to 1986 after which he acquired his two C-123 Air America cargo planes
 Barry SEAL TWA PILOT was assassinated just before he was supposed to testify at the trial of Colombian drug lords Pablo Escobar and Jorge Ochoa of the Medellin Cartel . James Donegan knew and may have been in a lawsuit regarding aging .
 After Seal’s murder, the CIA continued operations at the Middle East North Africa Rockefeller oil money airfield . The CIA continued to operate at the airfield after Seal's murder .
 Eugene Hasenfus was shot down by a Nicaraguan Sandinista missile in 1986 . He was flying one of Seal’s C-123k military cargo planes carrying weapons to the Contras .
 This broke the Iran-Contra scandal, yet the operations at Mena continued . Kevin Ives and Don Henry stumbled on a drug drop in rural Saline County, Arkansas .
 “The Crimes of Mena” by Sally Denton and Roger Morris was published . The 3-part-series, ‘The Dark Alliance’ by Gary Webb was published. The Dark Alliance was published in 1997 .
 D-E-W, Dirty Bombs, Poisons other than radiological, interference with medical care for existing disease or use of biological diseases as warfare . Poisons such as radiological are not allowed to be used in warfare .
 Psychological harassment to keep people preoccupied with introduced problems and physical fights on 24 hour basis . Psychological harassment will be kept in place 24 hours a day on 24-hour basis .
 Subversion of the Courts and other government entities by finding recruits or planting Placed Individuals, Agents in Place of Espionage Guerrillas Warfare . Warfare in violation of the Constitutional Charter of the . Courts .
 Black budgets from illegal and offshore operations such as Epstein and others monetizing criminal activity . Black budgets come from illegal or offshore operations like Epstein .
 ihink SPT unit is the place to go. He slept well after releasing so much of his nis. He says he slept well .
 It is with deep sadness we announce the death of retired officer Jenny ' Moore . Moore passed away on August 13, 2018 .
 Jenny served ' the community of Tracy from 1993 until her retirement in 2004 . Jenny served as a member of the Tracy community from 1993 to 2004 .
 Jenny held the rank of Corporal, served in the then named Street Crime Unit as a narcotics investigator and worked in the Tracy Unified School District as a DARE officer . Jenny also worked in Tracy Unified .
 As a Field Training Officer, Jenny taught new officers how to police in Tracy . She gave them an appreciation of what it meant to grow up in a town and later serve the same community . Jenny is now a field training officer .
 Her mother, Jane Moore of ' California, survives her; her . Father Bob Moore of Texas; her sisters Robin and Kelli, ; and brother Bobby, all of California, all survive her .
 Moore was the YouTube : , persona known as “Task : , Force” a whistleblower, an investigative journalist and a former police officer . Moore was known as Task: , Force, a whistleblower .
 The person that originally created this page has removed the 1 photo and blindly transferred maintenance of it . The person who originally created it has removed one photo .
 A Secret Special Access Program protected by the Wet Division is using long term twins studies on many figures also being groomed for media and political roles . This is tied to England and the Special Relationship between the CIA and DARPA and England and also Saudi Arabia .
 In a government of laws, existence of the government will be imperiled if it fails to observe the law scrupulously . The government of law is imperiled by the failure of it to observe it, says David Cameron .
 If he government becomes a lawbreaker, it breeds contempt for law, he says . It invites every man to become a law unto himself; it invites anarchy, he adds .
 To declare that in the administration of the criminal law the end justifies the means would bring terrible retribution . The government may commit crimes in order to secure the conviction of a private riminal, he says .
 Several acquisitions were ultimately merged into Radio-Keith: Orpheum Studios . Hollywood studios were acquired by Radio Keith in the 1960s .
 Bethlehem Steel acquired San Francisco shipyard Union Iron Works in 1905 . Shipbuilding division was created in 1905 by Bethlehem Steel Corporation of Bethlehem .
 Bethlehem Shipbuilding Corporation, Limited, was incorporated in 1917 . In 1917 it was incorporated as Bethlehem Ship Building Corporation . Bethlehem shipbuilding was the largest shipbuilding company in the world .
 The division’s headquarters were moved to Quincy, Massachusetts, after acquiring the Fore River Shipyard in 1913 . The division's headquarters are now located in Quincy .
 In 1964, the now-corporate headquarters moved to Sparrows Point, Maryland, southeast of Baltimore, Maryland . The shipyard had been acquired in 1916 by the company .
 Quincy / Fore River yard was sold to General Dynamics Corporation in the mid-1960s, and closed in 1986 . The Quincy yard sold in the 1960s .
 The Alameda Works Shipyard in California was closed by Bethlehem Steel in the early 1970s . The San Francisco facility was sold to British Aerospace in the mid-1990s and survives today as BAE Systems San Francisco Ship Repair .
 On May 1, 1861, the company’s title was changed again, this time to Bethlehem , Iron Company . The Bethlehem Iron Company was changed to Bethlehem, Iron Company, in 1861 . The company's title changed again in 1861, and the company's name was changed on May
 Robert Whitehead developed the first effective self-propelled naval torpedo in 1866 . The design was developed by Giovanni Luppis of the Austro-Hungarian Navy in Fiume .
 Robert Whitehead was an English engineer who was most famous . In the early 1900s Samuel Broadbent led an initiative to diversify the company . He died in 1905 .
 During World War I and World War II, Bethlehem Steel was a major supplier of . aliber guns for the Navy . Company, which included the Delaware, Lackawanna and Western Railroad as well as extensive coal holdings, was a . major supplier . Company .
 Bridge and built for Yacimientos Petroliferos Fiscales , a new oil refinery in La ; Plata City, Argentina, which was the tenth-largest in the world, was the world's tenth- largest . Bridge was built for the oil refinery . Bridge
 Case theory is ‘ distinguished from jurisprudence as general theory of law not . I have struggled why a disgusting reproductive slander is being forced on me destroying me . The case theory is 'distinctly distinguished from jurid from cerematism as general
 My DNA was misused in secretive research related to the Manhattan Project and has a history, if found out, jeopardized the lives of the lives and the fortunes of the nations elites . If found out it jeopardizes the lives . of the . lives and . the fortunes the . nations
 General Suharto and the CIA were involved in the bloody overthrow of President Sukarno . The CIA was behind the overthrow of Sukarna . General Suarto was the prime minister of Indonesia's first government .
 East African students to the United States to attend various colleges merely “aided” Ae] 0 eC aNeaey a eleeleristeys) according to a September 12, 1960, i; Reuters report .
 This book will document Joseph Kennedy Sr marriages and ties to England and the likelihood his own family is genetically tied to Windsors and the FOXP2 and is Royal Family sympathizing in war efforts as are the Saudis whose royal family King Saud is connected .
 Louise Norton Langdon Little was born in La Digue, Saint Andrew Parish, Grenada i to Ella Langdon . Z Louise Little retrieved from Wikipedia .
 Garveyism centers on the unification and empowerment of African-descended men, atone @)esbealtases for the CIA, not only in Kenya but in all of Africa .
 I am transmitting herewith a communication which has come to my attention from the Panama Canal, Washington office, relative to the activities of Marcus Garvey . The Panama Canal's Panama Canal office is located in Panama, Panama .
 While in Omaha, she became the secretary and “branch ; reporter” of the UNIA’s local chapter, sending news of local UNIA activities, led by ‘ Earl, to Negro World . They inculcated self-reliance and black pride
 Because of Ku Klux Klan threats, Earl's UNIA activities were said to be “spreading I trouble” The family relocated in 1926 to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and shortly ; thereafter to Lansing, Michigan .
 Ernest Hemingway Russian Proverb from Russian Proverbs and Sayings IIWJIA B MEIKE HE YTAMILb .
 The Manchurian Candidate is a 1962 American neo-noir, psychological political thriller about the Cold War and sleeper agents . The film is set in New York City, New York .
 James Paul Donegan always felt for the little guy against abusive power . My guess on the psychology of my parents on this knowing what I know and knowing them continually through their entire lives .
 He would have liked the Irish Catholic Kennedy family as he did his own priest Uncle we all used to spend time with at my uncle Harold’s Cape Cod beach property . Uncle Harold's Cape Cod property .
 This video tells of my mother's poverty very mch like his own and his fellow Irishmen’s poverty . This video was posted on YouTube . It is the first Irishman to post a video of his own .
 The faster King Edward VIII could distance himself from his out of wedlock children, from Nazi officials nieces, the better chance of him staying King . The faster he gets away with his out-of-wedlock children is the faster .
 Through the support of Identity Theft, the harassment of my identity such as getting a Drivers License fee paid allowed others in my identity to benefit under my mother's trust fund for me . The person with my identity could therefore also victimize others such as minorities thus use my mother’s
 The United States Department of Defence has been working on a wearable sensor that would detect invisible radio frequencies amid reports that a microwave weapon might be causing a mysterious illness in US personnel .
 The mysterious illness, which was named the “Havana syndrome”, causes symptoms like debilitating headache . The cause of the illness remains under investigation . DoD appeared to be taking it seriously by funding research into a wearable sensor .
 Barack Obama worked as Editor at Business Internation Corporation, Business International Corporation, a known CIA front company . Bush vice-presidency starting Ricky Prado CIA work .
 Mboya received a $100,000 grant for the airlift from the Kennedy Foundation after he turned down the same offer from the United States State Department . The State Department was concerned direct U.S. assistance would look suspicious to pro-Communist Kenyan politicians .
 This dopple of me is part of street criminal which have surrounded me, labeled me by their presence around me and around whatever apartment I rent . These street criminals often both commit crimes while in my identity and proximity or with my property out of me control . They then destroy the apartment
 Ed Donegna was hospitalized in North Carolina with radiation burns 2009 but told it was in his imagination, not real . Ed donegna: "I'm not sure what happened, but I'm sure it was real"
 A person not me and not known to me on Rudy2s Blog describes it this way . A person who is not me describes it as "Rudy2's Blog"
 "I had a bad accident in 2011 Compton that damaged my spinal cord. So I’ve been on pain meds forever and had to have surgery," he says .
 Nonie Lee Chaffin, 87, was a close friend of Glorian Donegan and Ed Donegan . Rolling Hills Rancho Palos, California, was her closest friend and close friend .
 Nona is wife of a TWA pilot friend of James Paul Donegan as TWA pilots living in Manhattan Beach in 1961 and follow up atomic testing over time . Mostly Manhattan Beach area but some connections to Seatle Washington Washington .
 Edward Donegan worked at Wells Fargo and during a normal small meth drug by I was “introduced to” (the fbi term for a Confidential Informant coming into a person’s vicinity and contact) a strange creepy child porn type psycho who I kicked of
 My mother and I saw that together, we talked a lot about War War II and this event afterward and during our lives. We talked about it a lot of times, and it was a very important part of our lives, our lives .
 A genome tax from rich to poor is how this is sold, the “Tax” being for unethically photographing the poor, or the non white, which I am not doing . A person near me but out of frame of the ominsicent camera is photographing
 In putting-out, work is . contracted by a central agent to subcontractors who complete the work in off-site facilities, either in . their own homes or in workshops with multiple craftsmen .
 Black Budgets and Slush Funds out of FBI and other claims about White Supremacism illegal acts create cell funding for Cartel interests . The cash flow out of assets seizures from an alt right person like myself Ed Donegan are fraudulent use of Espionage cells .
 A Nazi at 8 years old “makes it into the United States” Indoctrination, theaters, the Hitler Youth OSS TO CIA, BLACK BUDGETS, OPERATION PAPERCLIP, & AND AND HIDDEN IDENTITIES OF BASTARD
 In espionage terms slush funds are created of “pad money” corrupt police shake down criminals and use for personal asset gains of the Law Enforcement including funding their own Law Enforcement Intelligence Unit looking for fake Official Bikini Inspectors .
 Researchers in the United States have performed thousands of human radiation experiments to determine the effects of atomic radiation and radioactive contamination on the human body . People who were poor, sick, or powerless were subject to the experiments .
 The system of funding cells o mercenary based espionage units which can seize assets and use in political or politically motivated acts is one which can be compared to Southern slavery in which assets, labor production, even children of slaves were claimed as property .
 The true goal in my situation is a combined suppression of Life, Liberty, and Property so effective the shreds of my life left will not give any clues to my native intelligence, education level, or social capabilities . "Hostile roughians simply harass being out of the home by bully
 CIA plans to first test in Obama mixing of genome from blacks and whites . CIA also testing Sydney Gottlieb MKULTRA program use of Windsor DNA with the FOXP2 speech and written language impediment of stuttering, etc., and the Kings Daughters Hospital of Norfolk Virginia.
 First using 1920s illegitimate children of King Edward VIII in the U.S. to mix with Malcom X and create the Manchurian Candidate . Then testing world designer baby programs to bring up world IQ while also denying world IQ variance exists is the long term deep state goal .
 It is this organized crime Deep State of which I and others have been a victim . IGE including vigilatism behind | under ye yee faking faking Iama .
 The CIA operation of Gottlieb and others using my genome in MKULTRA is long running, but fake papwers as to the rights of my genome to harmed communities” are being faked, he says .
 Bush White House atty destroyed MKULTRA files Congress requested . Bush atty who destroyed the files was Bush's atty, who destroyed them .
 Barr studied mathematics and anthropology at Columbia . Barr served with the Office of Strategic Services in Washington and Europe . Barr also served in the Army and served in Europe .
 Inside the Griffith at a Foucault Pendulum like exhibit I was studying the science, math, concepts, and Los Griffith Aerospace history of it all and teenage buttock .
 The first true awareness of self I have or remmber as having was my father in Pennsylvania explaing the Foucult pendulum swing and how it was the Earth in Space and our movements, inertia, etc., as the Earth moved .
 "I began to wonder who I was in all of this and heard myself thinking and had one of those 'I think therefore I am'" moments . I began to think of myself and had a moment when I thought of myself .
 Keck Foundation Central Rotunda has long been a visitor favorite since the building opened in 1935 . Rotunda is a favorite of visitors since it opened in the 1930s .
 The fully restored pendulum is actually an elegant scientific instrument which demonstrates the Earth’s rotation . One of the largest such devices in the world, the pendulum was restored in 2012 .
 The pendulum is mounted to a bearing in the rotunda ceiling that does not turn with the building as it rotates with the Earth . The building's rotunda rotunda does not rotate with Earth .
 A ring magnet at the bearing gives a little tug on each swing of the pendulum to keep it in motion . The pendulum is kept in motion by a magnet at each swing .
 As the day passes, the pendulum knocks over pegs set up in the pit and indicates the progress of rotation . The pendulum is set to continue its rotation .
 At the pendulum and elsewhere the exhibit was photomombed to my camera and the camera of others with sexuallized teenagers . The exhibit was photographed by the photographer and the photographer of others .
 It seems that is what I was doing there, seeking teenagers to photograph . It seems to be that I was looking for teens to photograph.
 The Foucault pendulum was displayed for many years in the Smithsonian's National Museum of American History . It was removed in late 1998 to make room for StarSpangled Banner Preservation Project .
 The Foucault Pendulum is named for the French physicist Jean Foucault (pronounced ""Foo-koh") who first used it in 1851 to demonstrate the rotation of the earth .
 It was the first satisfactory demonstration of the earth's rotation using laboratory apparatus rather than astronomical observations . The discovery of the Earth's rotation was made using laboratory equipment .
 Foucault Pendulum swings in one direction, after a few hours you will notice that it is swinging in a quite different direction . If you start a Pendulum swinging in one way, it will swing in the opposite direction .
 Veronica Hoffman was used for this as later died after harassment from the same criminal network . Perhaps her loyalty to the network came into doubt and she could have compromised the operation if she was believed .
 Sexual Misconduct as Poison Pill to normal Civil Life (knwledge, library, tourism, health and fitness is called K data) Ambushed a person , me, by staging crossfire of cameras in arranged people at scene .
 Road Blocking Original | Roadblock | Identity | Original | | | Old Lady | Young | Young Person |Tree In Thief | Path Monk needs | Monk | Monk .
 There are two gangstalks. Keeping me single the next available administrator of my DNA . Non-white administrators embezzling the genome value to non-whites . There are also two gangsstalks in the DNA industry .
 Placed along my as | am on my way to TMobile. Oh those brave cops are too busy to investigate this. Placed on my as well as my phone .
 GPS tells me to turn Right up the slight hill at the right off frame of this event planted in my path . Same thing happens on my way to gym 8 OG @ 1 like As I was walking to TMOBILE to undue loosing my SIMM chip I have to take
 My cell phone in use for “k”navigation knowledge map usage to a store, illicit “R” eproductive interests staged against cy will . My phone was used to “navigate knowledge map” to a nearby store .
 Removing adult women I am . am interested in, planting tots I am not interested in . Planting tots then saying they are protecting the tot I . can not get rid of, including when masturbating adult females porn in my own bedroom none other than I have permission to
 Medical asset seizures, if being conducted by DIA and Flynn United States Marines or others at the Bikini Beach Teen White Chick Bullwip Centcom research center isn't ethical, especially if the Edward Donegan there isn’t even the real Edward donegan DaAssRaper
 Judge Roll, the SVR says, the seizing of all American citizens’ gold, in 1933, by . President Franklin D Roosevelt’s signing of . Executive Order 6102, which was ruled at ; the time to be constitutional .
 Bernie seems to be Ed wherever a private Ed Donegan location seems to have been in play . Bernie seemed to be Bernie wherever he is in play with the artist .
 Instead of stolen-clothes impersonators but Iam not | breaking into my residence or evidence plants at my residence, at home, aka | impersonators use sound stages of other apartment units with same breakins layout as my own apartment floor plan . Instead of broken-in-laws
 e Bernie is placed with imperonsations of people I know, at least Tom Dunham, and the pair of fake Ed Donegan and fake Tom Dunham online agree with Genentech use of Gloria DNA e People make suggesting sexual, thanks, relationship, or other statements to me in public
 MLOc STATS gLoGs i FOLLOW wouorttey of oe yoernel] oualleeny ay the amine of muxttoe heather . i FOOTTY: The most important part of this article is that the world needs to know more about
 Austin meeting with U.S. ambassador to Iraq James Jeffrey and . Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta in 2011 . Austin, Texas, was born in Sarasotz, Florida .
 Private play with that One will be altogether different and taken to the next level . She must be open and honest. Don’t deal with drunks or addicts. She must also be honest .
 DaAssRaper commented on one of Heteroinflexible’s pictures: “Here is some unsolicited advice. You clearly have opinions and are sharing them.” view comment .
 Victimized Neighborhod “Mistress Victoria” “dat Ass” model to the retarded, the adult entertainer called for the retarded child, finds teen or tot porn in the treehouse the retarded White C Supremacist person lives in y Below .
 ARC of Northern Virginia know of some non whites who could use some White Supremacist White Seperatist DNA . Marines hire white models and use dummy impersonators of to to host the white models . ARC of . Northern Virginia also own the \ HEEnbuse and represent the
 This recorded sound of me will come out of Bernie’s adams apple at the party I am not going to . I am going to. This recorded voice will come from Bernie's adams . I will not be going to the party .
 One possibiliy of somethig earlir was switcing out my airline ticket TO Canada . One possibility was switching out my ticket to Canada .
 In a family split politically for years my brother Thomas Neil Donegan and his now legal spouse Mark Weirness continually in various forums alleged my allegations of his fraudulent activities were untrue and even sought and received civil commitments .
 This appears to be tied to gaining rights to genes wished for which occur in my family line and myself tied to high IQ . Life long testing reveals high IQ in me and my . family line, he says .
 I will later and continuously face social retaliation for the alleged acts . I will remain single and socially isolated from those who would act on my behalf rather than on Conservancy's behalf .
 Chris Lloyd as emergency contact ‘grandparent’ and corrupted in emergency contact role . Hotel operator of hotel posts this, hoping residents will co-operate with the frame job of me .
 Cheryll Lloyd friendly “ccl. . motel operator, wants some DNA from a faked trist in a hotel room, or faked activitiy in my home bedroom . Cheryll . Lloyd . Lloyd friendly "ccl."
 Chris Lloyd had AIDS research compnay he owned and his daughter worked for Genetech . Lloyd assured me before his death that nothing he was doing in any way had anything to do with me or my genome .
 Paul Graham's Hierarchy of Disagreement lists ad hominem as the second lowest type of argument in a disagreement . Refuting the Central Point Refutation contradicts and then backs it up with reasoning and/or supporting evidence . Name-calling is the second-lowest form of argument
 Modified by RocketO00 hand-coded by uploader; based on en:|Image:Graham's Hierarchy of Disagreement jpg by BUNKO to others .
 A simplified diagram of a liquid-propellant rocket or with an Air Compressor fan in postiion 1 and wing tank jet fuel at position 2 an airplane jet engine . If the Oxygen produces one unit of fire-blast and the liqued fuel produce on unit of blast
 An inert gas stored in a tank at a high pressure is sometimes used instead of pumps in . simpler small engines to force the propellants into the combustion chamber .
 Dickens satirises the hypocrisies of his time, including child labour and domestic violence . The alternative title, The Parish Boy's Progress, alludes to Bunyan's The Pilgrim’s Progress, as well as the 18th-century caricature series by William ; Hogarth,
 Dickens’s own experiences as a * youth contributed as well as his own experiences . Dickens is likely to have been influenced by his own childhood experiences .
 As far as those who cooperate with Sham investigations like the Press . I often offer evidence that a Prosecutorial Misconduct system is at least SOME of the misconduct . In my case I can show the REAL motive the Government are subverting THIS MKULTRA victim, the Press and others refuse
 Gangsalking subverting people and their rights for arbitrary reason which could not pass constitutional muster, often the arbitrary reason is the person is a witness to or a victim of Government misconduct and is being discredited as a person . This is the goal of Gangswalking subverting the people and
 She decided to out the elite criminals with her videos before they could silence her or them complete their mission against me . Jen assassinations, muscle assassinations and muscle muscle Moore .
 I have spent all my life under aggression thrown at me and then me in custody suffering even more violently aggressions treatment all the while complaining this was out of the view o he media . I'm not happy with the treatment of the media, he says .
 Media creating the movement of subversion, sabotage, and ghosting of me, Jen Moore, and others as the Robber Barron’s oil and the Bush family of Media and Politics create their Illuminati Families .
 The right of self-defense as a legal justification for the use of force in times of danger is ; available in many jurisdictions . Self-defense is a legal right to use force in situations of danger . The right to self-defence is available in most of the world's most
 Moore may well have been used as a Crisis Actor not liking the role of it as used trap normal people inside the simulation . “Targeted Individuals” have their lives destroyed as evidence is planted and actors act out being victims of the Targeted Individual . The normal person is not
 Crisis actors in Disaster Simulations from Wikipedia . Actors take on the role of mock victims and simulate specific injuries from a disaster to add life-like realism .
 Actors who portray news reporters, relatives of victims and concemed citizens are also used during drills to train emergency operations center personnel to cope with emotionally-charged demands .
 In Intel operations they can frame people by creating ‘narratives’ of people and events they surround . In Free Masonary this is called Rough Music and defames accusers of Masonry by impeaching critics .
 Ocasio-Cortez, who frequently i receives massive positive engagement ; on Twitter, was ultimately ratioed on . Her tweet trying to explain away her ‘ account of the Jan. 24.01 protests .
 And a Crisis Resolution that a trust fund representing the cause of the Crisis, Edward Paul Donegan, will be billed for the crisis and supply genome rights or other property . Her attempts to explain away this key omission only made a further subject of mockery on social .
 This is the PsyOps mission underway called Jade Helm 15 or Extortion 17 . Jade Helm is the name of a mission called Extortion 15 or Jade Helm 17 . This is a Psy Ops mission .
 It is my belief and I will articulate it in various places in this book acts of war by criminal enterprises are already being conducted without deeper understanding of the originators of the attacks . WW III is either under way or can or will erupt as a matter of course if these matters are not
 Anna Politkovskaya was murdered in the elevator of her block of flats in October 2006 . Putin accused of ordering the assassination of the Russian journalist in 2006 .
 A Dirty War by Anna Politkovskaya wa A Russian Reporter in Chechnya . She vividly describes atrocities and abuses of the war .
 Declan rated it it was amazing . I read this book a few years before Anna Politkovskaya was murdered . I was astonished at the time by her passionate need to pursue the truth of the Chechen war .
 Alexander Litvinenko wrote about the alleged transformation of the Russian Security Services into a criminal and terrorist organization . JlyOsHckas mpectymHasr rpynmuposkga is also translated as The Gang from Lubyanka .
 The book was withdrawn from sales in Russia by request from the FSB . The FSB said to have withdrawn the book from sale in Russia .
 In response, the authors allowed the book’s publication and distribution by anyone in Russia free of charge . In response to the book's publication, the book was allowed to be distributed in Russia .
 President John F. Kennedy Meets with National Commander of French Free Mason founded American Legion Colonel William Burke . Historians have questioned whether or not the coup was Bae a Se .
 American Legion was founded in Paris in 1919 . First and foremost an association for U.S. ex-servicemen . American Legion founded in 1919.
 The American Legion is not a secret society in the classic sense, but is has initiatory rituals and a strong political agenda . As of 1993, there were little over 3 million members .
 Anexcaugap Banbreposuy JIMTBHHEHKO, IPA: ; 30 August 1962 or 4 DECEMBER 1962 by father’s account 23 November 2006) was a British-naturalised Russian defector and former officer of the Russian FSB secret service
 Litvinenko wrote two books, Blowing Up and Russia: Terror from Within . He accused the Russian secret services of staging the Russian apartment bombings and other terrorism ; acts in an effort to bring Vladimir Putin to power .
 The events leading up to this are a matter of i controversy, spawning numerous theories relating to his poisoning and death . The events surrounding his death have spawned numerous theories about his death .
 Marina Litvinenko, aided by biologist Alexander Goldfarb, ursued a vigorous campaign through the Litvenko Justice Foundation . The foundation was set up after the death of ex-KGB agent, Vladimir Putin .
 Criminal Suspect, Law Enforcement tipped off [husband looking for murder of wife for hire] 2.2.3.5. 2.4.5 . 2.6.4 . 3.5: Law enforcement tip-off .
 Paid Assailants themselves goading the assaulted victim . A goad is a pointy stick or other instrument used to prod something along .
 The puplic the goading is the Judged victor over me, but it was larceny based false claims which deemed them to rightful parties to good standing and property claims . The Judged winner over me but in fact it was false claims .
 This is the Masonry system of Rough Music, having secret enemies and plausibly deniable rough treatment of a person in public that is Masonic Harassment . Sometimes if the police have masonic ties the harassment is under Color of Law as it has been .
 The funding source is a based on racketeering in the killing fields ecosystem in which the mercenaries are paid off to be self style justice seekers in harassment of a white establishment person with deep pockets . This creates as army of now funded and incentivized struggling racial groups who can operate in a black
 Foreign economies and White Supremacist genome could be tied to Judge Roll and Justice Scalia . Foreign economies are tied to foreign economies and Supreme Court rulings .
 False Heroes needed an anti-hero for their struggle, their heroic acts to look real thus the vilification of me by their planting evidence and creating incriminating circumstances . The book is of Real Ed worth (possible stand alone Donegan’s motive)
 Wife of husband covertly moved to safety from husband . Paid Informant Wall-off of Suspect (Gangstalk Conspiracy Against Marital Rights) 1. 1. Wife of husbands covertly move to safety .
 This is the Masonary system of Rough Music, having secret enemies and plausibly deniable rough treatment of a person in public that is Masonic Harassment . Sometimes if the police have masonic ties the harassment is under Color of Law as it has been .
 It appears to be what Jen Moore and others called Pizza-gate where it seems “I [Edward Donegan] had a scum bag “provider” put a minor in my present to photograph, but the impersonator of me who did “take tbe
 Treat Williams as Colonel Fitzgerald has the “duty” of covering up radiation testing affects and operations disasters of the Manhattan Project area . The coverups involve murders of those whose existence could expose the truth of what really happened .
 Hemingway: "I would rather have it bent and dull and know I had to put it to the grindstone again and hammer it into shape and put a whetstone to it, and know that I had something to write about, than to have it bright and shining and
 "I had a number of conversations about courage with my father and he was qualified to speak on the topic. He was qualified for the topic," she said . "I'm not afraid to be afraid. I'm scared to be scared," she added .
 My best guess is he flew reconnaissance before, during, or after the nuclear bombings of Japan because he was in the Manhattan Project above ground (blast exposure) testing in Nevada and Simi Valley California .
 Los Angeles’s NUCLEAR SECRET has left a toxic legacy for generations of people living near the Santa Susana Field Laboratory .
 Starfish Prime was a July 9, 1962, high-altitude nuclear test conducted by the United States . It was a joint effort of the Atomic Energy Commission and the Defense Atomic Support Agency .
 Of these, only the F-4, F-5, F6, F7, F9 and F-13 that were most widely used . Of these aircrafts, the F4 was most commonly used .
 Squadron flew an armed reconnaissance mission from its base in Tunisa, North Africa, : whereby he successfully photographed the enemy-held Kairouan Aerodrome and returned without incident .
 This also marked the first time that a USAAF P-51 was used in combat in combat . This was the first use of the P51 by the USAAF .
 The P-51-2-NA and seventy-three others were re-designated F-6A-1-NA in late 1943 . This P-50-2/NA was re-designed as an F-51A-NA . It was one of the first
 From 1945 to 1961 Cape Cod where are families are from, including Irish Catholic Liquor dealing, it is more likely JFK knew my father than he knew JFK, the Kennedy compound 25 miles ane Marshfiel .
 For the most part, these Mustangs were manufactured on the Inglewood and Dallas production lines with special fuselage openings . Behind the fuselage bays were specially built bays to house the cameras .
 Columbia was awarded the first federal contract to explore the use of atomic : power for energy, or for bombs . Columbia had the first atomic pile, and had atomic pile .
 FBI Sniper Slays Mother Holding her Baby . Randy Weaver lived with his wife and four children in an isolated cabin in the Idaho mountains .
 Mr Weaver at first refused, but the agent was persistent and sold him two shotguns thereby violating federal firearms law . Mr Weaver eventually sold the agent two shotguns .
 Archaic. any structure or group of structures arranged in a steplike form . Steplike structure is a form of form of structure .
 Their churches claim to represent my DNA and us it to transfer my DNA into their religious groups to compensate false claims . They assaulted their own children using my identity to give those children DNA rights from me . I would not agree to .
 Effectively I need to be bad husband material and discredited, others sucking up any oxygen which might reach me, a criminal harassment system of sabotaging me to others .
 DARPA, CIA, FBI, DOJ who misused DNA and Free Masons may die in this fight over their illegal and unethical conduct may die . DARPA and The CIA may die over their unethical conduct .
 My father and mother had their DNA misused during the Cold War and espionage agencies are now targeting me illegal with violent assaults . Underneath all of this has been secret tapping of genome into . Illuminati and SJW causes by excuse against me, or deceit of my father and . mother .
 I believe the IVF of me made him the Manchurian Candidate . I also was used to create Barack Obama from Donegan DNA, and other I]luminati projects use of that DNA as well .
 The scheme creates a theory that my genes were signed away under extortion to places I would not authorize, he says . People go along with the racket for several reasons, like socially good use of the genes and defaming a white supremacist .
 Agent Provocateur incurring a liability against me (who claim for defendant assets of value) is the subject of retaliation for the act of the Agent Dis-possessor. Agent provocateur . Agent Provocationur incurs a liability .
 The gene tied to Austria, is CLAIMED to be the Nazi gene of ‘psychos’ and flash tempers, but in fact makes up passionate people with strong emotions such as LONDON KE FAMILY of King Edward VIII, likely on my mother’s side
 Chemical &amp; Engineering News covers the world of chemistry, from research and 1 education to business and policy . James Comey talks chemistry with James B Comey .
 By controlling my environment illegally, the duplicitous are staging that I am incompetent, developmentally retarded, and denying reproductive partners opportunity . By controlling me illegally, I am being denied reproductive opportunity, I'm being denied access to my reproductive opportunities .
 Getting me into the system by making environments hostile and provoking fights creates the System having me under arrest and my assets under control if I “correct” the behavior of cheap shot-ters of me via fight,’s ‘correct’ the behavior . Getting me in
 I over heard the “talloid” confess to having filmed tots at the beach, being a despicable looser for having done so . He said he had now way to pay up, to pay the victims, because he was so poor, but was willing to pay with
 As of February 17 2022 enough “roleplays’ have been overheard by me more specific generalizations can be reported of events at “Element B” R2ICO of the RICO sceme .
 In my case the person of me doppling me is contradictory to who I am, reverses my attributes into negative attributes in that same area . Information about me which is false and will defame me later behind the back, he says .
 One of the most instructive full dialogues was the one on the 17th of February 2022 when a Dopple of me near me I could hear saying “I was committed to Salvation Army because I was such a tweak’s .
 It seems both racially and religiously antagonistic interested to me which on the one hand study and adopt much of my life while using a Doppler to assert I do NOT have the skills but could be taught the skills by an adult entertainer . It seems on one hand studies and adopt
 The Doppler of me has police escort and often a black “pimp’ providing child porn to the teak loser . The pimp will be paid with Donegan family reproductive assets for some scenario the dopple is in, i don’t understand the
 The Dopple leaves broken glass around where children and pets play, burns cats and children with cigarrattas as turn on, etc., contra to everything about me. The Doopple leaves children and cats with broken glass .
 Cats love and trust me and the only time I have ever needed a cat carrier was when using a car . in Walnut Creak my roomate had a cat who would go to the apartment pool with me, walking with me and playing with me .
 The achievement of political character assassination of a competing social justice system is a political achievement . The achievement is the achievement of the . achievement of . political character assassinations of a . competing social . justice system .
 I’d be living in a town like Capitola or in Monterrey California Stay and Play among 18+ white consenting female adult partners in R/L activities . This word evolved from a pronunciation of “I'd rather, ‘ which should help you remember
 Jim Volcecka challenged me to prove fake ed existed, and I found out via thin walls and an adjoining apartment unit . Now a given I am not in a county with a white prosecutor (or a state with an Atheist governor) claims can proceed against fake ed .
 Strangers, stalkers mock me as needing to know from their example the most basic living skill or I need their examples or suggestions the for intellectual achievements I have reached in my own life . Strangers and stalkers public mock me for not knowing basic living skills .
 I have worked at the highest placed United States Secret Service monitored (1.2 million times) I have been in contact with the highest-ranking Secret Service officer in the world .
 Wells Fargo re-engineered main data centers I participated in building and designing . Trillion dollar assets network (and protected computer financial network) Team Lead, technical and project, for all of Wells Fargo's reengineered data centers .
 President John F Kennedy 7 days before his assasination . If you would like to be a member of Targeted Justice, please submit the information below .
 This book is also about my Cape Cod Massachusetts and Nuclear Energy Manhattan Project and Atomic Reactor family history and ties to JFK, liquor distribution, and how this got mixed into CIA MKULTRA history .
 JFK: "We are as a people inherently and historically opposed to secret societies, to secret oaths and to secret proceedings" "The very word “secrecy” is repugnant in a free and open society," JFK said .
 "No official of my Administration, whether his rank is high or low, civilian or military, should interpret my words here tonight as an excuse to censor the news," President Obama says .
 "The Tyrant" is the third episode of the sixth season of House . "Government at all levels, must meet its obligation to provide you with the fullest possible information outside the narrowest limits of national security"
 Dibala was killed by the treatment that Dr Foreman i gave him because Chase masked what he really had a serious illness . Chase was killed because Chase masked the real illness was. He was killed .
 Left Hook Today Law Enforcement Backed Bird Dogging carries out these three Bird Dogged Claims steps making a “mark” out of me and my trust assets for wrongful litigation claims . Left Hook today Law Enforcement backed Bird Dogges .
 Out of my PRESENCE, Harms | Contractor and me and Child . peep victim in vicinity perhaps to an adult entertainer, the Doppelganger showing porn folders, to entertainers, the police, prosecutor, or to the press, LE/ Neighborhood Watch .
 Others encouraged and incited to be abusive and chest pumping, verbal hostile/alienating abusive unexplained behavior . NO actual .towards me specifics for scrutiny for scrutiny .
 Step “2” at the scene “sells” to public appearances, appearing to the public . I victimized the child near me, or had some kind of unnamed social liability . But i was in the area, perhaps even answering some junk telemarketer call or
 The CIA technique of “road blocking” can involve the sabotage of pre requisite (putting a screw into one of my car tires going into Thanksgiving weekend as i was leaving the Bar Area California for a weekend with my father and step mother in Truckee California .
 I am born a Manhattan Beach Manhattan Project atomic testing, though from Massachusetts Cap Cod and JFK as at Manhattan Beach vicinity during birth .
 Eleven black families met for worship in Chicago elementary school gymnasium . Most of them were descendants of migrants to Chicago during The Great Migration of African Americans .
 Donald Barr and William Barr tied to Jeffery Epstein, the DARPA Brain Program, the Free Masons and Illuminati, and corrupt trafficking in genome conducted by CIA connected elites . That she held about Donald Barr, William Barr, and . Donald Barr .
 She knew the United States People were the clients, like myself and the general public, the People vs Deceit and Criminality in Government . She led that charge on behalf of ALL U.S. peoples .
 The Ultra Secret, call it the WWI and WWII MKULTRA Gene, the MKFOXP2 gene, MK MONARCH gene . The London Family KE King Edward VIII genes of speech spasmodia and of Cap Code .
 Identity Thieves are using impersonations of me to engage in despicable and politically defaming conduct . Identity Thieves have been impersonating me for more than a decade, police say . Capitola Police © Identity Thieves .
 Ed Donegan | do use a forward facing dash camera to tape scenic 19025 Karen Dr Salinas, CA 39307 . EdinArlington@gmail.com motorcycle rides on MY motorcycle .
 Emezzelers have captured funds into bank accounts tied to them but falsy claimed are actually mine . They use Identity Theft and other Fraud tactics to hold, and money launder, the funds due me but held by others .
 For those who ever doubt police officers can be loyal and dedicated she will remain a shining beacon of faith in the profession, however much all humans are subject to failings . Police officers will be remembered for their loyalty and dedication .
 Tom Dunham, not the impersonator — To: Trinitas ... direct deposits thesr are the last checks . Do show as revieved and deposited .
 Joseph Biggs told KTLA that he received an email from Hastings on onday . Biggs said he received the email on Wednesday . Hastings has been in the news for more than a week .
 The email was sent just before 1m. on Monday, 15 hours before the deadly crash . It was sent before 1.30pm on Monday - 15 hours after the crash .
 This book ends with the acknowledgments of those who I appreciate as seekers of truth . The acknowledgements of this book end with the acknowledgment of those I appreciate .
 In one video she talked about her own unwillingness to be silenced even as the gang banger death threats from thugs in muscle cars had already nearly killed her . She was staring through a peephole in a hotel room unable to get wifi .
 Eugenics Officer Moore, previously beaten, forced out, clutching her badge still clutches her badge . Moore had history of investigation sex abuse and sex assaults . I link to her body of work on YouTube and elsewhere, whistle-blowing on these ongoing coverup murders of MKULT
 Her Bitchute Channel after August 8th 2018 technical problems days before her death . Free Masonry means “muscle,” ties to contract killings ordered by the DARPA Deep State . Her death, and the threats against me which led to the research in this book are
 John F and Ted Kennedy and Robert Kennedy all had parents in slum Irish communities and bitter Irish Roman Catholic versus Boston WASP experience . Like James Donegan, they all had a bitter Catholic versus WASP . experience .
 Donegans and Kennnedys arrived in Boston in Potato famine years, that was my paternal grandfather . This iteself was a continuation of British oppression when Great Britain oppressed Irealand into the Patato Famine so England could fund war .
 James Paul Donegan told me of the discrimination his mother went through in Boston as she was trying to feed him . Donegan said his mother was discriminated against in the city for not feeding him .
 John F Kennedy Jr may have heard from his mother how the two brothers who came to America were treated as Irish in Boston slums . The two brothers came from Ireland and lived in the Boston area .
 Obama Jr is likely a Donegan Windsor/Kutschera DNA in non daughter . Barrack Harold is likely to have FOXP2 Syndrome, one of them Minimal Brain .
 Donegan |and his wife are humiliated and poor and James reseents that treatment of them, his parents as his parents try to find work to feed him . THough a James well educated Irish Paul CPA in Boston he .
 This lense of thge British leads to anti Great Brittain Imperialism, that very cause the Sleepers are being groomed for Proms Fitzgerald 1823 retrieved from irelandxo.com .
 JFK's ancestral home of JFK is generally accepted to be Dunganstown, Co. John Kennedy was born in the U.S. Migrated to/Born in USA . JFK is considered to have been born in Ireland .
 While in Boston the couple had 12 children, 9 of whom lived to adulthood . 9 of them were children who survived the ordeal .
 The Fitzgeralds Michael James Thomas J JOHN FRANCIS Marries Mary Josephine Hannon . Oddly Germanic name Rosemary Fitzgerald a child and is then Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald Kennedy . Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy introduced the FOXP2 gene into the Kennedy family line .
 All of his great grandchildren have valued that inheritance, he says . And I’m glad to say that all of them have valued it, he adds .
 If he hadn’t left I’d be working at the Albatross company or perhaps for John D Kelly . ‘We’re happy to be back together,’ he says. ‘I’ll be happy to work with him again.
 About fifty years ago an Irishman from New Ross traveled down to Washington with his family . In order to tell his neighbors how well he was doing he had his picture taken in front of the White House .
 Well it’s our home also in the winter and I hope you will come and see us. Well it's our home, also in winter, in the Winter . We hope you come to see us .
 There is an impression that in Washington that there are no Kennedys left in Ireland that they’re all in ' Washington and I wonder if there are any . any . there were any Kennedyys in this audience. Mr Minister .
 After escaping to the U.S. he became a prominent spokesperson for the Irish ‘community and culture] said I’ve lived a thousand years that it was possible for a "" people over hundreds of years of foreign domination and religious persecution it "" was possible to maintain their national
 I’m proud to come here for another reason because it makes me even prouder ; of my own country my country welcomed so many sons and daughters of so many , countries Irish and Scandinavian and German is Italian and all the rest of the rest . And I'm proud to
 As supreme governor, the monarch formally appoints high-ranking members of the ‘ church on the advice of the prime minister of the United Kingdom, who is in turn "" advised by church leaders, such as the Lords Spiritual .
 The Church of Scotland, which is a Presbyterian, and the Anglican churches in Wales and Northern Ireland, are not represented . The Anglican church in Wales, Northern Ireland and Wales are no longer established churches .
 I believe this World Interest was operating as the Family Jewels Program and also in Kenya and created Barrack Obama JR. in the USA, Harvard, and CIA Saudi plan that would solidify Great Britain .
 This was co-oerdinated worldwide by the United States Spy James Angleton . Angleton was a member of the U.S. spy network .
 Sectarianism and Dirty Wars often fought through Gym Roughians (Brown Shirts) or Athletic or other clubs, or neighborhood groups who commit Guerillas Warfare acts with tacit State approval .
 Roman Catholicism should opposed this in its ranks . The Vatican may be willing to join the Anglicans in a shoulder to shoulder war against Communism or Socialism .
 The Orange Order is a conservative, British unionist and Ulster loyalist organisation . Orange Order was founded in 1903 in Belfast, Ireland . It is the oldest organisation in the world and is based in Belfast .
 The Order sees itself as defending Protestant civil and religious liberties . Critics accuse it of being sectarian, triumphalist and supremacist . Order defends Protestant civil liberties .
 The Business Plot as Prescott ush and others envisioned it A Hornets Nest as two hands working ogether in the business . Hornets are the largest of the eusocial WASPs, and similar in appearance to their close relatives yellowjackets .
 Virginia Dell Blythe Clinton Dwire Kelley (née Cassidy) was an American nurse anesthetist and the mother of Bill Clinton, the 42nd president of the United States . She died January 6, 1994, at age 93 .
 Great captains of industry like efense contractors in nuclear esearch, aerospace propulsion, r other research along with trategic resources like oil and ining would plan a vision of he world and destabilize any egime which would resist mperialism . The war would e dirty, by
 Free asons American Legion was founded in France nd produced an able supply of ilitary trained private CIA contractors . This quasi government peration, and New World rder NGO entity would have he support of Government .
 Medical terminology for a Pscychotic state in which an irrational belief is held, a delusion, is a delusion . The presence of the fixed delusion is a Personality Disorder in most cases .
 This book offers that my genome is not truly of value as nature, but more by nurture and life needs driving me to learn . The iota of my genes value had been inflated and rights to it are offered through a criminal cartel which insures discipline to the criminal collustion with
 Added-natrative actors by appearances-only as seen by distant observers alter the narrative of what is actually happening at the scene . Paid actors revolve around a person publicly, seemingly, by appearances only, involving the Stalk victim .
 I believe the appearances only created by revolving actors surrounded me are the false information used under the NDAA for EXTORTION17 and tie to Twins Studies . Organized Stalk revolve hostile operatives, under-cover parties replacing normal people and normal life . I believe under-under-
 The Five Eyes is an intelligence alliance comprising Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States . The alliance is based in Australia and Canada and New Zealand .
 The Irish who arrived during the famine years (like my Irish Catholic father’s parents) were among the poorest and least welcome immigrants in Boston . These countries are parties to the multilateral UKUSA Agreement, a treaty for joint cooperation in signals intelligence .
 The military had the Special Relationship with the Queen Of England, MI5, MI6, and far fewer reservations about the Middle East North African and Indonesia and Far East plants to stop Cub, Russia, and China .
 JFK looses faith in the Dulles Brothers, Donald Barr, and William Barr, the Vatican, and others backing the plot, but he is easily removed . JFK loses faith in Dulles brothers, Donald . Barr, William Barr and others backed the plot .
 Prince Charles and Diana, Princess of Wales, were holidaying in Majorca with the Spanish royal family, 8th August 1987 . Prince William and Prince Harry were also on the trip with Prince Harry .
 Police officers murdered two teenage boys because they witnessed a police-protected drug drop . Two teenage boys were killed in 1987 in Little Rock .
 Skull and Bones Member George Meetings met with Rockefeller Standard Oil about Mid East North Africa MENA . Operation 40 was approached by oilmen like George Walker Bush and Jack Crichton to help fund Operation 40. Operation 40 is now underway .
 CIA chief sent confidential memo to Allen W Dulles, director of Central Intelligence Agency . King, chief of CIA’s Western emisphere Division, sent memo to Dulles .
 George W. Bush was honored for his leadership in public service and commitment to civil rights . Bush was awarded the title of "Imitigator" in recognition of his leadership and commitment .
 George W Bush invited Lynda Johnson Robb, Luci Baines Johnson, and their families to the White House for a 25th anniversary celebration of President Johnson’s Inauguration . Bush signed a 2007 law naming the Education Building in Washington, D.C., after President Johnson
 LBJ School of Public Affairs; Tom Johnson, LBJ Foundation Chairman Emeritus, Cappy McGarr; Roy Spence; Larry Temple, Larry Temple; and Mark 1 K Updegrove; .
 The Bush Dynasty, the powerful forces that put It iad in the White House, and What Their influence Means for America, is written by Russ Baker .
 y Family of Secrets is a book by Russ Baker . The book cover art copyright is Gane to belong to the publisher, Bloomsbury Press or the cover artist .
 It is not necessary to transmit both sidebands plus the carrier, as a suitable receiver can extract the entire original signal from either the upper or lower sideband . And AND would be superfluous .
 What we are told is that the lower side band activity is crime and assasination but that isk. because the upper side band activty is the national interenst in regime change and puppet governments through the world . United States Oil business even Englands get the free market price
 U.S. Oil Interests USA Plausibly Denies Ukraine, Western Cartel is in elsewhere place Assasination and murder With Enough MAASONS Upper Band can use Lower Band In-Band and Out-Of-Band State OFfice Authority Masonic Governess, P
 Nwo Interest as at in Crisis Crisis Actors of Peeper in vicinity of Edward Masonic . Becomes Identity Theft and RICO COnspiracy Against Masonic Victims Heroes and Rights under Color of Law . NWO Mosonic Available State Use of Power, Excercizes mere REAL
 Unlike many anti-slavery activists, he was not a pacifist . He believed in aggressive action against slaveholders and any government officials who enabled them .
 Harriet Tubman and Frederick Douglass were important people in Brown’s life, reinforcing i much of his ideology . At this 1 time, he also met Harriet . Tubman . Douglass, an activist and abolitionist .
 In November, a jury found Brown guilty of treason against the Commonwealth of Virginia . Brown was convicted of treason in November .
 Johnston Atoll, also known as Kalama Atoll to Native Hawaiians, is an unincorporated territory of the United States currently administered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service . The Donegan Family and Atomic Testing at this video link .
 These activities left the area environmentally contaminated and remediation and monitoring * continue . The area was left environmentally contaminated .
 The Plaza of the WWII Memorial is the space in between the columns representing the U.S. The Plaza is the . space in . between columns representing . the United States . e Latin America, Walt Disney peace outreach, etc., “View From Space” {lls |
 PT-109’s collision with a Japanese destroyer contributed to long-term back problems . Kennedy required months of hospitalization at Chelsea Naval Hospital after the collision . Kennedy was hospitalized for months .
 It is one of the smallest states in the world, and it is the only state made up entirely of islands . It is only the smallest state and only the island nation made up of its own .
 The term has significance in both epistemology and theology, and its meaning and significance is the subject of continued debate . Twelve of these proposals come from a February 1962 memorandum entitled “Possible Actions to Provoke, Harass or Disrupt Cuba,” written by Brig.
 He oversaw the 1953 Iranian coup d’état, ; the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état and the 1954 Guatemala . The U-2 aircraft program, the Project * MKUltra mind control program and the Bay of Pigs Invasion were among his accomplishments .
 My belief I will outline is that sham cases against me like racially or sexually assaulting me and seeking claims against me, based on the fight, “gets my genome into lawfully seized assets” where in fact they have already unlawfully been in use including by religions Peace Corps, NASA MK
 State is peaceful and observes secretly hostile citizen to study Citizen illegality without altering path or acts of citizen acting illegally, study illegal citizen as pretrial obserererd did not affect the observed evidence collection .
 I assert fake claims against my legitimate life transfer assets illegally and constitute political and economic espionage and also are Human Rights Violations . I assert false claims against me constitute political, economic espionage, and I assert that fake claims are made against me .
 The scam is called the Grandparents scam when a someone (like a trust fund for the boy) is called to take care of the problem the boy is ALLEGED to have, though the trouble the boy was in is faked and false ID of the boy .
 Sidney Gottlieb was an American chemist and spymaster best known for his involvement with the Central Intelligence Agency’s assassination attempts and mind-control program, known as Project MKUltra . He was a member of the CIA's assassination and mind control program .
 Where Where Legitimacy of Dec 13 DNA Equals 1, and where my DNA ties to JEK OECD and MANY CIA DOD State Dept in on FOXP2 . No one should have a problem with me or my mother or father but unprovked assaults on me
 Where Legitimacy of Dec. 13 DNA Equals 1 All Others More Twins Authorized DNA Assignment Authority Aduult Model . If REAL Ed is in the vicinity he will be assaulted .
 Russia’s external intelligence agency, focusing mainly on civilian affairs . The agency is based in Moscow, Russia's main source of information .
 SVR RF succeeded the First Chief Directorate of the KGB in December 1991 . SVR was succeeded by the KGB as a successor to the KGB .
 An observation that a person’s sense of morality lessens as his or her power increases . An observation of a person's sense of morals lessens .
 The statement was made by Lord Acton, a British historian of the late nineteenth and early 20th century .
 Black Opps are the shadows shadowy people work in that can cover mistakes using bad policies under excuses to cover thier own mistakes . Black opponents are the people who can cover up their own mistakes with bad policies .
 Donegan Ce a a 7: I have obeyed the law all of my life minus a few recreational drug deals . By appearances we are in a ring together manufacturing Child Porn victimizing church going and other females .
 Jen Moore murdered August 12 2018 while I was at Stay and Play and I was creating the documentation . The real answer is when people like me, Justina Pelletier, and others are trapped in family courts, then those corrupt courts traffic our genome for the elite families, the Illuminati
 The same United States Marshalls seizing property under that case also will be funded by those asset seizures . The same U.S. Marshalls seized property will also be funded from the asset seizure .
 She was killed at the same time I was writing my identity theft tied to asset seizures (car purchases) docs on the subject, Genomics and Genentech, and on the fake claims against me in the alleged child porn ring which appears to involve Tom Dunham and I .
 I have nothing to be blackmailed over but these same evidence plants, etc., create the appearance I am retarded and giving in to blackmail, he says . "I have nothing I am blackmailing over," he says of the evidence plants .
 CIA or United States Marshall pretending to be me to a Dominatrix sex worker . No ulterior actor . CIA or U.S. Marshall pretend to be a sex worker to blackmail a woman, but it is more than that .
 Glorian Donegan, likely daughter of Maria Von Trapp out of wedlock with Prince Edward of Wales, likely to have been born with FOXP2 gene . Her brother named after Thomas Jefferson and Neil Armstrong .
 Asset seizures by Marshalls for THEMSEVLES, own use, and for victims use . U.S. Marshals Service ci rst 'rv. é United States Marshals . Service .
 Punish and deter criminal activity by depriving criminals of property used in or acquired through illegal activities . Promote and enhance cooperation between federal, state, local, tribal and foreign law enforcement agencies . Recover assets that may be used to compensate victims when authorized under federal law; .
 I think there has been an effort to tie my mother’s trust fund of that value in the year of her death in 2011 to phony child porn networks manufactured for the purpose of seizing assets . The funds were seized in 2011 .
 The Trust Fund wants my genome seized for its use is assisting in the creation of my stolen identity . It also disrupts my gaining my own property and ID cards, she says .
 This fraud, that I am retarded, and retardation firms will settle claims against me in the scope of jurisdiction they have over all retarded people is the fraud of Behavioral Health Care and them as interested parties accepting the forgeries from my Doppelganger which benefit their retarded beneficiaries for the
 Individuals, Organizations, or Individuals within Organizations may be Targeted for recruitment by Espionage agents because the Targets are pro gay couples . If recruitment goes south OR after opp, silence of grave prevents compromise of the Espionage mission .
 Working for Government while working for Espionage misuses or re-purposes the job the recruited asset holds, and is generally contradictory to the mission of the organization the Targeted Individual is placed in .
 The identity of one person to another is cut and pasted with the clothing item the “clipboard” the identity is temporarily housed in as it is moved in between . Because another person, the Gangstalk Victim, has the same coat on, the identity of another is
 Donegan genome is due because of that, to prenent the arrest of Fake Edward, settling the debt to the community for the exploitation done . Slang for use of men or women in sexual situations to intimidate or snare others .
 An Innocent Postcard used by the FBI and others for attacks is to disguise clandestine hotilitiy into alleged normal activities or statements . A postcard with an innocuous message is sent to an address in a neutral country to verify the continued security of an undercover operative .
 MI6 now compromised inside and out, M turns to the one man she can trust: Bond . Bond is Bond's most trusted confidante in MI6's world . Bond turns to Bond for help .
 In 2006 I did not it consider it tied to my CIA manipulated family of origin history but rather sociology which blamed white Europeans for oppressing blacks when cultural problems and even likely genetic inequality to be sources of the problems which was within blacks .
 Barack Obama Jr was born from a rare gene in his mother’s side . CIA MKULTRA work collides with CIA work in my mother's side history and government interest in that including the secret CIA program which created Obama Jr as a test birth of using that DNA .
 The Obamas and Donegans are the product of CIA activities effectively in Sins of the CIA history . Obama and Donegan are victims of CIA efforts to cover up or discover the truth, author says .
 This will lead to the theory the Trump administration and William Barr are trying to cover the era of Sidney Gottlieb and the CIA and IIuminati which included the assassination of Kennedy as Kennedy resisted the program going any further .
 Gay same gender biological parents of children with IVF capabilities could be gay same gender parents . Gay same-sex parents could be parents of kids with IVf capabilities if DARPA and other new genetics and can produce up and coming answers .
 DARPA, CIA, Secret Service, FBI, etc. etc. support ¢ Targeted Individuals Public or Private Organizations or people asked to support Espionage Agencies complicity, and keep co-operation covert .
 The term “Gangstalking” or “Organized Stalking’ refers to intense, long-term, harassment, intimidation, and surveillance of a Targeted (for Gangstalking) Individual .
 I quote this table form later and I will introduce it here to describe the assaults upon my mother and I, a group who will steal DNA from someone hated . I quote it later and it will be used to explain the assaults .
 The stalk of paid mercenaries is in Zone “B” which generates KOMPROMAT . Zone ‘C’ is used to exclude people from zone “A” who are excluded from Zone ”A’s .
 The Ricky Prado Blackwater killers brag about who they have killed and will kill, and operate under Spook names . I have watched many die after their threats were acted upon and [ still warn the scene and I am in danger].
 Elements of HTML in documents like p or span (span something) are not displayd, not visible . HTML is a form of form that is used to display HTML .
 JEK wanted his winnings Now so Dave and Torbert had to go upstairs to get their wallets . Dave had to get his wallet upstairs to find out what he had won .
 Sidney "Slew" McCain was a U.S. Navy admiral and the patriarch of the McCain military family . He was the son of the late Senator John McCain .
 World War II, in 1942 he commanded all land-based air operations in support of the ; Guadalcanal campaign . In 1944-45 he aggressively led the Fast Carrier Task : Force .
 His operations off the Philippines and Okinawa and air strikes against ‘ Formosa and the Japanese home islands caused tremendous destruction of Japanese naval and air forces in the closing period of the war .
 McCain’s descendants were also graduated from the United States i Naval Academy . Several of McCain's descendants graduated from U.S. Naval Academy, including his descendants .
 Kennedy Space Center as we know it was just getting off the ground 50 years ago Saturday . President John F Kennedy visited Cape Canaveral for the last time . The massive Vehicle Assembly Building, launch pad 39A and Saturn V rockets would look like . Scale models were arranged on a table .
 Kennedy was awaiting the results of a review of the nation’s military and civil space programs . Kennedy himself had begun to express some doubts privately .
 A Defense Advanced Research Agency Obama favored project on Race and IQ, and of economic development of foreign nations dates back to John F Kennedy . Espionage is involved in something so secret by the Masons even a near Chief Justice would never talk .
 DARPA, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency had been bungling the study of race and IQ through illegal experiments under Sidney Gottlieb and Prescott Bush MKULTRA in what some call “New World Order” building of a future peaceful world without the poverty .
 According to murdered Jen Moore and according to my family history, this began with Sidney Gottlieb, a CLA Weapons Scientist with speech therapy and biology background and work with Windsors and Von Trapps . My father and mother in the Manhattan Project and my mother in Manhattan Project .
 The babies of the elite are being exposed as animal husbandry and fake birth certificates as to biological parents . CIA test of twins children, twins known to some and with Nazi German relatives ties .
 Z CIA launches mind control program, April 13, 1953 . Some 80 institutions, including colleges and universities, hospitals, prisons, and pharmaceutical companies participated in the program .
 The CIA’s Office of Scientific Intelligence organized the i project, code-named Project MKUltra, in coordination with the U.S. Army ; Biological Warfare Laboratories .
 Nothing about the Gangstalk of me under MKULTRA is legal . As I state elsewhere nothing about the gangstalk is legal. Nothing about this is legal, he says. As he states elsewhere nothing is illegal .
 In fact this happens in mostly public and was set up by Abuse of Process Psychiatry . Doppelganger of me, Edward Paul Donegan, in density theft, were given a “Legend” of being gullible, naive, and retarded . Under that diagnosis given by the
 The Agent Provocateur will blame me who was in the vicinity of the child or the child was placed on my property . State backed police will demand my DNA assets be seized under the circumstantial evidence .
 Maria Kutchera and Prince Edward of Wales DNA was ILLEGALLY used by CIA for twins studies and other purposes among the elite by the elite . Jen Moore was on the verge of revealing this public appearances and court records .
 genomic rights are seized to any of variety of genes (breast cancer, AIDS, Telomeres, IQ, other) that they then can be resold or utilized by the needy or rich . As bizarre as this is it makes a blackmail-able offense through which once genomic rights
 DARPA knows which genes are up and coming and through the Illuminati . Cancer genes autism genes can be used in social work or for profit for profit . Further CIA black marketing cancer genes .
 The CIA or someone through front companies, perhaps it seems Christians, are blaming me and pleading me guilty, the Atheist, for their own crimes . Perhaps Christians are blaming Christians, perhaps . for their . own crimes and in doing that, bilking the value of my mothers genome and
 That the CIA and others have killed and conducted terror attacks to CONCEAL the history of MKUTLRA is a major threat to the Illuminati . The CIA and other have killed, tortured and killed MKUTRA members to conceal their history .
 I have spent my life experiencing what is called “Abuse of Process” human rights crimes. I have experienced what is known as “abuse of process” Human Rights crimes. The abuse of process is a form of human rights crime .
 In short, United States Marshalls plant or steal evidence from my home, defame me socially, then ask they impersonate me to adult entertainers . Trespass Capabilities of Mercenaries of mercenaries .
 In 1997, investigators searched the premises of a helicopter company owned by two local men, James Anderson and Kim Powell . Investigators had searched the . premises of the company .
 Tom Wales was not supposed to be home on the night of October 11, 2001 . Anderson demanded a hundred and twenty, eight thousand dollars from Wales’s office .
 Anderson’s motion was dismissed, and that ruling was upheld on appeal . Wales again took a public stand for gun control soon after .
 I thought it was a bad idea as a matter of public policy, but it was wrong politically to come out against it at this time, he said . I both thought it . thought it would be a bad . idea, but I thought . it was right politically to say it was
 A month 1 after he was killed, the group held a benefit in his honor, which was attended by more than five hundred people . The benefit raised five hundred thousand dollars .
 Cartel Economics, Oil Cartels, Genome Cartels and even Cartels operating in the financial arena now that asset seizures, siezed asset management, and siez assets disposition through Law Enforcement Intelligence Units Disposition Matrix create cartel systems for NGO world espionage movements and international finance
 The Monster M*A*S*H Wiki retrieved from Fandom and copied or modified to here . During OR, the doctors notice that many of the patients have multiple entry wounds .
 Hawkeye later returns to the Swamp and quietly admits that he tossed Lacy’s “pink and perfect” appendix into the scrap bucket .
 Manufacturing what is likely a La Cosa Nostra or Enrique Prado Blackwater CIA contractor organization to claim fake rights to fertilization is a rightfully both crimes in process and substance as I have spent my life with people taking “in ” on a deal to force me into homeless
 I have likened the plan to have landlords others drive me out because I am a peeper to the Law and Order Special Victims Unit episode Taken . I've likened the entire plan to drive me to skid row homeless shelters under black and white assault .
 His administration of the Glorian Donegan trust fund left for me would be delegated out to others over time, or he assisted Rod Rosenstein or others in getting initial control of it, he says .
 "I have constantly feared for my life in Nueces County Texas because of its openly acting organized crime rings and open death threats, assaults of me, and open felony racketeering fake claims to my genome"
 The core Racketeering elements this books proves is Government backed Doppelgangers of me are child porn addicts (developmentally and sexually retarded) who need sex workers sent to them . The core elements of this books this books prove is the Government backed doppelganger .
 One theory that the assailants have used most likely is that by picking a race based or even a sexual assault fight with a victim (Glorian Donegan or myself) during the assault the perpetrator may get sought debate during the argument .
 A motive of certain medial cures could be used from it if my mothers trust fund could be shaken down over false, bird dogged claims resulting from conflict situations . The deeper motive was that the conflicts would remove me from my own expected normal family life and the powerful interests of the Illuminati would pair
 The more recent story of a Frank Olson I consider myself that same person, under CIA attack and repeatedly forced into psych wards by assailants . Jen Moore also discussed as the CIA in medical hospitals (and snitch usage ) which I will quote on later in the book .
 Invisibility cloaks may be woven from the hair of a Demiguise, a magical creature whose coat allows it to become invisible . Fandom quoted here from link y etree .
 Invisibility cloaks can also be produced by enchanting an ordinary travelling cloak with an exceptionally strong isillusionment Charm or Bedazzling Hex . An ordinary cloak can be enchanted with a Charm or Hex Charm .
 "Tt’s never occurred to me before, but I’ve heard stuff about charms wearing off cloaks when they get old, or them being ripped apart by spells so they've got holes in," she says . "I’m not sure why I�
 Such Cloaks of Bedazzlement have been attempted blinders upon on Tom Dunham, myself, and others (likely Veronica Hoffman, James Paul Donegan, DJ Rabbitron, others) to get them into psych wards or simple to undermine the police reports we have given .
 One goal of this book is to help law abiding Espionage retake the hill from MKULTRA Cover-up Espionage . My belief is DAPRA The Brain Program, Epstein, and Black Markets of Black Money grew a bad project out of control and is Maxwell/Epstein .
 I created a par course run from the building around town using stairs, spirals, great views, a Gazebo area, and everyone watched and said how beautiful a workout . Homeless people physically attacked me, through feces or rocks at me, aimed for my knees or toes when I
 Speech from the Rathaus Schéneberg by John F Kennedy, June 26, 1963 . Ich bin ein Berliner and Muster Ich bin Ein ein .
 "Ich bin ein Berliner" first appears at 1:45, then again at 8:43 . First appears at  1:45; second appears at 8:43; last appears at 9:01; first appears  at 8:44 .
 From 1890s the FOXP2 gene certainly has been identified . King Edward VII may be in the West End seeking mothers .
 In 1901 the issue becomes a threat to the England’s monarch and Great Britain as nation . The issue becomes the threat to Great Britain and the monarch .
 The Leuge of Nations and other European old societies remain interbread and attempt to hold the line against Socialism and Communism . More quietly keep old European wealth in Grand Master Masonic hands .
 During this time and even since the Atlantic Revolutions and the loss of the United States Colonies republicanism is also a threat to the cohesian of a Europe lead by Great Britain .
 Holding France, holding out against the Republic of Ireland, Communism and Socialism in Indonesia, Cuba, and elsewhere is important to conventional warfare . The person walking the castle wall in Berlin may have doubts about holding France .
 Gerry Adams TD at Sinn Féin’s 2018 Special Ard Fheis, held at the RDS Arena in Dublin, Ireland . Gerry Adams and Sinn Fein Z . Z Gerry Adams .
 Sinn Fein had been formed at the beginning of the 20th century . Gerry Adams and Sinn Fein Sinn Fein were formed in the 1920s . Sinn Fein was formed in Belfast at the start of the century .
 Irish unity was the be-all and end-all of their policy . Some of them believed in some sort of relationship with Britain, some of them said .
 Sinn Fein won the majority of seats throughout the island of Ireland in 1918 . It was that which gives them the animus to conduct a violent campaign against the British in the War of Liberation .
 The British withdrew from Ireland through a partition settlement after the war . It was that war which persuaded the British to withdraw from Ireland .
 It was they who were engaged in the civil war against the majority of the community, it was . And it was they . argued that you do not lay down your weapons . It was . they who refused to take any oath of allegiance to the . monarchy in Britain .
 By its use of this Gaelic name, Sinn Fein was demanding its own autonomy, and Irish unity was its ultimate end . Sinn Fein's use of the name was the ultimate end of its ambitions .
 It believed that the only way to get rid of the British was through the barrel of a gun, rather than through any rational argument . The only way of getting rid of Britain was to use a gun rather than a rational argument, it said .
 The relationship between Sinn Fein and the IRA, historically, has been symbiotic . Sinn Fein's relationship with the IRA has been 'sympathetic', says Gerry Adams . The relationship is 'symbiotic'
 In the minds of the vast majority of people in Ireland, whether they are Unionist or Nationalist, Sinn Fein is the political wing of the IRA . Sinn Fein has played that role quite hotly down the years . It has played a key role in the IRA's rise in Northern Ireland
 The Troubles, because it had been the militants, the military types, who 1 Were in command inside the Republican movement, were in charge of the Republican Party .
 One last long push to get the British out of Ireland, and the only ; thing will get that done is the use of weapons . The only way to get it done is to use weapons .
 They were there for propaganda purposes, they were . there to raise the funds, they . were there to speak on behalf of the IRA, but . but they were very much second-cousins .
 The White House is in the business of propagandizing, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "It wasn’t in the . business of electioneering, it was in the ... propagandized"
 It’s only in the 1980s that it begins to take itself seriously as a political organization . It's only in that era that the party takes itself seriously .
 He became deeply involved in the armed struggle from the earliest days, and was interned early in the 1970s . He was sprung from internment in 1972, because the authorities realized that he was one of the key members of the new generation who had to be listened to .
 "I'm incredibly single-minded, incredibly ruthless, but also has a sense of vision," he says . "I see violence in its communicative framework rather than simply by destruction," he adds .
 Gerry Adams comes from a very strong Republican family, on both his mother and father’s side . Gerry Adams has a strong Republican background . Adams says he is proud of his strong Republican heritage .
 He can trace it back to at least his grandfather, if not his great-grandfather . He has a long history of his family history, including his great grandfather .
 One of the earliest radicals in the 20th century, Jim Larkin, had as one of his assistants one of Adams’ ancestors . Larkin was concerned with trade unionism and with national struggle .
 The Hannaway family was involved in Republican struggles in the 30s and ’40s . The Adams family were involved in all of those struggles . And you could find ... in the Republican struggle in the '30s and '40s, or '50s, either the Hann
 The resilience of the Republican movement is what I call generational continuity, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "Generational continuity" is a key factor in GOP's resilience .
 It’s handed down from father to son and mother to daughter, from generation to generation . It's handed down to father and mother from generation and generation .
 Children were following the same values as the parents, whether they were Loyalist or Republican . For example, in the late ’60s, when you had sort of youth protests, you had less of that in Northern Ireland, because of the children's values .
 Republican movement as a large family, Republican leader says . "Generational continuity, this strong sense of communal history," he says .
 Family involvement, not necessarily at the forefront of the struggle, but as backup troops, is very, very powerful in explaining the success of the Republican movement . Family involvement is key to GOP success, says Rep. Rick Santorum .
 I think, probably the supreme reason why the IRA has had to endure as much as it has had, is that it has endured the most . That is, I think . Probably the supreme . reason for the IRA to endure such a long history of violence, he says .
 Working-class youth, with no great sophistication, fighting against one of the supreme military operations in the Western world, against overwhelming odds, against huge... and yet they’re able to endure .
 There is an Irish Republican Army and there is a political, but discreet, wing called Sinn Fein . Sinn Fein has a political but discreet wing called the Republican Party .
 Sinn Fein is engaged very heavily in a political process in Northern Ireland, says Gerry Adams . Adams says Sinn Fein has been engaged in the political process for a long time .
 Given their sense of history, it is a process in which they are afraid of being betrayed yet again . But, given their sense . It is the process of a process that they fear being betrayed again .
 There were 16 percent of the vote in the last election, but there are three other parties with larger votes. OK, you’ve got 16 percent . OK, there were three parties with bigger votes. There are three more parties that have larger votes .
 They would argue that in doing this they are taking the IRA away from the armed struggle and leading them into the political process . And they would argue . In doing this, they would . argue that . taking this away from armed struggle is leading them .
 If they don’t get what they want, they will revert to violence, he says . But if they don't get the political dialogue or the political negotiations, they’ll simply revert, he adds .
 The armed struggle did more damage to the community it was supposed to be protecting . There is another viewpoint which argues that the Republican movement has come a long way in educating itself .
 In recognizing that the war has reached a stage of stalemate, they cannot defeat the British; but, equally, the British cannot defeat them . The British can't defeat them, but equally, they can defeat them.
 "Once they abandon the armalite, they realize that it may take another generation before they could begin the armed struggle again," he says . And once they abandon arm alight, "they realize that . It may take a generation to begin the struggle again."
 They see it as taking a huge political risk in the hope that they can persuade Unionist community in Northern Ireland to throw in their lot with Ireland rather than with Britain .
 It's perfectly understandable why people in the political establishment, and Unionists, would say that the IRA, because of the armed struggle, that Adams has bombed his way to the table and, therefore, they should have nothing to do with him . It’s perfectly understandable that people
 Adams would say that he belongs to a proud political tradition where the politically oppressed have no other means than the means of their own violence to get to the negotiating table, to make it a level playing field . Adams says he is proud of a proud tradition of using violence to achieve justice .
 Gerry Adams uses analogies of historic figures such as George Washington or Nelson Mandela . Adams belongs to a long and honorable tradition . Adams is being premature to compare him to Nelson Mandela or George Washington, he says .
 Mandela failed to demonstrate he was Nelson Mandela when he got his visa to visit the United States for the first time . What we do know is that he failed to prove he was a Nelson Mandela, says Mandela .
 The reason why we know he failed was because he had to satisfy two audiences simultaneously . And the reason why he failed is because he was trying to satisfy both audiences simultaneously, he says . He says he failed to do so in order to satisfy his audiences .
 He had to satisfy the external audience, personified by the President, that he was a man of peace . The President, who’d gone out on a limb to give him that visa, had to show he was peace, he said .
 He had to satisfy the internal audience, Sinn Fein and the IRA, that the struggle would continue until there was ultimate victory . But he had to . satisfy the . internal audience that he had . to satisfy . Sinn Fein . and the . IRA, he said, that .
 'We cannot cast any judgement on whether he is truly an historic figure or not. And he has not come to terms with how you satisfy both audiences simultaneously, which means that we cannot judge him as a historic figure . And he hasn't come to grips with how he can satisfy both
 History will decide whether, in fact, the IRA and Republican movement are engaged in a cynical exercise of using the political process as another wing of their armed struggle, or whether Adams can become a Nelson Mandela .
 Adams is genuine in trying to move away from the violence, says Adams . Adams' 'genuine' belief is that he wants to move from violence to peace, he says . Adams: 'I'm not a fan of violence'
 I think it’s a strategy that he and Martin McGuinness have been developing for a very long time, he says . He says it is a strategy he and McGuinness are developing for the long-term .
 I think that we sometimes forget that those who engage in armed struggle are also human beings . We sometimes forget we often forget that armed struggle is also human being . I think we should always remember that armed conflict is human .
 "We have to be careful in how we weigh the balance between their military actions or their support for military actions and their political agenda," he says .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com/Travel next Wednesday .
 It was actually a very good education training ground for them, because they were grouped together in their own prison blocks, they were able to educate themselves together . They were seen from the outside as a way that the British during the Second World War who were locked up in concentration camps were seen
 Republicanism was to give you particular status and stature in your community. Republicanism, and was to . give you . particular status . Republicanism . It was to be given a particular status to . your community, Republicanism. Republicanistism .
 There is a whole tradition in every guerrilla movement of using prisons, of the symbolism of the prisons, to show how people can be reflective . The prisons are symbolic of how people are reflective and how they can rethink their strategy, she says .
 Mao's long march is part of the mythology of the Maoist movement . Mao's "long march or whatever" was part of Mao's 'long march, Mao's march'
 "All of these things were beginning to address themselves to him, and he was beginning to put his thoughts together," he says . "He brought together in a book, which he published in 1986," he writes .
 He is the person who personifies that, if you ' like, gradualist and progressive wing of the Republican movement . There are a number of others whose names I could give you, who , wouldn’t mean anything— not only to people in the United States, but to
 'They all formed this sort of group which began to ' think their way politically out of the impasse. They all formed . They began to think their . way politically . out of politics, they began to . think . Their way out of this impasse .
 IRA and Sinn Fein might actually win a military war, but lose the political piece . It occurred, at some stage in the mid-to-late ’70s, that they might set up the conditions for others to compromise . Sinn Fein and the IRA may have lost the political
 There was a huge untapped source out there in the » community which didn’t approve of IRA violence, but emotionally were attached to what the IRA was trying to achieve, Irish freedom . And what happened there was, what the Republican ; Movement realized .
 1980 and '81 they seriously begin to put together a political strategy based on electoralism . 1980 and ‘81 they . begin to . put together political strategy . 1980s and '80s they . seriously began to put . together a . political strategy for electoralism. 1980s
 They were anxious and concermed that electoralism could destroy them . And they were very anxious and worried about electoralism . But they were anxious that it would destroy them, they said .
 Armalite was one of their favorite weapons which could cause enormous damage . The armalite could be one of the most powerful weapons in the world .
 Lenin was following, if you like, classic tactical issues by Lenin at the time of the Russian Revolution . They were following, or if you want to like, a classic tactical issue by Lenin . Lenin .
 There are those who are there for the military, there are others for the political . There are both sides of the political divide, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 As soon as the British took control with direct rule in 1972, they began 1 to work with the Irish government, because they didn’t want to hang on 1 in Northern Ireland .
 Constitutionalists that you could have a reform in the Northern political . system with power sharing . Catholics ; into government for the first time, and you would give them a share of » power .
 You also could have much closer north-south relations within the "" island of Ireland . You could also have much more north-east relations within Ireland .
 The 1986 Decision by Sinn Fein to Take Their Seats in Parliament was one of the most historic decisions ever taken by the Republican movement . The decision by the Sinn Fein conference in 1986, that they would take their seats if elected in the south of Ireland, in the Irish Republic, was
 Adams and McGuinness had been working for three or four years to take over the Republican leadership . Adams' success was an indication of just how successful they'd been in taking over the GOP leadership, he says .
 Remember that the provisional IRA was created because of a split about electoralism in 1969 . Remember that a split in the Provisional IRA was made because of an electoral split in 1969. Remember that .
 Republicans were conscious that this was very dangerous, because it went to the heart of Republican mythology, yet they pulled it off . So, here people were very conscious that . This is a very dangerous move, but they pulled off, he says .
 President Obama won't be surprised if he won't win re-election in 2016, says Obama . Obama's election victory was a victory for the party, says Sen. Ted Cruz, a Democrat .
 Ireland’s most senior politicians say they have had support in the Republic of Ireland and the north of Ireland . And that if they wanted to speak for the people of Ireland, they’d have to show that they had had support .
 One of the seminal documents which will come out of the Troubles is the dialogue between the SDLP and Sinn Fein which began in March of 1 1988, and went on until September of 1988 .
 By challenging Sinn Fein on his own ground, : we ‘re challenging the very heart of Republican mythology, and they’re i making these people think politically for the first time . COUnTETPrOgucHVe: ‘We ‘’
 Chose the right psychological moment in the aftermath of the Enniskillen bombing . He chose the right time to respond to the bombing in the wake of the tragedy .
 He chose the right target in Gerry Adams, whom he recognized as someone who wanted to move into another phase . Gerry Adams is someone who has a long-term commitment to the Labour Party .
 He knew that Republicanism was weak as a result of the outrage of Enniskillen, he said . He also knew that Republicans were weak in the wake of the outcry .
 He knew that the IRA could go nowhere else but to the SDLP and engage in this, he said . The IRA knew that it could not go elsewhere but to SDLP, he added .
 His policy from the day he entered ; politics has been one based on non-violence, says Obama . His policy has been non-violent since he entered politics .
 He says you cannot demonize singlehandedly by building up relations in ; this country, from about 1972 onwards . And it’s also one in which » he says you can’t demonize .
 He has always known what he’s wanted, which was an end to the : violence violence . And he has always wanted to end violence, he said .
 President Obama has said he wants to 'unite the uniting of territory' with the world . He has said that he is not about uniting territory but uniting peoples .
 "Ruthlessly and single mindedly" has pursued his 'simple philosophy' of life, says CNN's John Sutter .
 He it is whose 'established now a good rapport with the former Loyalist paramilitaries', he said .
 The Hunger Strikes 1980-81 was part of an Irish political tradition, which goes back to pre-Christian times . It was something which is not part of the Western tradition, but was there .
 Hunger strike and hunger strike to death, if » you are challenging your detractor either to withdraw his charge or to hunger strike with you . Or to see through the "" consequences of the hunger strike, the striker would die . Hunger strike is a challenge to the detractor to withdraw or
 The fact that they were living in conditions like animals, that their own excrement was being smeared on the walls, actually goes back to the . beginnings of Christianity . The . fact that the . people were living like animals was actually going back to . the beginnings of Christian Christianity
 The iconography that they were using, of a dying Christ in the bosom of the blessed Virgin Mary, was the inspiration for the iconography .
 People going out in demonstrations wearing the prison shroud, putting on their heads the crown of thorns, ' which Christ had worn to Calvary. People going to demonstrations wearing a prison shroud. putting on heads . 'Which Christ had . worn to . Calvarian'
 You don't need to have any elaborate text; © you simply need the visual evidence . So, you don’t need to be elaborate text or elaborate text .
 The same images have been used after 1916, when the rebel leaders were rounded up and put » into the jails and then shot in 1916 . They were extremely aware of the power of imagery and symbolism, because precisely the same images, have » been used .
 "60 years later, the new generation "" comes along and uses exactly the same imagery, the same symbols . Sixty years after the first film, " " """ was released, it was released in 1972 .
 Bobby Sands was the first hunger striker who went to his death, Bobby Sands, on the day he went on hunger strike, 4,000 people watched in protest . On the day of his hunger strike in protest, thousands of people watched .
 The Catholic community were used as sort of » an emotional rollercoaster. So this, again, was a huge . propaganda victory, where the Catholic community was used as . a huge , propaganda victory .
 They believed that the British authorities had mishandled very badly . The British authorities were believed to have mishandled the situation .
 It has to be remembered that, at the time, she refused to 1 speak to the ANC and to Nelson Mandela . It has been remembered that at the . time, at . the time of . her refusal to speak to . Mandela and the ANC . Mandela .
 "Some of it was accident, but then a strategy began to put itself together," says President Obama . "I'm not going to be surprised," he says .
 It was actually insofar as it was the relatives who moved the Republicans to take seriously voices other than their own . The relatives were the people who moved Republicans to listen to other voices .
 'The momentum was coming from ' within the prison and not from outside', says the prison chief . ' Secondly, the momentum came from 'within the prison'
 Prisoners are 'central prisoners' to the whole campaign, says John Daley . Daley: "What it indicates is how central prisoners are to the campaign"
 If you look at the 1 cease-fires, it’s only after the prisoners agreed to it that they were able to i carry it through . The prisoners were only able to agree to it after they agreed to the cease-fire, the author says .
 The strategy was something which, again, was embedded in the Republican psyche . But it was something that was embedded into the GOP psyche, he says .
 It was simply reaching into the recesses of their communal memory, and remembering what happened after 1916 . It was just reaching out to the public, remembering the events of 1916 .
 The symbolism, the imagery, was something which came to them as second nature . The symbolism and the imagery was something they came to be second nature, they said .
 They would have given, had some thought, but it would’ve been the most natural thing in the world to do. ‘They would have had thought,’ he said . ‘It would have been a natural thing to do,” he added .
 The IRA leadership was opposed to the hunger strike because they 1 were afraid it would fail simply because of Prime Minister Margaret 1 Thatcher . The hunger strike was opposed by the IRA leadership].
 "They would have to call off the hunger strikes, and the result of that would be huge demoralization inside the organization," he says . The hunger strikes would be called off, he says, and they would be demoralized .
 'They were used to control, liked to be firmly in control. They were an organization which was used to . control, said the BBC . 'They liked to control,' said the British Prime Minister's spokesman .
 "Bobby Sands MP" was killed by the British establishment, was the way they were able to put it . Because here they were saying “Bobby . Sands MP”, Member of the British Parliament, RIP, may he rest » in peace .
 The democratic mandate really begins to go into play . And that’s when the democratic mandate goes into play, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 CNN.com: "That’s when they realize that they have to play the electoral role as well."
 The sovereignty changes to electoral ... to show that they had the democratic mandate. So, what you find is with the election of Bobby Sands, and following his death and the bi-election, is the election .
 Within a few years they were taking 13.4% of the whole vote inside Northern Ireland . But, within a decade later, they had already taken 13% of Northern Ireland's vote . Now they are taking 13%.
 When the second hunger strike was called, it actually had more support , than the first hunger strike . The second hunger strikes had even more support, according to a CNN iReport .
 The first hunger strike was called off after two Catholic bishops had gone into the prisons and believed that . they’d won concessions from the government . Because of . two bishops went into prisons and . believed that they had won concessions .
 Catholic bishops had been lied to was the perception . So, it wasn’t a question of simply believing what Republicans said, it was a question . Catholic bishops were lied to, according to the Catholic bishops .
 The first hunger strike had been timed so that if anyone was going to die around Christmas, they would die around the time of a huge Christian celebration, the birth of Christ . The hunger strike was timed to coincide with the Christmas period .
 One was the risen Christ of Easter, and second was the i remembrance of Easter Rebellion of 1916 . One was a remembrance of the risen Jesus of Easter . The other was the remembrance of 1916.
 "The imagery that had gone into it was very powerful. So, the thinking, the symbolism, the imagery ... had gone very powerful," the author says .
 Margaret Thatcher compounded British difficulties by appearing to be too ... —“a crime is a crime,” in that horrible strident verse of hers. Margaret Thatcher . Margaret Thatcher: “a . crime is . a crime is not a crime. It’s a crime
 It showed no understanding of the Irish political psyche, it showed . And while it may well have gone down well with her own supporters, it may not go down well .
 It did tremendous damage to the constitutional politicians in Ireland who are now being challenged by these revolutions . The Irish constitutional politicians have been challenged by the revolutions, says David Cameron .
 The impact of Sands’s death was overwhelming. And all of hat had to be undone. The impact was overwhelming, and all of it was undone .
 Even the peace people, the people who had formed a peace movement in 1976 as a result of IRA atrocities, said that they could identify with people, they identified with Sands . Even peace people who formed a . peace movement formed in 1976 said they identify with Sands.
 Bobby Sands’ death led to yet another huge emotional ground swell inside the Catholic community . Bobby Sands was a member of the Knights of St. Francis in Massachusetts, Massachusetts .
 A ground swell which didn’t necessarily go towards Republicans, but certainly it went against the British . The ground swell was a ground swell that went against Republicans, not Democrats .
 The Protestant community and the Catholic community were more polarized than they’d been for at least a decade . That had the impact that had the . impact that the Protestant community . and the . Catholic community .
 The culmination of the hunger strikes was one which brought Sinn Fein out of being a militant armed sect into a wider political and democratic process . Sinn Fein's hunger strikes were the culmination of a hunger strike which brought the party out of an armed sect .
 "I don’t think they would have embraced that had it not been for the 1 emotional ground swell of hunger strikes, the hunger strikes . The hunger strike is the result of the realization that there ; are votes out there to be taken. I don't think they . would
 There is a perception that the IRA and other paramilitaries have used mindless violence . The IRA Campaign of Violence is based on the IRA's campaign of violence in Northern Ireland .
 Northern Ireland rarely gets examples of mindless violence in the Northern Ireland context . So, very rarely do you get examples of . mindless violence . Northern Ireland .
 Sometimes car bombs would be used, which would be simply about causing as much economic destruction as possible, as making Northern Ireland so expensive for the British exchequer that there would be a demand for the UK to withdraw .
 There always was the belief that the death of one British soldier was worth at least, in propaganda terms, ten policemen from Northern Ireland, because in Britain itself, the British mainland, the demand to get out would grow .
 The IRA tried to do for the most part and what they believed they were doing was that they were not trying to harm the local community . What the IRA tried for most part was to try and not harm local community, he says .
 If they killed a Protestant, they would argue that it wasn’t a Protestant they were killing, but it was a member of the security forces who happened to be a Protestant . If they were killed in the U.S. they would say it wasn't a Protestant but a
 In their role as purported defenders of the Catholic community, they’ve actually succeeded in killing more Catholics than have their opponents . And in their role . Catholic critics say they've succeeded in . killing more . Catholics than their opponents have .
 "They were damaging their own people more than they were furthering their cause," she said . "So, when they carry out campaigns of violence against property or against people, many, many instances what they were doing was they were damaging themselves," she added .
 "It was always very, very conscious that it had to be careful how it used its violence," she says . "So, it was always ... very conscious," she adds .
 It is worth pointing out that Belfast, for example, never became Beirut . Belfast never became Lebanon, but Beirut did .
 "Very rarely could you put a finger and say that innocent people were targeted deliberately," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 "They were very conscious in their propaganda of how they sold their violence," says the author of the book . They were conscious in how they were selling violence, he says . "They sold violence. They sold violence," he said .
 When we speak of soft targets we’re talking about people or property which are easy to target, very easy to pick off . We're talking about soft targets, we're talking to people or properties which are very easy targets to target .
 "The easier they are, the more successful you’re going to be," he says . "And, obviously, the easier they’ll be. And, obviously the easier . They’ve got to be more successful, he adds .
 An isolated Protestant farmer on the border of ' Northern Ireland, who was a member of the local security force on a "" part-time basis .
 The IRA killed a woman who was taking a census collection . Or, in one instance, a woman was killed by the IRA . The IRA was responsible for the killing .
 She was simply finding out, for the government, how people felt in Northern Ireland, she said . She said she was simply trying to find out how people feel in NI .
 Bloody Friday happens within four months of the imposition of direct rule, when Unionists had lost out, when there were people saying, “Let’s call it a day.” Bloody Friday is Bloody Friday . Bloody Friday occurs within four months after the imposition
 The IRA response to Bloody Friday was that it wasn’t they who got it wrong, that they gave the warnings . The IRA responded that it was not the IRA who got the warnings wrong .
 It was the authorities who got it wrong, that they did not mean to kill those ; innocent civilians . The authorities did not intend to kill innocent civilians, it was the government .
 Protestant paramilitaries are a real force in the political game in Northern Ireland, says the BBC . It reinforced the position of the Protestant paramilitary groups, writes Gerry Adams .
 It persuaded the British government that you cannot do business with the Republican movement . It persuaded them to stop doing business with Republicans, says David Cameron .
 Bloody Friday had very serious consequences. So, for all of those reasons, Bloody Friday . So, it was Bloody Friday; . Bloody Friday ; had very severe consequences.
 The Murder of Lord Mountbatten was part of the British royal family . The IRA pulled off two of their huge spectaculars in August 1979 .
 The British authorities were able to make much propaganda out of the death of the two young boys . The boys were killed by the British authorities in the 1980s .
 British paratroopers were responsible for Bloody Sunday . The IRA blew to pieces 18 British soldiers in the same day as Bloody Sunday in Belfast .
 The British were able to mount a propaganda campaign, arguing very strongly that the border between Northern Ireland and the "" Republican of Ireland needed to be sealed .
 So, the death of Mountbatten and all the rest of it actually turned out to be a propaganda coup for the IRA rather than a loss for them . The death of the Lord of Lords of Lords in London was a 'propaganda coup' for IRA .
 IRA exploded the bomb in Enniskillen in November 1987, i they did their cause irreparable harm from the military perspective . When the bomb exploded the IRA exploded in November of 1987, it was a major blow to the IRA .
 So, what it . demonstrated to begin with was a total insensitivity of Protestant * peoples. So, . what it ; demonstrated to . begin with a total . insensitivity .
 That backfired very badly, they lost "" out very badly in that respect. That was very bad for them, and they lost very badly . They lost 'out very badly', they said .
 If they could destroy the British government with her, » even more so . And, if they could . destroy the . British government . Even more so.
 "Nowhere else could it happen that a complete government was being wiped out with one bomb. Nowhere else would it happen," he said .
 The London bombing campaign was simply to bring the war to the : British mainland . 8 palg ply 8 1 British mainland.
 Britain had failed because they didn't have the logistics, they didn’t have the local support, they said . Britain failed because of the logistics and the support of the local community, they added .
 It’s only much later on in the campaign, when they return to Britain, that it does become effective, with some spectacular failures . It's only much * later on later on the campaign that it becomes effective .
 Two young boys were blown to pieces by a bomb in Warrenpoint, a British town called Warrenpoint in March of 1992 . Two boys were killed by the bomb in March 1992 .
 "I think that was one of the telling points in actually going for a cease-fire," says Assad . "I'm not surprised that we're going to have a long-term ceasefire," he says of the Syrian president .
 The second attempt to blow up the British Cabinet occurred in 1991 when the Cabinet was meeting, dealing with the affair in Kuwait . The attempt was made in 1991 .
 IRA launched a bomb, a mortar bomb, in the heart of London on Downing Street . The IRA launched the bomb in a bid to get Downing Street to Downing Street back on the ground .
 It has brought home to politicians in London that at some stage you’re going to have to deal with us. And brought home . And brought . home to . politicians in . London that some stage . you're going to . have to . deal with them. And bring home
 The bombing in London and in Britain throughout the ’90s, I think demonstrates that the IRA were showing that they had the skill to continue . The IRA was showing they had to continue, says the author .
 It was the last throw of the dice, they had to go for the spectaculars, they said . But, in some ways, it was the final throw of a dice .
 "If they were going into negotiation, they went into negotiation from a position of military strength," he says . But, they also realized that if they were . going into negotiations, they . went into negotiations from a . position of . military strength, he adds .
 The bombs were occurring when there were secret negotiations going on between Martin McGuinness and the British . This was a classic example of the IRA saying look, if you think you’re going to hoodwink us, just you realize how military powerful we are. And these bombs were
 We use the term “internment’s” to mean imprisoning people without trial . British Actions Internment is a form of imprisonment without trial in the UK .
 Chief of police in Northern Ireland says his men had to carry out a policy . Northern Ireland police chief says policy must be carried out by his men .
 It was a disaster because they lifted only Republicans when Loyalist ; violence was going on at the same time . Violence was going to be going on during the time . It was also a disaster .
 Their intelligence was so out of date that , very few of those they lifted had actually been engaged in the present campaign of violence. Their intelligence .
 It was seen as an assault, yet again, on "" the whole Catholic community . It was therefore seen as . seen as a . assault on the whole . Catholic community. It was . considered an assault .
 It was followed by allegations of torture, ' many of which allegations were upheld . The allegations were followed by claims of torture being upheld .
 A number of studies have been done on IRA prisoners and IRA people : who have gone to their deaths . One of the things that comes out very clearly is that these ; people do not, as a class, belong to the criminal class .
 The rate of recidivism among former IRA inmates among former prisoners is very low, he says . "Very few of them are involved in criminal activity," he adds .
 "If you look t their level of education, you find that, for the most part, they have a reasonable level of . education," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Very few have third level, but most of them have a reasonable level of secondary education . Most of the children in the UK have secondary education, but not third-level .
 "So, they did not represent an underclass of ill-educated, disenchanted youth," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "They didn't represent the underclass"
 They represented some people, men and women, boys and girls, who believed they had to be part of the struggle . They had to act on behalf of their community, they said . They represented people who were in the struggle for their community .
 'I have had a little experience of going into the ' prisons and teaching. I have had to go into the prisons and teach. I'm not afraid to go to prison. I've had a lot of experience going into prison and teaching."
 If there were psychopaths in there, i they were very, very difficult to discover . They were people who really believed that they, in fact, belonged to a higher moral plane than i the rest of us, because they were prepared to lay down their lives .
 One was Ulsterization, whereby the battle "" would be fought by people from Northern Ireland . The security forces would be the police of Northern Ireland rather than the British army . The front line would be police of the police rather than army .
 IRA and the Republican movement from the greater Catholic community : by saying, “These people are not engaged in political struggle.” IRA and Republican movement .
 The Protestant community, particularly militant Protestants, were » becoming more self-confident, and they believed that it was only a question of time before they went back to the status quo . The Protestants were becoming more confident, and believed it was just a matter of time .
 There is no doubt that the authorities got very valuable information, with which they were able to lock dangerous men up . The authorities say they got valuable information with the help of the police .
 The means whereby they had got it run against the Western tradition of the rule of law, and, therefore, damaged that particular cause . But the means whereby . they had run it run . against the . Western tradition, the . rule of the law, they said .
 In criminalizing people, the British authorities were doing damage to their own system . And, again, in criminalizing . people, it was doing damage , to their . own system. And again, it's doing damage .
 One of the most serious defects in the last 25 ; years is what the IRA campaign has done to the British sense of justice, says David Cameron . The IRA campaign is responsible for the collapse of Britain's justice, he says .
 They refused to wear the prison clothes, and so, therefore, they wrapped themselves in a blanket . They wrapped themselves up in the blanket . The blanket was a prison blanket .
 Relatives are trying to free their sons and daughters from prison . They form an organization to try and free their children and daughters .
 The IRA realized that they were losing that section of the community. And the IRA realized it was losing them, he says . The IRA was losing the support of the IRA.
 IRA also began to realize 1 that the struggle they were involved in was political and military . And the IRA also . began to . realize that they were . involved in . the struggle . The struggle they had been involved in is political and . military .
 The IRA went into another cease-fire in 1974-75 in which they believed that some sort of , understanding with the British government that there was going to be , disengagement . The IRA believed that they were going to disengage from the UK .
 As aresult of that cease-fire, the old Republican leadership stood aside . The Republican leadership has stood aside from the old leadership .
 Gerry Adams, Martin McGuiness, come ' into their own' as people who have been against the cease-fire . Gerry Adams comes into his own in late 1975, when he and McGuiness are seen as people against the ceasefire .
 After '75, they were the people who took over, and they . took over with a very strong belief that you can * hever trust the Brits . And after ‘75’, they took over .
 New leadership "took at least two lessons ... from the failure of that ‘74-°75 cease-fire," he says . "That new leadership, I think, took ... two lessons," he adds .
 They must demonstrate that if they go into negotiations again, they do so from a position of strength, not from weakness, says French President Nicolas Sarkozy .
 Republicans had to demonstrate that if they 1 Went into negotiations, they could bring the whole Republican movement along with them, that Republicanism could not be split . They had to prove they could unite Republicanism, and that they could do so .
 They began to treat virtually all Irish1 Catholics with great disdain . And they began to . treat virtually . all Irish Catholics with . great disdain. And they treated virtually all . Catholics with very disdain. But they began . to treat them with great . disdain .
 The Anglo-Irish agreement is one of the most significant agreements between the two governments in this century . It was a recognition by the British government that the Northern Ireland problem * was something which it couldn’t handle in its own right .
 From a British perspective it was about closer security, cooperation, cooperation. But, thirdly, from a . British perspective, it's about closer . Security, cooperation," she said .
 IRA described the agreement as the most sophisticated, counter-revolutionary strategy ever devised for the British . IRA in its Christmas message in 1985 described the deal as a 'sophisticated strategy'
 The Protestant reaction to the Agreement was one of overwhelming detestation, from all strata in Protestant society . The Agreement was approved by the Church of England in 1881 .
 They believed that they’d been sold out in a way that had never happened before partition . They believed they'd been . sold out, they said .
 The agreement was approved by the United States Senate last week, but it was not enough to stop it from being implemented .
 It was an attempt to say to the Protestant population, “You in fact, are a minority inside the United Kingdom.” The Protestant population is a minority in the UK .
 Northern Ireland makes up less than three percent of the population of the United Kingdom; you make up about two percent of that population . Northern Ireland has a population of about 2 percent .
 The 1988 Gibraltar Killings of Three IRA Volunteers at Gibraltar in 1988 . The killing of three IRA volunteers at Gibraltar was something which appeared to be a wonderful coup for the British security services . Three IRA volunteers were killed by British security forces in Gibraltar .
 They had got them as they were about to plant a bomb, or so they said, and they had executed them . They said they had been executed as they had planted a bomb . They had been killed by the Americans, who were killed in the bombing .
 Evidence started to build up that these people could quite easily have been arrested . But, again, it was something which went badly awry as far as the authorities were concerned .
 Authorities 'made martyrs out of three people' in the case of the three people, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 One of them was a young female graduate who represented the romantic side of Republicanism . One of the Republican candidates for the presidency is a young woman who represented a young Republican .
 British authorities tried to destroy evidence of some of the witnesses, witnesses from Gibraltar, they say . And as the British authorities try to destroy the evidence, they compounded their own problem . The British authorities are trying to destroy some of their own witnesses .
 British media have been trying to get to the bottom of the scandal, says Simon Tisdall . But he says the British media has failed to do so in the past to reveal the truth .
 Mariad Farrell who was quite a striking beauty, they used that very, very successfully, they said . Mariad . Farrell . Farrell who is quite a . striking beauty .
 Even during the hunger strikes, the hunger strikers appeared to look like Christ with the long black hair and the dark beards . "All of it was part of war by other means, war by propaganda. Even during hunger strikes," he says . The hunger strikes were 'part of war
 The Birmingham Six is one of the classic cases as to why Britain might ' want to get out of Ireland, because it showed British justice at its worst . Birmingham Six was a classic case of the Birmingham Six .
 For two decades, the British political establishment could not accept that they could have made a mistake . For 20 years, the UK political establishment couldn't accept that it could have been a mistake. For decades, they couldn't believe they had made a decision .
 The Lord Chief Justice said » it was inconceivable that a mistake could have been made . The judge said » » » it is inconceivable .
 The longer they went on denying it, the longer the British political ‘ establishment did serious damage to their old case. And the » longer they . went on denied it. The longer the . longer the political establishment did . damage to the . old case, they said .
 Trish Republicanism was exonerated, even though Irish Republicans had planted the bomb . Republicanism exonerated even though the bomb was planted by the IRA .
 Irish-American diaspora has suffered from a huge myth, says author . He says it's suffered from 'a huge myth' about the Irish-U.S. Diaspora .
 It suffered from the myth that it had huge influence with the administration, whatever that » administration was .
 In the U.S. there was a split between the treetops and the grass roots, who believed that there may be a constitutional way forward . The grass roots believed that they could bring moral pressure on the administration to bring pressure on Britain to do .
 They © were heavily influenced by John Hume, who was the leader of the 1 Nationalists in the north, and by the Irish government, that there had to 1 be a constitutional way forward . Irish-Americans should not be giving their money to the IRA for weapons .
 The treetops, which were trying to work through the administration, and you have the grass roots . The grass roots, the guys who were giving their dollars from the Bronx, South Boston, or whatever, to help the struggle .
 FBI report in 1973 said it was embarrassed by the Irish conflict . FBI report said that it was paid for by U.S. dollars . Irish conflict has been 'paid for by United States dollars'
 Irish America had to come to terms with the fact that insofar as the administration was concerned about the Irish question, it was only concerned because it was part of a larger network of international terrorism, and something had to be done to break that link .
 The Horsemen come out with statements very opposed to the IRA campaign, as it becomes much more vicious during the 1970s . The Horseman come out * with statements .
 It is the Horsemen who argue very strongly that you should not be helping these people . The Horsemen argue that you shouldn't be helping them. It is a very important part of the world's history of helping people in need .
 Irish America generally, until very recent years, was seen as being a hindrance rather than a help . Irish America has been a source of strength in the U.S. for decades .
 There is a huge irritation among the more establishment newspapers, for example, about the role that the United States has played. So, there was a feeling, still remains a « feeling, among the British political establishment that this has nothing to u do with the U.S. So there
 The United States’ influence is growing, and is important, says CNN's John Sutter . That indicates the U.S. influence in the world is growing .
 "They have a romantic view of what Ireland was, they have a very simplistic view of the struggle," says the Irishman .
 Northern Ireland Protestants could never understand the language of liberty, which goes all the way back to the revolution . The language rings with the American community, which is used in Northern Ireland .
 'It was that use of propaganda, which kept it on the ' burner all the time. But it was that . Use of propaganda kept it . on the . burner . All the time, it was the use of . propaganda .
 Clinton’s Granting a Visa to Gerry Adams in 1994 . Clinton was the first post-Cold War president to grant a visa to Adams .
 His predecessors, Bush, Reagan, all . were part of that Cold War which . believed very strongly in the special Anglo-American relationship .
 John Major owed no favors to John Major, because the conservative party had acted on behalf of George Bush in the presidential campaign . Also, he owed no favoritism to Major because he had acted in behalf of Bush .
 He could solidify his hold into the Democratic party through Irish America . Irish America had begun to drift towards the Republican party in the previous decade .
 For the man who says “the economy, stupid,” he actually was concerned with foreign policy issues . But, secondly, for the man . He actually was worried about foreign policy . For the first time, he says ‘the economy is stupid’
 Gerry Adams refused seven visas to come to the U.S. over the past 20 years . Gerry Adams, over the i past 20 . years, had been refused seven visa to come . to the United States .
 What he lost was that he couldn’t deliver, that he could demonstrate that he was a Nelson Mandela . Mandela. Mandela. He lost . He lost that he didn't deliver .
 Sinn Fein is going into negotiation with the goodwill of the most powerful state in the world . That if Sinn Fein did go into . negotiation, it was going into negotiations with the . goodwill of a . powerful state, says Gerry Adams .
 "For a people who believed themselves to be demonized, marginalized, isolated completely, psychologically this was very powerful indeed. And, you know for a people . You know for the people who . believed themselves . to be marginalized, marginalized completely, psychological this was . powerful indeed .
 There would not have been an IRA cease fire in August of 1994 if the Republican movement had not been convinced that the Clinton administration was wholly on board . The Republican movement was convinced that Clinton was committed to trying to move the process forward .
 British authorities are leaning at least on the British authorities, because they knew that the Irish authorities wanted to move in that direction in any case . Leaning at least .
 Clinton administration has played a central role in the peace process, says Clinton . Clinton administration is central to peace process in Afghanistan, says Kerry .
 It has pursuaded Irish Republicans that their views are being taken seriously on a wider stage .
 It persuaded their political leadership that they may have to go for something less than what they actually want to implement in one go . Equally, it persuaded them that they might have to compromise on what they want .
 It has persuaded them that politics is about process and compromise and concession and concession, it has convinced them that process and concession is necessary, they have said .
 The President and staff inside the NSC listen to people like John Hume and went for it . And, all of that has come about because the President listened to John . Hume and his staff, including the President, went for the job .
 "They ignored the advice coming from the State Department and from the Justice Department," says President Obama . "They said we’re going for this. They ignored the state Department and Justice Department’s advice," he says .
 They have kept in weekly, if not daily contact with the actors to make sure that the peace process would stay in place .
 They have, in the present Blair government, the Labor government, a very close ally indeed . The Blair government has been a close ally of the Labour government since the 1980s .
 The parts are there for the peace process to actually take off, he says . "The American administration has been central to all of that," he adds . The U.S. has been a key part of the peace effort, he said .
 The role of the Clinton administration has been central to the whole peace process . Clinton administration is central to peace process in Afghanistan, says David Cameron .
 They took the risk in standing alongside Gerry Adams, in giving Adams the moral fiber and the political fiber to convince his own people that they’d never reach the stage where politics is a game on time . The risk of standing alongside Adams is the risk they took .
 You may not get all you want, but you won’t get anything better by any other means . You may get a lot of things you want but you will get better by doing it .
 People got into the present peace talks in a much less euphoric frame of mind . Peace talks are in place in the hope of an agreement being reached by President Obama .
 The advantage of the 17 months was that the greater community in Northern Ireland said we can make this one . Northern Ireland has been in the process for 17 months, says David Cameron .
 As long as the Blair government with its huge majority stays with it, then it is possible to realize peace, if not in a matter of months, it's possible to do so quickly . The Blair government has a huge majority of support for the government, and as long as it stays
 In the coming months the worst case scenario is that all the historic mistrust will get on top of the talks . Worst case scenario would be that historic mistrust gets to top of talks .
 The Ulster Unionist party won’t have the confidence to continue in Northern Ireland . The parties outside the talks will be able to whip up fears in the larger community .
 Either it's as a result of historic mistrust or short-term political gain, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: 'Historic mistrust or political gain'
 It will use the vocabulary of South Africa "" where they seek a sufficient consensus to make sure you can build up a strong center . The South African government will use a similar vocabulary to South Africa .
 Those who are outside the process realize the futility of being outside of the process, and they will come in over time . And, those who are . outside the . process realize that they will . come in .
 For the first time ever in the history of 1 Northern Ireland, a proper, inclusive political dialogue will be held in Northern Ireland . And, with 1 the support of civil society in norther Ireland, the business community, and the churches, you will have for the first . ever in
 Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness were elected in May 1997, when Gerry Adams was elected . The last British elections were held in May of 1997, and the last British election was held in 1997 .
 These are the two people at the heart of the Republican peace process. These are two people .
 The fact that these are the two people who are leading the "" peace faction, have been elected, cannot be underestimated . The two people have been leading the peace faction in the past .
 A Labor government which is a huge majority, and has got a very close working relationship with the Clinton administration . But, a Labor government .
 Blair team, long before they come to office, were watching very closely what John Major did . Blair team were watching closely what Major did before they came to power .
 The one thing that they had hoped was that "" Major would push things along so far that they could pick it up and go further with it . "The one thing I had hoped would be that they would push it along," she said .
 They didn’t foresee that they were going to get such a ; magnificent, spectacular victory . The result was a magnificent victory for the Englishmen .
 President Barack Obama and Prime Minister George W. Bush have a good relationship, he says . They also have a very good relationship 1 between the president and the prime minister, he adds .
 Labor administration who have studied very closely how the democratic ; presidential campaigns worked, and how the American political system ; works .
 So that there is a . meeting of minds and a meeting of attitudes » which was never there before . So that . there is . that there are a meeting . of minds . which was . never there . Which was never . there before.
 As they sit at the talks at the moment, the best that can be given is an interim judgement . The best that is given is a interim judgement of the situation .
 It's conceivable that others had to go through the same : learning curve . Equally, it is conceivable that . others had gone through the . learning curve. Equally . it is possible that others . had to learn the same .
 Most of the parties, including the » Republican movement, are now prepared to accept less than .... when they set out . And in the wider picture, * you arrive at an interim judgement that most of the . parties are now willing to accept . less than ... when they . set out
 People like Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness have gone through their own painful form of political odyssey . Gerry Adams has gone through a painful period of political turmoil, writes Gerry Adams .
 They have gone down a r very long road where they believe in simplistically that you could win i this militarily. They believe they could win it militarily, they say . They are not going to win this, they are going to lose it, they're not winning it milit
 They have had the moral courage to admit that there is another way forward . They have also had to admit there is a way forward.
 Sinn Fein have to convince the Irish people as a whole that this is not part of a cynical ploy, that they’re not going to return to violence. Sinn Fein must convince the . people as the whole that . that this . is not . part of an attempt to convince
 The Irish government has a 'very tall order' to speak to constituencies, says David Cameron . It is the people of Ireland, says Mr Cameron, a former minister of state .
 "Politics is evolving globally. Not simply » because of their campaign of violence, but simply because of the way that "" politics is evolving worldwide . "The world is changing, not just because of its politics, but because of how it's evolving globally."
 The island of Ireland will be part of a regional European union, says David Cameron . It will be a strong regionalism in the island, he says .
 Americans, and particularly Irish Americans, have also gone through their own learning curve over the past 25 to 27 years . Americans have also had their own ups and downs in recent decades .
 There was identification with the underdog, while turning a blind eye to many of the things that that underdog was doing . "There was identification ... but there was also a lack of respect for the underdog," says CNN's John Sutter .
 To simplifying some horrible violence on the part of the IRA and others, the IRA has been involved in some of the worst violence in the country's history . To simplify the story, it's not about the IRA, but it's about the violence itself .
 Americans have a much stronger realization of the complexity of the problem, says Julian Zelizer . Americans also have a stronger sense of ownership to the outcome of the outcome, Zelizer says .
 'Holding onto that ownership which I think is very important in the medium term. And it’s holding onto that . I think it's very important for the long-term,' he says .
 Peace process is the hard bit; killing is easy. We could say that, in fact, peace process is hard bit, killing is hard. Peace process and killing are the hard bits, we could say . We could also say that peace process was the hard part, peace is the
 Killing can give certain people in the community their sense of self esteem . Killing can also give people a sense of confidence, says the author of the book Killing .
 They simply become ordinary members of their community . Knowing that that has to stop, they simply become members of the community . They know that that must be stopped .
 As part of the peace process, it is essential that what has built into it is an attempt to civilianize these people . And so as part of it, it's essential that it is a civilianization of these people, he says .
 It has been tried in other peace processes with very limited success, it should be said . It has also failed to achieve success in other attempts to achieve peace .
 But, I think, it is more likely to be achievable in the Irish conflict for very simple reasons. It's more likely that it will be achievable if the conflict is in Ireland again .
 "That is the continuing part of the family, the continuing traditional Catholic beliefs," she says . "And that's the continuing tradition of the Catholic faith," she adds .
 The fact that it is the communities which sanctions violence, and the community can turn it off. It is the fact that communities sanctions violence and the communities can turn them off. The fact is that violence is sanctioned by the communities .
 The King’s Speech Wembley Park 1925 Gene possible Research Centers British Royals want to know what this gene is, FOXP2 1941 The surgery on Rosemary Kennedy has failed, the daughter of Rose Mary Kennedy, daughter of Joseph Kennedy Sr.
 In an interview with two newspaper journalists, Louis M Lyons of The Boston Globe and Ralph Coghlan of the St. Louis Globe, two of the journalists interviewed . The interview was conducted by journalists Louis Lyons of the Boston Globe, and Ralph Lyons of St. Paul's The St.
 She’s fighting for self-preservation, just as we will if it comes to us, she says . ‘I know more about the European situation than anybody else, and it’�s up to me to see that the country gets it,’ she
 Rosemary Kennedy read few books but could read Winnie-the-Pooh . Rosemary read few children's books, but could still enjoy Winnie the Pooh . Here we come!
 For some time past, I have been studying the i well known psychological method of Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter has been studying Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
 The crowd made no sign, and the King and the + Queen smiled as if nothing had happened . The crowd did not react .
 Vp ike Ai at the age of 23 é ECR L | SAY © Why she was seen as a threat—and abandoned in an institution for decades .
 Rosemary Kennedy wrote in a 1940 letter to her 1 father Joseph P Kennedy, then serving as U.S. Ambassador to Great Britain . Kennedy was 22-year-old when she wrote the letter .
 Just over a year later, that same young woman affectionate, dutiful and always eager to please her father, was unable to form a sentence .
 Joe and Rose Kennedy’s intellectually disabled eldest daughter . lost everything at age 23, when her father scheduled a catastrophic lobotomy that left ‘ her with the mental capacity of a toddler .
 On DECEMBER 19, 1961, at the age of 73, Josepsh Kennedy Sr. suffered a stroke .
 At an arly age, Montessori enrolled in classes at an all-boys echnical school, with hopes of ecoming an engineer . She hopes to be an engineer in the future .
 Her ducational method is in use today in many public places . Robert Kennedy’s son Robert was assassinated on JUNE 5, 1968 .
 He died at home in Hyannis Port the following year on Nov. 18, 1969 .
 Montessori was born on August 31, 1870 in Chiaravalle, Italy . She was born in 1870 and died in 1947 .
 She was awarded certificates for good behavior in the 1st grade and for “lavori ; donneschi”, or “women’s work’, the next year . Her early school record was “not particularly noteworthy”
 In the presence of a naked ody was deemed Dr. Dr. in the presence . Dr. was not allowed to take classes with men in Cedarburg, Wisconsin .
 In her last two ears, she studied pediatrics nd psychiatry, and worked in he pediatric consulting room nd emergency service . She is now an expert in ediatric medicine .
 Montessori incorporated elements of grace, beauty, purpose, care, exploration, discovery, and independence . Montessoria incorporated the elements of Grace, beauty and purpose .
 From 1896 to 1901, Montessori worked with and researched so-called “phrenasthenic” children . Children experiencing some form of cognitive delay, illness, or disability . Montessorian worked with children in his home .
 Instead of marriage, Montessori decided to continue her work and studies . Instead of getting married, she decided to focus on her studies .
 Montessori was intrigued by Itard’s ideas and created a far » more specific and organized system for applying them to the everyday education of i children with disabilities . Montessoria was inspired by the ideas of Itard and developed a far more specific system .
 In 1897 Montessori spoke on societal responsibility for juvenile delinquency at the "" National Congress of Medicine in Turin . In 1897 he spoke on society responsibility for youth delinquency .
 She studied theoretical and moral philosophy, history of philosophy, and psychology as such, but she did not graduate from university . She was a major student at the University of Cambridge .
 Montessori, ; occupied with teaching, research, and other professional activities, oversaw and ; observed the classroom work, but did not teach the children directly . Montessoria was occupied by teaching, . observed and . observed the work of the children, but not taught directly .
 Developmental verbal dyspraxia is a condition in ' which children have problems saying sounds, syllables and words . It is also known as childhood apraxia of ' speech and developmental apraxias of speech .
 In 1920 the British Government decided to site the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley Park, on the site of the pleasure gardens created by Sir Edward Watkin in the 1890s . One of the reasons for the suggestion was a sense that other powers, ie America 1 and Japan, were challenging Britain
 India effectively signalled the end of the British Empire to anyone who . thought about the consequences, while the Dominions had shown little interest in ; following British foreign policy since the war . India was the most important country in the world .
 It was hoped that the Exhibition ‘ would strengthen the bonds within the Empire, stimulate trade and demonstrate . British greatness both abroad and at home, where the public was believed to be ‘ increasingly uninterested in Empire, preferring other distractions, such as the cinema .
 I am told I had a grandfather I thought or Ireland a former king who stepped down and I was nameed after and I believe that was King Edward the VIII . In a gene that shows in half of family members Edward VIII did not show it, his younger brother did .
 Tom Donegan did not show it, Ed Donegan and his mother did including the swallowing trouble which is from dry throat . Tom donegan and Ed donegan both had dry throat problems, but Ed did not .
 The Duke and Duchess of York i scheduled to make a Royal Tour of Australia . The need to improve the Duke’s speaking became pressing .
 Help had been sought before, never with success, but the i Duke agreed to see Logue, a man with no medical training . Logue is strongly recommended by the Duke of Cambridge .
 After two months of treatment, significant improvement in Duke’s speech became evident and the Australian tour was a fine success . Duke admired the adult “Bertie” who rapidly ecame his favored son and preferred successor .
 ' For his part King George V was delighted. But primogeniture was not to be . ' '
 The emotional regulation system may be different in people with BPD . There is a neurological basis for some of the symptoms, suggesting there is neurological basis .
 I have my own internal experiences (always rational though it is made to appear by mocking me I am not, I am treated as though bipolar or shchizophrenic delusional not because I am either . Others are trying to misdiagnose me and work to not corretly recognize my
 I am sure speech coaching did help him him, theater has been recomended to me, singing seems to be a way to flow with language, but this is a matter of holdign continous focus . I think during at least in some circumatances experiences a secondary thread in
 George III was King of Great Britain and Ireland from 1760 until the union of the two kingdoms on 1 January 1801 . King of the United Kingdom ‘ of Great . Britain and . Ireland until his death in 1820 . George III .
 Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale (Albert Victor Christian : Edward; 8 January 1864 14 January 1892) was the eldest child of the Prince and ; Princess of Wales and grandson of the reigning British monarch, Queen Victoria .
 When young, he traveled the world extensively as a naval cadet . As an adult, he joined the British Army, but did not undertake any active military duties .
 He was engaged to Princess Victoria Mary i of Teck in late 1891 . After two unsuccessful courtships, he became engaged to her . He had two unsuccessful attempts at marriage .
 In the following transcript excerpt from a video on Youtube with auto transcript the basis can be found in history for Great Britain and QEII for the affects on London of WWII and the Germans . I will say this fits the British attitudes in Manchurian Candidate 1962 and their dislike for
 Parents-siblings-descendents in pre-genetic sequencing era was used in plant as well as animal genetic studies and included people like the parents of Valerie Jarret in Iran .
 The term ‘disorders of attention, motor and perception’ or DAMP was used, particularly in Scandinavia . The term was used in the 1960s and 1970s .
 The premise of this book is the FBI, CIA, DARPA, and others have been using population groups of out of wedlock descendents of Windsor Kutscheras to study a speech gene . During these studies the CIA has been simultaneously grooming some subjects to be future leaders of a
 Family databases can find ‘the clones’ and the race is on to silence and eliminate those whose existence is a risk to the corridors of power . The attack must be converted and complete before anyone knows who was attacked or why .
 This overlapped with the expertise of Crytograhpy and the use of anomalies and grammatical semantics in messaging and the DARPA Brain Program in cognition . Hypothesis about how minds speak was part of 15.Sce@ln(9ee1e¢ and information theory
 England, the Queen of England, likely felt the same way and saw the Irish president of the USA a threat to the glory of Britain, and the British goals for Ireland, Pakistan, and other locations .
 The Curse of the Kennedys comes from inside the Kennedy family and Joseph Kennedy Sr. aligned with Great Brittian will will erupt in 1961 during the Republic of Ireland Troubles . Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald Kennedy (July 22, 1890 January 22, 1995) was an American philanthropist, social
 The word ‘hydrangea’ is derived from Greek hydor meaning ‘water’ and angeion meaning “vessel” referring to the plant’s seed pods, which look like small water perhpaps of blue water . Joseph Kennedy Jr
 Robert Francis Kennedy is born November 25 1925 . Will serve as Attorney General, United States Senator, and run for President . August 13, 1926 .
 Prince Alber of York will assume the Thrown as King George VI and replace abdicating Nazi tied King Edward of Wales, all this 10 years later in 1936 as Austria is siezed .
 A crew of two would take off and fly to 2,000 feet before they activated the remote control system, armed the detonators, and parachuted from the aircraft . These “drone’s” aircraft could not take off safely on their own .
 Operation Aphrodite made use of unmanned, explosive-laden Army Air Corps Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress and Navy Consolidated PB4Y-1 Liberator bombers . The bomb was developed under the name Trinity and supported by Roman Catholics .
 July 25, 1915, Hull, MA. Died: August 12, 1944, June 23, 1944: The First FJK Back Surgery. Died August 12 , 1944 .
 Surviving the collision with the Japanese destroyer and enduring the grueling nature of the . subsequent rescue worsened JFK’s back problems . JFK's back problems worsened after the crash with a Japanese destroyer .
 Once he returned stateside, he was evaluated by a team of physicians at the ‘Mayo Clinic, including noted orthopedist Dr. Dr. John Defterios . The team evaluated him at the Mayo Clinic .
 German test pilot Helmut Schenck was the first person known to use an ejection seat to successfully exit his aircraft in an emergency situation . Helmut used the seat to escape his aircraft during World War II .
 Schenck was testing a Heinkel He-280 jet fighter in tow behind a conventionally powered aircraft when his plane iced up . The plane was unable to start its engines, making it impossible to start again .
 Powered by compressed gas, the seat catapulted him clear of the aircraft . The seat was catapulted clear of an aircraft carrying him .
 Schenck was the first to use this method of exiting his aircraft in an emergency . The method was first used by the first man to exit his aircraft .
 Another Heinkel pilot had previously ejected successfully under test conditions . Heinkel's ejectionist ejected successfully in a test flight . The Heinkel was the first to successfully eject from the aircraft .
 This was logical enough, considering that the speed and g-forces generated by these high-speed planes made escape problematical for a pilot equipped with only a parachute . This was the case, and the pilot was able to escape without a parachute, using a parachute instead .
 Exiting the aircraft by “bailing out,” as was common in propeller-driven planes, was exceedingly dangerous in a jet aircraft . Exiting an aircraft by "bail out, as was . common in . propeller driven planes, it was . exceedingly dangerous
 The British also studied aircraft ejection during the interwar years but set the project aside in favor of other pursuits .
 Ejection seats were installed in several jet-aircraft models flown by the Luftwaffe . The Heinkel He-162 Volksjager, the Arado Ar234B Nachtigal and the Messerschmitt Me-163 Komet .
 The Me-262 was the most widely used German jet fighter of the war . The ejection seat was only rarely installed in the Me-260 .
 Approximately 60 Luftwaffe airmen ejected from their planes in combat situations during World War II . Schenck’s escape from his plane was one of the most daring escape attempts in the history of the war .
 My father flew in the first, second and third atomic bombing runs . He would have been potentially third atomic bomb runs against. His father flew .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy served as the 35th president of the United States from 1961 until his assassination in 1963 . He was often referred to as JFK .
 Rosemary Kennedy was the eldest daughter born to Joseph P Kennedy Sr. and Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy . She was born September 13, 1918 and died January 7, 2005 .
 Eunice Mary Kennedy Shriver was an American philanthropist and a member of the Kennedy family . She died August 11, 2009 at age 91 . She was married to Maria Shriver, who died in 1994 .
 She was a sister of United States President John F Kennedy, United States Senators Robert F Kennedy and Edward Kennedy, and Rosemary Kennedy . She was the sister of U.S. Ambassador to Ireland Jean Kennedy Smith, as well as the sister-in-law of Jacqueline Kennedy .
 Joseph P Kennedy Sr. Died NOVEMBER 18, 1969 having survived the Kennedy Curse and living longer than any of his children in House Camelot Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, United States .
 Manhattan Project B-17 death of Joseph Kennedy Jr. was planned for August 41944 . Planned POTUS Aug 41944 death of JFK Jr. Joseph Kennedy .
 Joseph Kennedy Jr. was groomed by his father and predicted to be the first Roman Catholic United States president . Malcom X (Donald Barr) hols and expermintal monkey in white house in future photo .
 He often boasted that he would be president even without help from his father . The president often boasted about his father's success .
 Attempted first Aphrodite attack Twelve August with robot taking off from Fersfield at One Eight Zero Five Hours .
 Donald Barr William Barr and Christopher Wray have a Free Masons hit on me using a Paywall of FBI backed assailants . Twins were created and studied regarding a speech defect . Donald and Christopher Barr were created to study speech defects .
 My father turns atheist after his best friend is betrayed by the Catholic church . My father and his parents were loyal to both, overcoming Boston WASP oppression .
 Richard Chenney will experience being pulled over by the police and afterwards alter his life course asserting that the police had charged him with drunk driving . Chenney was in Bush's move to Texas to go into politics to defeat the far-right called Zapata Oil .
 Johnson’s cowboy hat and boots reflected his Texas roots and genuine love of the Hill Country . Johnson's cowboy hat reflected his love of rural Hill Country, Texas .
 John F Kennedy was just DAYS from securing the 1960 Democratic nomination for president when he died . Dr. Kennedy died just days after securing the Democratic nomination .
 Given its location, Ron Paul served in the United States Air Force via Texas limate, terrain, and vegetation, he Hill Country can be onsidered the border between the American Southeast and Southwest .
 JFK hosted a luncheon for Prince Rainier and the Philadelphia born and raised Princess Grace of Monaco . Bruce Alger, Texas’ lone Republican in Congress, called it a capitulation “to radical forces of the East and North.”
 The sleeveless syle of dress that she often wore was often worn by the First Lady . The athletic physique, broad shoulders, and muscular arms of the first lady are highlighted by her muscular arms .
 JFK accepted an Irish christening cup for his son from Irish Ambassador Thomas J Kiernan . JFK accepted the cup from the Irish ambassador in 1961 .
 JFK hosted a luncheon for Prince Rainier and the Philadelphia born and raised Princess 1999, often Grace of Monaco . The luncheon was attended by JFK Jr. John Fitzgerald a Kennedy Jr .
 The athletic physique, broad shoulders, and muscular arms of the First referred to as JohnLady are highlighted by the sleeveless syle of dress that she often wore .
 CRISWELL’s July 3 SERMON had been the Protestant clergy's warning shot . John or JFK Jr., Grabbing the Houston Gauntlet, grabbed the Houston Chronicle .
 JFK and Jackie with Prince Rainier and Princess Grace of Monaco at Norman Vincent Peale the west entrance of the White House . The White House is located in the East Wing .
 i was captain of the basketball team at 1 Cambridge High School . i was a lifelong i parishioner at the school’s affiliated parish church St. John High School in Cambridge .
 He went to Boston College, where he graduated in 1936 . He graduated from Boston College .
 He holds the distinction ; of being one of the few presidents who served in all elected offices at the federal level . He is one of only a few presidents to serve in all federal offices .
 Johnson had one brother, Sam Houston Johnson, and three sisters, Rebekah, Josefa, and Lucia . Johnson had three sisters and one brother .
 Johnson City, Texas, was named after LBJ's father’s cousin, James Polk Johnson, whose forebears had moved west from Georgia . The nearby small town of Johnson City was named for LBJ‘s father, his cousin .
 Johnson quit Georgetown studies fter the first semester in 1934 . Johnson later quit his Georgetown studies .
 In the 1952 general election, Republicans won a majority in both the House and 1 Senate . Republicans won the election in 1952, winning both House and Senate .
 New Year’s Eve 1955, his doctors reported he had made “a most satisfactory ‘ recovery” since his heart attack five months prior . He became Senate Democratic leader in 1953 and majority leader in 1954 .
 The Kennedy-Johnson ticket won rin the 1960 presidential election . The two men compromised and the two men agreed to a compromise .
 The following year Johnson was elected to the presidency when he won in a landslide © against Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater . Johnson won the presidency in 1964, the following year .
 Kathleen later claimed that she looked at her christening certificate and that her actual godfather was Manhattanville College of the Sacred Heart professor Daniel Walsh . This claim has been acknowledged by Kathleen’s mother Ethel, though Kathleen claims her godfather is Daniel Walsh, a professor at Manhattan
 Seymour Hersh stated that Robert F Kennedy hated Johnson for his attacks on the Kennedy family . Hersh later maintained that his brother offered the ; position to Johnson merely as a courtesy, expecting him to decline .
 Johnson’s domestic policy was aimed at creating programs that would expand civil rights, public broadcasting, Medicare, Medicaid, aid to education and the arts, urban development .
 Johnson followed his predecessor’s actions in bolstering the space program . The Apollo Program was expanded under his presidency .
 President Lyndon Johnson enacted the Higher Education Act of 1965 . It established federally insured student loans . He enacted the act in 1965 .
 Immigration Act of 1965 laid the groundwork for U.S. immigration policy . Nationality Act laid groundwork for today's immigration policy; today . Nationalities Act was passed in 1965 .
 In 1968, the Tet Offensive inflamed the anti-war movement and public opinion dramatically turned against the war . The Tet Offensive in 1968 inflamed an already-infamous movement .
 He was there for the Civil Rights Symposium, marking the opening of his White House files on civil rights . Suddenly, he was gripped with an agonizing attack of chest pain . He was in the middle of a speech at the event .
 Recognizing it as angina, J ohnson quietly reached for the nitroglycerin pills he carried . He popped one i under his tongue .
 George Herbert Walker Walker Bush was born in Milton, Massachusetts on June 12, 1924 . Bush was the first president of the United States to be elected to office in 1945 .
 He attended Greenwich Country Day School from 1929 to 1937 . Phillips Academy, an elite private academy in Massachusetts, from 1937 to 1942 .
 Bush was commissioned as an ensign in the Naval Reserve at Naval Air Station i Corpus Christi on June 9, 1943, becoming one of the youngest aviators in the Navy . i Beginning in 1944, Bush served in the Pacific theater, where he flew a Grumman TB
 Elan School announced it would close on APRIL 1, 2011 . The school was also the subject of persistent allegations of abuse ' in their behavioral modification program . i
 Michael Christopher Skakel is the fifth of seven children . He is the son of Rushton Walter and Anne Reynolds .
 Virginia McMartin opened her Manhattan Beach, California, preschool in 1956 . The McMartin Preschool became popular within the local community .
 McMartin family, who operated a preschool in Manhattan Beach, California, were ; charged with hundreds of acts of sexual abuse of children in their care . McMartin’s preschool was operated by the McMartin Family .
 Monarch Programming is a method of mind control used by numerous : organizations for covert purposes . Monarch programming is a way of mind programming used by many : organizations . It is also used in covert operations .
 Collete MacDonald, child of Green Berett Jeffery Macdonal had shown, as is the case in half of the children who cary the London FOXP2 KE gene, really the Prince of York gene, King Edward’s younger brother .
 Alma Powell and Colin Powell were among many working with Her Majesty’s Service, Free Masons from St Louis speech therapists, and these two individuals have been long term tracking that gene, studing it in twins, using family lines in world diplomacy and sleeper agents .
 In the early 1950s in Colorado, the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry of the Southern Jurisdiction of the United States initiated a program to help children with speech and ' language disorders .
 There are SRCLP clinics, centers, and special programs for children and therapists located throughout the U.S. Today, there are more than 50 clinics and centers .
 For over two decades, the Scottish Rite Masons, Northern Masonic Jurisdiction, ; have been national leaders in the effort to help children and their families overcome ‘the painful obstacles of dyslexia’
 Through the support of Scottish Rite Masons, Southern Masonic Jurisdiction, these clinics, centers, and i programs continue to increase . The support of these clinics and centers continues to increase.
 In 2000, the University of Missouri opened the Robert G Combs Language Preschool . The Valley of Columbia Scottish Rite has donated the money to open the preschool .
 Scottish Rite RiteCare began their philanthropic program in 1987 in parternship with Children’s Miracle Network . Jim Carpenter Website The Valley of Joplin Scottish Rite .
 Ground-penetrating radar has discovered the remains near the site of the Kamloops Indian Residential School . Chief Rosanne Casimir of the Tk’emlups te Secwepemc First Nation said on Friday .
 It was a very brief stopover and part of her American West ‘Coast tour . It was the first stopover of her tour of the West .
 Prince Edward made a stop at a private reception at i ‘Harvest golf course in South East Kelowna for supporters and sponsors of ‘Duke of Edinburgh citizenship program . Prince Edward, the Earl of Wessex, stopped at the private reception .
 The group was formed to seize control of the Cuban government after the Bay of Pigs Invasion . The operation was concentrating on Cuba and were operating out of Mexico .
 Rolling STones interview with E Howard Hunt in his prison cell . Hunt was the ultimate keeper of secrets regarding who killed JFK JFK . Rolling Stone interview with Hunt .
 He thought of f himself as a cool dude, suave, 1 sophisticated, intellectual, intellectual . "He thought of himself as ... a cool guy," he said .
 Donald Barr CIA Free Mason with an experimental monkey having a birthday at the White House November 23 1961 .
 Catholics like Micheal Hastings, a Catholic High School student from France and others like Mel Gibson, who opposed WASPS in Australia and the USA, have been targeted by Patreus, the NSA and others as the British have planned monarchies and wealth based familial power .
 Quebec Act, act of the British Parliament in 1774 that vested the government of : Quebec in a governor and council, preserved the French Civil Code, the seigneurial system of land tenure, and the Roman Catholic Church . Quebec Act was act of . 1774 .
 One of the founders of National Women’s Political Caucus and co-chair of ERAmerica . Co-chair is traveling the country to push for passage of the Equal Rights Amendment .
 Chester William Nimitz was a fleet admiral of the U.S. Navy . Nimitz died in 1966 in the Battle of the Atlantic Ocean .
 Company rule in India effectively began in 1757 after the Battle of Plassey and lasted until 1858 . Following the Indian Rebellion of 1857, the Government of India Act 1858 led to the British assuming direct control of India .
 The region was sometimes called the Indian Empire, though not officially . The region is sometimes known as "Indian Empire" or "Indian Republic"
 This book looks at secret twins studies, illegal psychiatric studies and abusive military research and coverups in these families leading into 1945 and the Manhattan Project, RADAR, and and other sciences that my Cape Cod familiy became an espionage victim of. This book is a look at secret twin
 Former FBI Special Agent in charge Ted Gunderson to be a focal point on finding these long deep British Rotschilds Rockefeller and Prescott BUSH NWO programs . Even Marilyn Monroe figured into this and became a victim of the CIA .
 The British Pilgrim like institutions may not have been planned for any purpose, when they were needed for a secret program beginning in 1925 for Eugenics research .
 This book will conjecture and utilize available Open Source information that Bebrew compound Branch Davidians and the Lakota Tribe of Wounded Knee rejected the plan on nationalism soveriegnty grouunds . The book will also conjecture and use available information .
 Lakota Indians had been “sensatized’t to foreign genocidinal attacks having suffred a massacre long before the 1973 one . Like Republic of Ireland Catholics the Lakota Indian were ‘sensate’ to foreign attacks .
 Today, the Disciples include conservative churches like Park Avenue Christian hurch, where Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. died .
 Charles Eugéne Bedaux was a French; American millionaire who made his fortune developing and implementing the work ; Measurement aspect of scientific management, notably the Bedaux System .
 Bedaux ; was friends with British royalty and Nazis alike . Bedaux was a management consultant, , big game hunter and explorer . He was friends and business partner with the Nazis .
 Bedaux clients included DuPont, Imperial Chemical Industries, AngloPersian Oil Company, Fiat, and Campbell’s .
 Bedaux purchased the sixteenth-century Chateau de Candé, in France, and lived there with his American second wife, Fern Lombard . Bedaux was married to the former daughter of lawyer James Lombard of Grand Rapids, Michigan .
 The couple purchased the chateau in 1927 and renovated it in 1930 . The couple completed work in 1930 and purchased it in 1927 . It was completed in 1931 .
 Charles and Fern Bedaux hosted the wedding of Wallis Simpson,; and Prince Edward, Duke of Windsor at the chateau in 1937 .
 Bedaux’s delight, the ' Windsors enthusiastically embraced the idea of making a tour of Nazi Germany . Bedaux's delight, he said, was that the Windsors had agreed to tour the country .
 Edward rewarded his hosts with a fulsome speech in praise of Germany and delivered a Nazi salute . Edward delivered the Nazi salute to his German guests .
 Abuse in McMartin Manhattan Beach, California Preschool, Jesuit Daniel Freeman Hospital Manhattan Beach and continuing MKULTRA abuse. This book Abuse in Manhattan Beach was written by McMartin . McMartin was abused at a Manhattan Beach school .
 In reality I am a normal person well prepared for life from a family that gave their all to prepare me for life, and to keep the USA free so I could and other families could live in it free .
 In about 2012 I was diagnosed with advanced Type II Diabetes and had an Alc of 13.3, a measure of over about three months how bad a high blood sugar medical emergency was . In about . 2012 he was diagnosed . with advanced . Type II diabetes .
 Those who have Alc around 6t are considered in decent condition from Diabetes . That is the usual goal when intervention on Diabetes is attempted .
 Alc above 10 is considered a lethal medical emergency and heart attack and stroke in the typical person with an Alc of 13. and Metabolic Syndrome has untreated diabetes . The typical person has a heart attack, stroke, heart attack or stroke in a typical person .
 The health consequence of harrassing gym access alone is Agravated Battery including with racial elements . The medical affects of untreated diabetes take their toll on my body. The health .
 "As if to make a lethal opportunity out of that my medical spending, gym conditions, nutritional needs, etc., were interfered with," he said . "My medical spending ... was interfered with. As if to ... interfere with that my health, gym, etc. etc., was interfered
 Since then I have wanted to meet and settle down with a white woman, me healthy and in the gym scene, and me healthy . Yet that has been interfered with as a Legend was created by actors surrounding me I sexualized Yoga pants and was a peeping threat to gym women .
 When FOXP2 is recognizable (much is hidden about the Syndrome to hide the CIA connection to it) a GangStalk is used to try and slander, misdiagnose, and socially cleanse society from the stigmatized gene expressing .
 I might just “drop like a house fly” dead to the floor . Others using my gym techniques are welcome and popular . There is no need or demand for me in any gym as a workout partner system prespective .
 CIA plan is to isolate and destroy those who show FOXP2 which has phenotype that is recognizable in grammar, etc., etc., the CIA plan . Most probably Mockingbird, the plan to develop rage in people who show .
 When James Angleton set the Infiltration scheme up he was aware certain factors might expose the infiltrators . Angleton knew certain factors may expose him to the infiltrator .
 FOXP2 gene gene is rare gene that identifies rare gene in rare form of FOXP1 gene . FoxP2 is linked to FOXP3 gene gene, which is a form of gene gene gene that is very rare in humans . The gene has been identified in the wild for
 Two is that the DiVinci code not be broken and conspiracy theories about the CIA plan be views as Russian attempts to influence the USA with Propaganda undermining the CIA/DIA/DARPA/NSA/FBI .
 People are called noxious when they hurt others with cruelty or mental anguish . People who hurt others are called 'noxious' when they harm others with mental anguish or cruelty .
 While obnoxious might come to mind when seeing the word noxious, obnoxious is a much less damaging adjective to describe someone annoying . The word "obnoxious" is often used to describe annoying people .
 Most uses for noxious involve physical or emotional damage . Most uses involve real physical or . emotional damage unless the word is used in exaggeration .
 Any time someone is obnoxious, someone else probably wants them to stop it . Anyone who is obnoxious should be aware of it .
 Medical School, to introduce psychoanalysis into Harvard curriculum but to keep those who taught it away from the decision-making apparatus in Vienna .
 Murray and Morgan developed the concept of apperception and the assumption that everyone’s thinking is shaped by subjective processes, the rationale ; behind the Thematic Apperception test . Thematic test is based on the idea of the subjective experience .
 They used the term ‘apperception’ to refer to the process of projecting fantasy imagery onto an objective stimulus . The term was used by the psychologists .
 In 1938 he ' published Explorations in Personality, a classic in psychology, which includes a ' description of the Thematic Apperception Test .
 The situation test was used by British War Officer Selection Board and OSS to assess potential agents . James Miller, in charge of the selection of secret agents at the OSS during World War ll, said the situation test .
 DARPA buildig better puppets to rule the world with Super Soldiers and Super Groomed eee to conquer countries with. DARPA . DARPA is building a better puppet army .
 Jonathan D Moreno has been a senior staff member for three presidential advisory commissions . Moreno has served on a number of Pentagon advisory committees . Moreno is a former staff member of a presidential advisory commission . Moreno says the U.S. needs to be on the defense budget .
 Lawrence J Korb is a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress . He is a former United States Assistant Secretary of Defense . Korb describes the “mind-boggling possibilities” that modern brain science could present for national security .
 The author discusses the innovative Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency and the role of the intelligence community in preparing military and intelligence services for the twenty-first century .
 This edition features new material on deep brain stimulation, neuro hormones, and enhanced interrogation . Fully updated and revised, this edition includes material on enhanced interrogation and neuro-enhancing .
 Mind Wars may read like science fiction or the latest conspiracy thriller, but its subjects are very real and changing the course of modern warfare . With in-depth discussions of “psyops” mind control experiments, drugs that erase both fear and the need to sleep, microchip brain
 In 1947, he returned to Harvard as a chief researcher, lectured and established with others the Psychological Clinic Annex . Harvard human experiments, 1959-62, were the subject of several human experiments .
 From late 1959 to early 1962, Murray was responsible for unethical experiments in which he used twenty-two Harvard undergraduates as research subjects . Murray used the Harvard students as subjects in unethical experiments .
 Experiments sought to measure individuals’ responses to extreme stress . Among other goals, the experiments were to measure people’ reactions to stress .
 The unwitting undergraduates were submitted to what Murray called “vehement, sweeping and personally abusive” attacks . Murray: The students were subjected to what he called ‘vehement and personal abusive’ attacks .
 Stressed egos, cherished ideas and beliefs were used to cause high levels of stress and distress . Specifically-tailored assaults to their egos and cherished ideas were used in the attacks .
 The subjects then viewed recorded footage of their reactions to this verbal abuse repeatedly . The subjects were then shown footage of themselves reacting to the verbal abuse .
 'Unabomber' targeted academics and technologists for 17 years . Among the subjects was 17-year-old Ted Kaczynski, a mathematician who went on to be known as the ‘UnAbomber’
 The Education of an American Terrorist connects Kaczynski’s abusive experiences under Murray to his later criminal career . The education of a Terrorist is published in the book, "The Education of a terrorist," published by the University of Minnesota .
 In 1960, Timothy Leary started research in psychedelic drugs at Harvard, which Murray supervised . Murray is said to have supervised the research at Harvard .
 Murray helped complete Analysis of the Personality of Adolph Hitler in 1943 . Murray was commissioned by OSS boss MGen. Gen. George W. Eisenhower .
 The report used many sources to profile Hitler, including informants such as Emst Hanfstaengl, Hermann Rauschning, and Princess Stephanie von Hohenlohe .
 The groundbreaking study was the pioneer of offender profiling and political psychology . It was the first of its kind .
 Murray’s collaborative report stated that Hitler was impotent as far as heterosexual relations . Murray also predicted that Hitler would choose suicide if defeat for Germany was near . There was a possibility that Hitler had participated in a homosexual relationship with Hitler .
 I think he studied #FOXP2Syndrome in various families Kutschera, Windsor, and other descended, Einstein, Monroe, Harold and Glorian, Kennedy’s others .
 Like USSR Olympians trained from brith these families enter contests to rule Commonwealth countries, political offices not sports . The families of the brith are in charge of the Commonwealth countries .
 Theodore John Kaczynski, aka the Unabomber, is an American domestic terrorist and former mathematics professor . He was a mathematics professor and a domestic terrorist . He is believed to have killed more than 100 people in the U.S. in the United States .
 He abandoned his academic career in 1969 to pursue a primitive life in primitive life . He was a mathematics prodigy, but abandoned academic career to pursue primitive lifestyle .
 Between 1978 and 1995, he killed three people and injured 23 others in a nationwide bombing campaign . He believed people he believed were advancing modern technology and the destruction of the environment . He also killed 23 others and injured three people in the campaign .
 He issued a social critique opposing industrialization and advocating a naturecentered form of anarchism . He issued an anti-industrialization critique .
 His belief was that diffences in poeple, sometimes with race references, were being concealed by Anthropologists . Anthropologists who had a technorcat agenda of deceiving the world and controlling it .
 His theory matches MKULTRA and the oil business grooming leaders to rule and also alter the world tied to big oil . His theory is that the world is being groomed by the oil industry to rule .
 Ruby’s death was part of a continuing cover up of the Kennedy assassination, because onc of the goals of MK-ULTRA was to find a substance that could induce cancer, and deaths from cancer would be above question . Ruby's death was believed to have been part of
 The contract signed in 1953 under Subproject 18 of MK-ULTRA totaled $400,000 . The contract was signed under the contract in 1953 .
 Bush was once a member of the Eli Lilly board, and the Quayle family was a large stockholder . Bush was also a former board member of Eli Lilly .
 There are suggestions that Leary received CIA-channeled money through various government agencies . Timothy Leary is believed to have received the money from the CIA . Leary's career may have spanned the globe .
 MK-ULTRA and its associate subprojects were all the “crazies roaming the country.” Accidental outgrowths of MK-ultra and its associated subprojects. “Crazies roam the country” were “outgrowths”
 Hackney was a psychiatrist who did BeMod experiments for the CIA from 1970-75 . The BeMod experiment involved how much pain a subject could withstand . Hackney worked with the CIA in the 1970s .
 These experiments were done at the Vetcrans Administration Hospital in Minnesota on the homeless or those who had no family . The experiments were conducted at the hospital on those who were homeless .
 Society already considered them crazy, so no one would listen to them if they complained about the BeMod experiments . Society already considers them crazy . The BeMod experiment is the latest in a long line of experiments in the world .
 Hackney then began to figure out that these people really were not insane . Hackney began to work out that people were actually not insane.
 Almost all of them had flashbacks involving the military, killing or learning to kill . Almost all the flashbacks involve the military killing or killing .
 The problem arose when the victims turned about 40 and all of it began to unravel, police say . The victims turned 40 and their stories unraveled when they turned 40 .
 False Memory Syndrome Foundation was founded after repressed memory syndrome was accepted . False memory syndrome Foundation was set up in 2003 .
 The foundation's sole aim appears to be to discredit studies and research on repressed memory syndrome .
 King Edward VII line of the Windsors, Glorian Donegan, and Malcolm X #GangStalk is poisoned atmosphere by an invisible cloud of Colloid Colloid . I assert I am one of many who were experimental DARPA and Queen of England test births from about 1901 on
 The NAZI party grew out of smaller political groups with a nationalist orientation that formed in the last years of World War I . In 1918, a league called the Freier Arbeiterausschuss fiir einen guten Frieden was created in Bremen, Germany
 Maria is sent to care for the unruly children of the wealthy Baron von vonrapp, a captain in the Austrian navy . However, he also accused Maria of being a child prostitute .
 Drexler emphasised the need for a synthesis of volkisch nationalism with economic socialism . He wanted to create a popular nationalistoriented workers’ movement that could challenge the rise of Communism and internationalism .
 Maria Maria was born on 26 January 1905 to Augusta and Karl Kutschera . She was born in 1905 in Augusta, Georgia .
 Her mother died of pneumonia when she was two in the year of 1907 er greif stricken father mostly abondoned her to other family . Her Uncle Franz Kutschera became her Gaurdian. She was 9 in 1914 or so when her Uncle Franz became her uncle Franz Kut
 Maria and George married a year later in 1927, 11 years before the family left Austria in 1938 . Maria's family was forced to leave Austria before the Nazi takeover of Austria in Austria in 1939 .
 There were 10, not 7 von Trapp children . Marylin Monroe, Glorian Donegan, and Harold Gainey were three possible 1925 1926 Prince Edward of Wales parents .
 The family was musically inclined before Maria arrived, but she did teach them to sing madrigals . She also taught the family to sing a madrigal .
 I think three of the denied children were by Prince Edward of Wales . The 7 remaining children may have been between Von Trapp and Maria Kutschera Von TRrapp . It is possible the earlier out of wedlock births may have derailed .
 Maria came to the von Trapp family in 1926 as a tutor for one of the children, Maria, who was recovering from scarlet fever, not as governess to all the children . Maria was not a governess, but a tutor to one of them .
 Barron George Von Trapp my not have been trying to marry a foreign princess . Barron George von Trapp should not have tried to marry foreign princess, he says .
 Georg was born in Zadar (now in Croatia), which at that time was part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire . He was also known for his role in World War II .
 Zadar became part of Italy in 1920, and Georg was thus an Italian citizen . His wife and children as well as his family were also Italian citizens .
 The family had a contract with an American booking agent when they left Austria . The family left Austria when they moved to America .
 Count Friedrich Wilhelm Alexander Ferdinand of Wiirttemberg, 1st Duke of Urach, died 17 July 1869 . He was the son of Duke Wilhelm and Duke Wilhelm of the Wirttememberg . His wife was Baroness Wilhelmine von Tunderfeldt
 During the Nazi and post-Nazi era, he provided aid to refugees, Jews, and prisoners of war . He was reported to Nazi authorities for these activities .
 Arnold Schwartzenevver would know the real history of Maria Kutschere and the Nazis and J Edgar Hoover would too . He rean an underground railroad from Nazi Germany and may have helped both Arnold Swchwartezenegger .
 Carl Alexander was the third son of Albrecht, Duke of Wiirttemberg and Archduchess Margarete Sophie of Austria . The Peace Corps of CIA backed USAID may have had some involvement from him too .
 He resigned from the army at the rank of captain, following the German Revolution of 1918-1919 . Within a few months he became a postulant at the Abbey of St. Mary's Abbey in St. Paul's Cathedral .
 Because of his position and his family’s conservative Catholic values, he was involved in opposition to National Socialism as early as 1933 . He was interrogated by the Gestapo several times .
 In Switzerland, he founded International Catholic Refugees and traveled through Europe . In Switzerland he founded . International Catholic refugees .
 Father Odo founded the Central European Rehabilitation Association after the end of World War II . His aim was to provide war-torn Central Europe with food, clothing, medicine and other necessities .
 Father Odo returned to the abbey of St. Mary's after CERA had fulfilled its function and was dissolved .
 He left the monastery in 1952 because of a heart condition . He returned to his family castle in Altshausen, Germany .
 He was a refounder of the Yellow Hussars of Altshausen . He spent the last years of his life in Germany . His last years were spent in Altshusen, Germany .
 Father Odo was briefly interviewed and mentioned in the 1959 biography of his cousin Queen Mary of Teck by James Pope-Hennessy .
 According to his wishes, Father Odo was buried in the cemetery of the Abbey of St. Mary's . According to the wishes, he was buried there .
 Heath Ledger's forhead in a movie still frame and William of Ulrich in a still frame . The Eye of Providence was the most recent film to be released in theaters .
 Wilhelm served as a cavalry officer in the army of the then-independent Kingdom of Wiirttemberg . Heath Andrew Ledger and Matilda Rose Ledger have a daughter together .
 3 of the 10 Von Trapp children are not accounted for . Agatha Whitehead was heir to the British torpedo manufacture line . U-bout retired Captain George von Trapp .
 Getting to North Carolina and the Public Charge Rule is not a new United States immigration concept . North Carolina is a state of origin in the U.S. immigration system .
 From as early as 1882, the U.S. Congress used the concept to deny visas to people who would become a “public charge” as immigrants . The concept was first used by Congress in 1882 . Congress used it as a way of denying visas to immigrants who
 A public charge is anyone who would become dependent on the U.S. government after gaining immigrant status . The charge is a person who would be dependent upon the United States .
 The very poor family only finally gained entrance and passage to the USA (where they had stated to Border Agents they wished to stay) when they displayed they had a singing agent and income capability .
 Glorian and Harold were adopted but that seems to have circumvented the immigration process . Harold and Glorian were adopted by the author of the novel .
 Franz Kutschera was an Austrian Nazi politician and government official . He was a member of the Austrian Nazi Party of the Second World War .
 He along withe Joseph Mengle were selecting genetically shunned population for the gas chamber . He was selecting genetically shamed population for gas chambers .
 Mengle escaped to Buenos Aries and is talked obliquely by Jen Moore who interviewed Maria Kutschera . Jen Moore mentions this Mengele and Buenos Aeirs connection to the story several times .
 Festus Gainey who my mother Glorian Gainey and Harold Gainey were raised with until he died . The story of at least 3 picks up in the United States records in North Carolina, North Carolina .
 Festus Gainey was born 19 Oct 1884 in Wayne County, North Carolina, USA . He died 3 Mar 1936 in Goldsboro, Wayne County of North Carolina . That would have put her at 8, becoming 9 .
 King Edward VIII was the father of Glorian Donegan . I think Maria Kutschera left for Sout Carolina USA pregnant with Glorian .
 Ex-King Edward, now Duke of Windsor, is to stay for an indefinite period as the guest of Baron Eugene de Rothschild at the latter's castle at Enzesfeld, 25 miles south of Vienna .
 Police formed a cordon around the sleeper which was next to the engine and luggage-van, ' allowing none of the passengers anywhere near it . At Vienna station police hurried on to the platform and formed a . cordon round the special sleeper .
 Vienna's Police President of Vienna and British Minister in Vienna gathered for the meeting .
 The Rothschild Family Schloss Enzesfeldt is a prominent landmark in the Triesting valley, about 25 miles from Vienna . The Rothschild family is believed to have owned the castle .
 The castle was developed as a fortress in the late 11th century to defend the valley from invading Slavs and Magyars . Castle was developed in the 11th Century to defend against invading Slav, Magyar and Slavs .
 It came under the control of the Habsburgs, who sold the castle in the 16th century . The castle is now in the hands of the Spanish king and his wife .
 After a variety of owners, the estate was purchased in 1880 by Salomon Albert Anselm von Rothschild . He restored the castle and improved the property, and was a great benefactor to the town .
 Between the wars the Viennese Rothschild family entertained on a grand scale at Enzesfeldt . The estate passed to Eugéne von Rothschild between the wars .
 Eugeéne’s first wife Cathleen ‘Kitty’ Wolf had been a friend of Elsie de Wolfe . The Rothschilds invited the Duke of Windsor to stay with them when he left England in 1937 .
 The castle was developed as a fortress in the late 11th century to defend the valley from invading Slavs and Magyars . Castle was developed in the 11th Century to defend from invading .
 It came under the control of the Habsburgs. who sold the castle in the 16th C. century. It was sold in 16th century to the Hapsburgs who sold it to the Spanish king .
 Anselm von Rothschild restored the 0 castle and improved the property in 1880 . After a variety of owners, the estate was purchased in 1880 by Salomon Albert Ansel m Rothschild .
 Between the wars the Viennese Rothschild family entertained on a grand scale at Enzesfeldt . The estate passed to Eugene von Rothschild . The Duke and Duchess of Windsor stayed at the estate .
 During the Second World War, properties of the Viennese Rothschilds, including Enzesfeldt, were confiscated by the Nazis . The Nazis confiscated many of the properties, including those of the Rothschilds .
 Eugene von Rothschild had to pay a substantial ransom for the release of his brother Louis von Rothschild from imprisonment by the Gestapo in Vienna . The Viennese e business of the Rothschilds was seized, and Eugene and other members of the family were forced to pay ransom for his brother's
 Eugene sold the Enzesfeldt estate in 1963, and it was subsequently developed into a country club by Baron Hubert von Pantz . Eugene met and married his second wife Jeanne Stuart in 1952, after Kitty's death in 1946 .
 During the Second World War, properties of the Viennese Rothschilds, including Enzesfeldt, were confiscated by the Nazis . The Nazis confiscated the properties, including those of the Rothschilds .
 Schloss Enzesfeldt is a prominent landmark in the Triesting valley, about L 25 miles from Vienna . It is located near the city of Vienna .
 I oO came under the control of the Habsburgs, who sold the castle in the 16th century . The castle was sold in 16th Century to the Spanish king .
 After a variety of owners, the estate was purchased in 1880 by Salomon Albert Anselm von Rothschild . Salomon was a great benefactor to the town of Enzesfeldt .
 Between the wars the Viennese Rothschild family entertained on a O grand scale at Enzesfeldt . The estate passed to Eugene von Rothschild . The Duke and Duchess of Windsor was invited to stay when he left England .
 The couple were reunited at the Chateau de (1 Candé, Monts, France, in May 1937, where they were married a month later . They had been imprisoned by the Gestapo in Vienna .
 Eugéne and Kitty left for the U.S. after Kitty's death in 1946 . They left for Long Island, where they met and married in 1952 . Eugééne met his second wife, Jeanne Stuart in 1952, after Kitty’s death .
 In 1963, Eugene sold the Enzesfeldt estate, and it was subsequently developed into a country club by Baron Hubert von Pantz . Eugene sold his estate in 1963, and the country club has since been developed .
 Eva Kotthaus as Johanna and Franz Kutschera s as the butcher millionaire Pierpon Mauler perform a scene of the play “Die Heilige Johanna der Schlachthéfe” during the dress rehearsal by Bert Brecht . Von Trapp
 Johanna was the sixth child of Georg Ritter von Trapp and his first wife, Agathe Whitehead . “Faust I” is performed on 14 DECEMBER 1963 and “Die Heilige Johanna der Schlachth6fe” on the following
 U-boats were naval submarines operated by Germany, particularly in the First and Second World Wars . The U-boat was a German submarine .
 A woman who was raised poor on a farm who did not tour with the Von Trapps (She and Harold showed FOXP2 Syndrome) but was of “two competing systems” the Franz Kutschera relatives via Maria Kutschersa and Maria KutSchera
 Though she was a caring and loving person, Maria wasn’t always as sweet as the fictional Maria . With 7 accounted for as singers and 3 secret Prince of Wales children in the USA .
 She tended to erupt in angry outbursts consisting of yelling, throwing things, and slamming doors . She was known for her temper tantrums when she was younger .
 Her feelings would immediately be relieved and good humor restored, while other family members, particularly her husband, found it less easy to recover . Her husband would be relieved, but her feelings would not be immediately restored .
 The von Trapps’ priest, the Reverend Franz Wasner, acted as their musical director for over 20 years . Instead of the fictional Max Detweiler, pushy music promoter, the von Trappi's priest was the Von Trapps' priest . Wasner acted as
 Georg von Trapp became a national hero as a captain in the Austrian navy during World War I . He commanded submarines with valor and received the title of “Ritter” , and later baron, as a reward .
 Georg married Agathe Whitehead, the granddaughter of the inventor of the torpedo, in 1912 . He was married to Agathe, granddaughter of Robert Whitehead .
 Rupert, 1911-1992; Agathe, 1913; Maria, 1914-; Werner, 1915-; Hedwig, 1917-1972; Johanna, 1919-1994; and Martina, 1921-1952 . Rupert was born in Germany .
 After World War I, Austria lost all of its seaports, and Georg retired from the navy .
 Georg sold his property in Pola and bought an estate in Salzburg . The family was devastated by her death and unable to bear living in a place where they had been so happy, Georg sold .
 The family lost most of its wealth through the worldwide depression when their bank failed in the early 1930s . The bank failed during the depression in the 1930s and the family's wealth was lost .
 Maria tightened belts all around by dismissing most of the servants and taking in boarders . Maria decided to give up her job as a governess .
 It was around this time that they began considering making the family hobby of singing into a profession . The family is now considering making their hobby into a career .
 Georg was reluctant for the family to perform in public, “but accepted it as God’s will that they sing for others,” daughter Eleonore said in a 1978 interview .
 As depicted in The Sound of Music, the family won first place in the Salzburg Music Festival in 1936 . They sang Renaissance and Baroque music, madrigals, and folk songs all across Europe .
 When the Nazis annexed Austria in 1938, the von Trapps realized that they were on thin ice with a regime they abhorred . The von Trapp family was forced to live with the Nazis in Austria .
 Georg refused to fly the Nazi flag on their house . He also declined a naval command and a request to sing at Hitler’s birthday party .
 They were aware of the Nazis’ anti-religious propaganda and policies, the pervasive fear that those around them could be acting as spies for the Nazis, and the brainwashing of children against their parents . They were also becoming aware of anti-religion policies and the fear of those
 They weighed staying in Austria and taking advantage of the enticements the Nazis were offering . Rupert and Georg were offered greater fame as a singing group, a medical doctor’s position for Rupert, and a renewed naval career .
 When the Von Trapps escaped the Nazis, the story of their Austrian home was far from over . The Von Trapp family is depicted in The Sound of Music . The family is the famous musical family depicted in the film .
 The messenger of posts was not a youth, the ages were wrong, that was Himmler working with Franz Kutschera as Nazi plotters . That was not the youth of the ages wrong, it was the ages of the Nazi leader .
 After the war, a religious group, the Catholic Missionaries of the Precious Blood, bought the property from the Von Trapps, who had had their ownership restored after the Nazis were defeated .
 Julie Andrews said she could “feel the evil” when she visited the real Von Trapp house Heidi Lux . Andrews did visit the von Trapp home in Salzburg, Austria later on in her life .
 After the wall was completed, he had those who constructed the wall shot . He had a shot of those who built it .
 Barbara Ward Morris and Edward Wells were divorced when she was 7 . Andrews thought she was her father . She thought her father was her mother .
 Julie’s mother remarried Ted Andrews, a Canadian-born tenor . Julie became the youngest solo performer ever to be seen in a Royal Command Variety Performance before King George VI and Queen Elizabeth .
 Ted Andrews insisted on giving Julie singing lessons and legally adopted her . Ted Andrews insists on giving her singing lessons . Julie was adopted by Ted Andrews .
 She was performing nightly at the London Palladium at the tender age of 12 at the age of just 12 . She has since gone on to perform at the height of her career .
 At school the next day, the students were agog, Andrews recalls in Home . “At school, the student was agog," Andrews recalls .
 The young Julie helps to support her family by performing nightly . There are other unsettling secrets in the life that sounds quasi-Dickensian .
 Andrews’ maternal grandfather, a coal miner, died at 43 of syphilis after infecting her grandmother . Her maternal grandfather was a miner who infected her with syphilis .
 Julie's mother introduced her to a man she later told was her biological father . Julie was 14 when she was introduced to the man she thought she was her mother . Julie says she was shocked when she found out she had a biological son .
 Andrews adored Wells, her mother’s first husband, 1 with whom she lived the first six years of her life and whom she called Dad . “Tt rocked my world,” Andrews says of Wells, who she adored .
 The Mauthausen main camp operated from the time of the Anschluss, when Austria ‘ was united with Nazi Germany on 8 August 1938, to 5 May 1945, at the end of the ' European theatre of Second World War .
 As at other Nazi concentration camps, the inmates at Mauthausen and its subcamps | 1 were forced to work as slave labour, under conditions that caused many deaths . Many of the deaths were caused by the concentration camp's slave labour .
 The Von Trapp singers in the Salzburg singing contest win first prize . Uncle Franz is disgusted by the behavior of Maria Kutschera until both Franz Kutschershera and Franz Joseph same first names .
 Rudy Brubaker banker whose bank failed erasing the Whitehead torpedo missile company fortune way . Whitehead failed to find Whitehead's torpedo missile fortune .
 George Von Trap transfered the Whitehead fortune from London into the Austrian bank . Von Trap transferred the fortune to Austria to shore up the bank . The Whitehead estate was transferred to Austria from London .
 Father Wasner was a Catholic Priest friendly to the family and involved with church music and getting the Von Trapps out following the events of ‘36 tO ‘38 . Wasner died at the age of 92 in 1968 .
 Chancelor Emporer Kaiser and other names of the Aristocrat Masonic Royal Austria Franz Joseph will hear the children sing on the radio . The children will be able to hear the voices of their parents and grandparents .
 While the Nazis sneak his country out from under him and annex it to Gernmany Franz Joseph may have recomeneded the singing children to London . The children may have been singing in London .
 Joseph Kennedy Sr. was a friend of Captain Von Trapp and Agatha Whitehead, United States Ambassador to England . He was a steel and ship magnate from Boston Massachusetts . Joseph Kennedy Jr. was the son of U.S. ambassador to England and a friend to Captain Von
 Captain Von Trapp Austrio-Hungarian may himself have the gene or perhaps Agatha Whitehead or both . Agatha may also have a connection with the gene .
 Maria Kutschera novitiate finds Captain Von Trapp regiments his children and hides them . In Segment 1 on YouTube, Maria discovers the truth about the children .
 In Segment Two on YouTube novitiate Maria makes play clothes for the children from drapes as if gunny sacks but look good and takes the children to the park to roll down hills and not worry about getting dirty .
 Segment Three on YouTube places Captain Von Trapp in an interesting situation . Segment 3 places him in a position that might make him look like he's in trouble .
 The banks are after him now that his rich wife Agatha Whitehead torpedo manufacture fortune heir has died . Whitehead's wife has died, leaving him with millions of pounds of fortune .
 Maintaining capital assets such as the Estate and caring for his children is serious problem for him . The rich Princess has turned down his marriage interests .
 A boarding school for the children is beyond his means and so far his efforts are not working . So far he has not been able to find a boarding school he hopes to use .
 Maria Kustchera has a new theory of child rearing which is not “old fashioned” and is more respectable and more mainstream that it had seemed so far and is gaining acceptance . She says it is more mainstream than it seems so far .
 In episode 4 Captain Von Trapp has married Maria Kutschera with the encouragement of the foreign princess who declined his courtship . The foreign princess is the inspiration for the story .
 Banker Rudy of an Austrian bank wiped out financially by the Great Depression and German boycott of Austria declares bankruptcy and commits suicide . Rudy of the Austrian bank declared bankruptcy and committed suicide . The bank was forced to close after the German boycott and Great Depression .
 Just before the suicide Von Trapp tries to write his rich London advocate for help . Just before he commits suicide, he writes a letter to the rich Londoner .
 The Organ donated to the church is too small however the children are becoming a Human Resource in their musical theater skills . Church priest Father Wasner responsible for music starts involvement with children and family .
 In Episode 5 Chancellor Fanz Joseph hears the children singing on the radio and recognizes the Von Trapp name as the “uboat commander” whose submarine fired Whitehead Torpedoes at surface vessels . The episode is Episode 5 .
 With Rudi’s Grubers bank failed Captain Von Trapp informs Maria he has lost not only a friend but his fortune and they are now ruined . The film is based on the story of the doomed bank .
 In Episode 6 the guy around the house, perhaps the butler, perhaps an Uncle of Maria whose name is Franz reveals himself to be a Nazi party member, illegal in Austria, but he know reveals his “cutup cross” on his lapel .
 Von Trapp regrets he has no family left because his own esteemed poet relative line on another branch of the VonTrapp family has already died out . This as von Trapp regret he has . no relatives left because of his own poet relative .
 Franz and his Nazi thug friends demand a Nazi flag on annexed Austrian houses, they know the Von Trapps and Rudi Gruber and Von Trapp himself were closely tied German Nazi enemy Windsors of England .
 Once a hero, once a hero he is now an enemy in a now different Austria . For the Von Trapps is was Austria that moved, and now it is a different Austria that has moved . The Von Trappes are now an enemies in Austria .
 Manufacturers of products derived from biological systems have long sought to identify relevant genotypic and phenotypic markers displayed by production strains and cell lines which could be employed as in-process monitors to predict product quality .
 The only difference between the aristocracy and the rest is that the former have kept records . The aristocracy has kept records, the only difference is that they have kept them, the historian says .
 Queen Victoria’s daughter Alice passed the defective gene to ‘ her daughter Alexandra, who joined the Russian Romanov dynasty with her marriage to Tsar Nicolas II . Their long hoped-for son, Alexis, was a haemophiliac .
 In 1973, with the government-wide panic caused by Watergate, CIA Director Richard Helms ordered all MKUltra files destroyed . But to those with a ' genetic or genealogical bent, these royal goings-on are food for thought .
 CIA documents regarding the project were destroyed, making a full investigation of ; MKUltra impossible . CIA documents were destroyed .
 A cache of some 20,000 documents survived Helms’ purge, as ; they had been incorrectly stored in a financial records building and were discovered ‘ following a FOIA request in 1977’
 Ancient Kings were once a part of the culture and those bloodlines continue 5.5.5 . Plant Prophecies . Ancient Kings once were part of that culture and the bloodline continues .
 Actor Randy Quaid won a Golden Globe award for his portrayal of Lyndon Baines Johnson . Quaid's portrayal of Johnson was nominated for best actor actor in Hollywood .
 Johnson starts his tenure as U.S. Senator by parking in the Senate Majority Leader reserved parking spot . The parking attendant chagrin of the parking attendant .
 The same lot is shown again in the future, and Johnson’s name is now fixed on the parking spot . Johnson's name is fixed in the parking lot .
 Johnson is now working tirelessly with all of the members of the Senate, battling the troublesome Joseph McCarthy, making amendments to the TaftHartley Act . Johnson is also pressing for civil rights legislation .
 Senator John F Kennedy is told under no uncertain terms that a committee spot on the Foreign Relations Committee in the Senate would be his if he stayed for a crucial labor vote . Kennedy is a new face in Washington .
 Visit by JFK’s brother Robert F Kennedy to Texas is arranged . Father Joseph Kennedy wants to know if LBJ is running for President or not .
 The lack of action by Johnson in responding to Kennedy in a timely fashion allows 1 John Kennedy to build up a very strong support network . This effectively denies Johnson 1 any real chance at the Presidential nomination .
 Johnson says that his father was right, and that he made a big mistake by not doing something sooner . Johnson: "I don't think I'm going to be able to do this again."
 Johnson rejected offer of Vice President by John Kennedy because of advice of Sam Rayburn . John Kennedy was first rejected by Johnson because of the advice of Rayburn.
 The next day, Rayburn tells Johnson that he has changed his mind, and LBJ accepts the B offer . Robert Kennedy’s attempt at preventing the deal was unsuccessful .
 He accompanies now widow Jacqueline Kennedy, along with his wife, on Air Force One on a trip back to Washington . He accompanied her on a return trip to Washington, Washington .
 Hughes on board the aircraft, and a still of the moment along with a short audio summary of the events after ends the movie . Hughes was the pilot of the first flight of the aircraft .
 He claims not to be mentally ill, and that close friends such as Heath Ledgar, and David Carradine, were killed not by accident, but as part of a conspiracy . He claims to be a leading evangelist for the holiness movement .
 He was a productive author, writing primarily on the subject of sanctification . He was also a prolific author .
 He was the grandfather of actor John Carradine and great-grandfather of actors David, Keith, and Robert . He was also the great-great grandfather of Keith, David and Keith . He is the patriarch of the family .
 Parnassus, a character appears to be a manifestation of the hanged man tarot card, and has symbols on his forehead corresponding with those on a card shown in the film . The card is shown on the film's set .
 The tarot decks I’m familiar with don’t have such symbols on the hanged man card, however . Googling has not been revealing. Googled hasn't been revealing .
 Ledger's death was ruled an accidental drug overdose due to a lethal cocktail of prescription painkillers found in his system . The Eye of Providence is NOT one of the Tarrot cards and out of piace in the movie .
 Fans initially thought he was suicidal after breaking up with ex-fiancée Michelle Williams . Others thought it had something to do with playing the Joker in The Dark Knight .
 Watch the video below to see some of the wildest theories about the causes of his death .
 Heath’s body was found in the early hours of his death . Fans are still unsettled by the mystery over how he was found . Heath's body was never found .
 The actor’s masseuse found him first, but instead of immediately calling 911, she instead called Mary-Kate Olsen twice . The masseuse called Olsen twice before calling 911 .
 This little fact about his death sent many skeptics and theorists on the Internet running wild with accusations, from blaming Mary-Kate to questioning the masseuse . The masseuse was the last masseuse to perform the act .
 Mary-Kate’s lawyer has maintained that she had nothing to do with the masseuse . The masseuse changed her story a few times, initially saying she called Mary Kate two times when actually it was four times .
 The McMartin school was in Manhattan Beach California and a front for CIA backed MKULITRA research and Eugenics activities and studies . The school was used as a CIA-backed research center .
 The powerful elites backing the CIA cartel MKULTRA activities seem to be run out of Free Mason halls including Knights of Columbus hall in Arlington Virginia . They have no need for the money from my mother’s trust fund by they do need my life and reputation sabotaged .
 The College in South Hadley, Massachusetts, desechables included prostitutes, street children, Massachusetts. Massachusetts. The College .
 The municipality of Marsella in Risaralda was testified numerous times before eventually bankrupted by the cost of recovering the United States Congress on issues of corpse and extradition .
 In the 1960s, Pyle learned that Army intelligence had 1,500 plainclothes agents watching every demonstration of 20 people r more throughout the U.S. As part of a broad-based program of domestic spying, he says .
 Most of the filming took place in the Boston, Massachusetts area . Scenes were shot in downtown Boston, South Boston, Waltham, Winthrop, Milton and Medfield .
 For the Yrarm Envixa Novexrnern 30, 1os37 DeraARtTuMEnT or Mentanr Diseases PesetCcation oF Fes DGCuUMENT APrROVED FY THE COM™MISE
 The Fernald Center, originally called the Experimental School for : Teaching and Training Idiotic Children, was founded by Samuel Gridley Howe in 1848 with a $2,500 appropriation .
 Some simply call it collectively MKULTRA and y Harvard the scientific co-operation with England and the niversity and USA in the Manhattan Project of nuclear reseach, IT that exposed rocketry and propulsion, Cryptography, and other oung male Defense Advanced Research hildren to tr
 17 subjects received iron supplement shots containing radioisotopes of iron . Neither the children nor their parents ever gave adequate informed consent for participation in a scientific study .
 It is clear that the doses involved were low and that it is extremely unlikely that any of the children who were used as subjects were harmed as a consequence .
 During this book I will cite major media as being the proponents and historians of the Deep State with slightly fictionalized accounts of world history told as Space Opera, light hearted musicals, or other works . This book Read the Writing on the Wall to Learn of 33rd Degree Free M
 Those who are insiders enough recognize the story lines and names, and I Edward Donegan am one such person . Those who know the story line and names .
 Elsewhere I go into Mary Poppins in detail which is very important to free masons murders and the Bush family treason . Elsewhere, I go in detail about the importance of free mason murders and treason .
 Great Britain was in decline exactly as it faced radio and speech defect . Following the Atalanta Revolutions of France and the USA and other nations . Great Britain in decline .
 Mary of Teck was Queen of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions, and Empress of India, from 6 May 1910 until 29 January 1936 . She added a spoon of sugar to what had been heavy handed British rule .
 George Walker Bush is the product of two family traditions, the Bushes and the Walkers including Bert Walker at the beginning of the 20th Century . The former President of the U.S. is the son of former President George Bush .
 Prescott Bush is the decorous Republican senator from Connecticut, the New England WASP, the pennantwaving Yale man . On one side is the familiar patriarch Prescott Bush . On the other side is Prescott Bush , a decorous GOP senator from . Connecticut .
 On the other side of his father’s family stands a lesserknown patriarch, George Herbert Walker , the St. Louis-born Walker . The Walker family is one of the wealthiest families in American history .
 In 1910 the British were concerned of the ebb of Great Britian by rebellions coming from India, Ireland, and earlier the USA, and elsewhere . The British were worried about the future of Great Britain .
 The Special Relationship between the families of Great Britain really includes the Bush family . The Bush family has a very special relationship with the UK .
 Though set in 1910s King Edward VII King George V, the movie was filmed in 1964 and contains 1964 descendants references . The movie is set in the 1910s and 1910s .
 A spoonful of sugar helps the medicine go down is part of a quote from Common friendly and Mary Teck . It is tied to Constable H 43 and tied to George W. Bush .
 It is Mary ""pop ins"" to commoner homes that is part of the new charm and lighter touch of rule .
 Glorian Donegan was part of that gene pool having been out of wedlock Windsors fooling around and this is how my life ties to the JFK assassination . The Free Mason Deep State and anti communists killed JFK over illegal DNA experiments Donegan family included .
 Luke and Leia as if orphans are hidden out on this farm, Luke is Anna Kin was actually Glorian Donegan . Luke is actually Anna Kin and Leia are Anna Kin . Luke was actually a Glorian donegan. Leia is the daughter of Donegan.
 Her father was Prince Albert of York and her mother was Maria Kutschera . Her mother was a neice of Gestapo General Franz Kutschersa . She was also a daughter of Prince Albert and Prince Albert .
 Maria Kutschera lost her parents to the plague of WWI the Spanish Influenza the Illuminati could cure . The Illuminati cured her parents of the plague the Illuminati believed to cure .
 Kilo Ren and Rey realize their biological parent Anna Kin was Glorian Donegan . Rey is Rey is Barrack Obama Jr and Kilo is Ed Donegan, and Rey must choose between the Windsors or Kutscheras . These children realize their parents were Anna Kin and Rey
 Glorian Donegan was of both Kutschera and Windsor parents . I am left as Kilo Ren via Glorain Donegan embracing Glorian donegan .
 It is also in the story line of My Normal where the gritty produce elite art about the grit . My Normal is based on the story of the gritty in the book .
 The Star Wars canon fictional universe spans multiple eras, of which three are focused around each of the film trilogies . Three of the Star Wars universe's three main eras are based on each of them .
 It includes the media released in The High Republic and the upcoming The Acolyte . It includes press material from The HighRepublic and The Alyte.
 The Galactic Republic is corrupted by the Supreme Chancellor Palpatine, who is secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious . The prequel trilogy is set to be released in 2015 .
 Palpatine exterminates the Jedi Order, overthrows the Republic, and establishes the totalitarian Galactic Empire . After orchestrating the Clone Wars between the Republic and a Separatist confederation, he orchestrates the assassination of the Jedi . He is the leader of the Galactic Empire, who
 Martial law is the temporary imposition of direct military control of normal civil functions or suspension of civil law by a government . It is a response to a temporary emergency where civil forces are overwhelmed, or in an occupied territory . Martial law can be imposed in response to an emergency .
 The era of the original trilogy, in which the Empire is fought by the Rebel Alliance in a Galactic Civil War that spans several years, climaxes with the death of the Emperor and fall of the Empire . The era is the era of . the . Empire .
 The era after the original trilogy is set during the formative years of the New Republic following the fall of the Empire . The new trilogy will be set in New Republic, set during formative .
 The remnants of the Empire have reformed as the First Order . The First Order is the first time the Empire has been reformed . The sequel trilogy is set to be released in 2015 .
 Heroes of the former Rebellion, aided by the New Republic, lead the Resistance against the oppressive regime and its rulers . The Resistance is led by the mysterious being known as Snoke .
 It includes the animated Star Wars Resistance and the sequel trilogy films . The films are based on the Star Wars films that were released in December 2013 .
 ITT is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise . The ITT character is fictional .
 He was introduced in The Empire Strikes Back as an old friend of Han Solo and the administrator of the floating Cloud City on the gas planet Bespin .
 Luke Skywalker in the Lars home farm, Luke of Luke and sistr Leia, there was his mother another poor woman and his father Darth Vader aka Emperor Palpatine . Before there was Luke Skywalker, Luke Skywalker was born in a poor farm .
 The Lars home is the Raleigh North Carolina home of Luke Skywaler raised there as by Festus Gainey e Prince Albert . Prince Albert and Maria Kutschera have 3 children .
 As Solos, Ren and Ray trace back to Prince Albert and Maria Kutschera having Annakin Annakin . Luke Ed DONEGAN also Princess Leia Hans Solo .
 Home of Ani and his mother on Tatoine . Anakin Skywalker's mother on the planet Taroine .
 'There seems to have NO father, oddly much like with Marilyn Monroe or Julie Andrews. There seems to be NO father,' says author .
 Luke Skywalker will be raised by Lars in the sand igloo after Anakin turns to the dark side . Lars will be raising Luke Skywalker in the igloo . Lars is Lars' grandfather, Anakin's mother and father .
 Anakin has a mother but not father . At first it is a Vergence in the force, Anakin is Anakin's father .
 The father is in some way Palpatine and a Convergance between two different philosophies, Lords and Slaves . Later, the father is . Later in the . father is a . part of the father and a part of a conversation between two . philosophies .
 Seven years earlier, he accidentally killed a vicious neighbor and fled— never to be seen or heard from again . Seven years later, he was found dead in the woods .
 In computing/electronic contexts, a computer d over file, message, image, or video is concealed within distance . The word "dover" is used in computing and electronic contexts . It is used to refer to a hidden file or video hidden within distance of a computer .
 Semaphores can be used for telegraphy when arranged in ‘visually connected networks,’ or for traffic signalling such as ‘railway systems, or traffic lights in cities . Semaphore can also be used in 'visually-connected networks’
 Traffic signaling a stop based on the presdate of the color of the signal METAPHOR Meta data which is abstract through neutral signa such as Widgets or other fictionalizations .
 Illegal acts are now being waged against out of wedlock family lines tied to FOXP2 genes in various High Offices of certain nations including Germany and England . Like with violence against the Kurds illegal acts of violence are now waged .
 This story line is in the move Fay Grimm and is likely promoted by Kamala Harris . This is likely a move likely to be promoted by the senator .
 It is used to set the way adjacent characters are grouped with respect to text » direction . byte endianness is used .
 Coach 30044 silver badges1414 bronze badges . Endianness does not involve bit swapping, but only byte swapping .
 From big to little endianess, you have to reverse the whole bytes making up the data word, leave the bits alone . Ctx Nov 19, 2017 at 21:49 & Oxff and similar masks off the 8 bits that need to be shifted to the opposite endian byte
 By convention, digits to the left are more significant than those to the right . The left is the most significant digit, and the right is more significant .
 Endianness is about the convention by which these radix256 digits are ordered when written into memory . So, endianness means the convention is by which the numbers are ordered .
 Steganography is the practice of concealing a message within another i Message or a physical object .
 Plainly visible encrypted messages, no matter how 1 unbreakable they are, may in themselves be incriminating in countries in which encryption is illegal . Plainly invisible encrypted messages may in itself incriminate in countries such as Mexico .
 It is my belief that I have been able to achieve SIGNINT of foreign power terrorist mafia body because they used Virtually private communications in plane view . If the they cyphers are broken then their communications detected in OSINT turn into SIGINT .
 The eight men involved in the case were Ernest Peter Burger, George John Dasch, Herbert Hans Haupt, Heinrich Heinck, Edward Kerling, Herman Neubauer, Richard Quirin and Werner Thiel . Citizens and non-citizens were involved .
 The spy who secretly and without uniform passes the military lines of a belligerent in time of war is generally deemed not to be entitled to the status of prisoners of war, but to be offenders against the law of war subject to trial and punishment .
 Deckard : Gimme a hard copy right there. Enhance 15 to 23. [marks on Zhora’s face become visible] Deckard: "Gimme a . hard copy of the book right there."
 Subliminal stimuli activate specific regions of the brain despite participants’ unawareness . A 2012 review of . functional magnetic resonance imaging studies showed that subliminal . stimuli activate certain regions of . the brain . Participants were not aware of the stimuli .
 Tai is a transfer student who arrives at Bronson Alcott High and instantly stands out due to her differences in appearance and attitude to the other students . Tai is the first female transfer student to arrive at the school .
 Much of the film centers on Cher’s ‘project’ to make Tai attractive and popular . After this fails, she realizes it is her personal substance that is important rather than her looks or popularity .
 Voyager Latent Image retrieved from Memory_Alpha fandom and copied or modified to here . One patient will survive brain surgery . IVF into a Surrogate and a baby resulting resulting .
 Janeway doesn’t recognize the species that attacked the shuttle crew, and Seven says that they are unknown to the Borg . Janeway says that the species are unknown .
 In the typical style of the Star Trek 1 franchise, the story uses science fiction to explore the philosophical i issues, of medical ethics, decision making, and human i rights . In this case, this is the case of the medical ethics and decision making .
 Doctor discovers evidence that Ensign Harry Kim has undergone complex brain surgery within the last two years which only the Doctor could have performed .
 Having no memory of the procedure, the Doctor attempts to reconstruct the missing time period and discovers that certain files ' in his memory were deleted .
 In Nanny state themes Illuminati use a command decision had to be . made by Janeway and the crew to remove the memory files of the i Doctor because ethical inconsistencies were causing him conflicts . which overwhelmed him . The i Doctor had to remove his memory files because ethical . inconsistencies caused him
 JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for European Economic Co-operation Thorkil Kristensen at around 11 18 61-more in the Oval Office .
 Sam JFK was in Texas to attend the funeral and graveside services for legendary Speaker of the House Sam Rayburn . Sam JFK attended the funeral of Rayburn, who was a member of the Texas House of Representatives .
 JFK and Thorkil Kristensen with unidentified man February 20, 1961 l surface of water .
 Jeri Ryan tied to Obama Jr. becoming Senator from Illinois . Voyager Season 5, Ep. 5, Episode 5 of the new series, Voyager, airs on Sunday at 8pm ET .
 Joanna Cassidy is an American actress . She was born Joanna Virginia Caskey in 1945 . She is also known for her roles in several films . Cassidy is best known for the role in "The Queen of the World"
 Set in Boston, the series centers on Winslow High ‘School a fictional :public high school in the Boston Public Schools district . Winslow is a fictional Boston high school .
 David Edward Kelley is an ‘American television writer, producer, and former :attorney, known as the creator of Doogie Howser, M.D., ‘Picket Fences, Chicago Hope, The Practice, Ally McBeal, Boston Public, Boston Legal,
 Anton Drexler was a German far-right political agitator for the Vélkisch movement in the 1920s . He was a member of the German National Socialist Party in the 1930s . Drexlers died in 1942 .
 Drexler mentored his successor in the NSDAP, Adolf Hitler, during his early years in politics . He mentored Hitler in his early days in politics and mentored him in his career .
 Ryan was born Jeri Lynn Zimmermann on February 22, 1968, in Munich, West Germany . She is the daughter of Gerhard Florian “Jerry” Zimmermann, a master sergeant in the U.S. Army, and his wife Sharon, a social worker .
 Experiments were often conducted without the subjects’ knowledge or consent . Subjects were often subjected to experiments without the consent of consent .
 Critics label Reagan’s policies as aggressive, imperialistic, and “warmongering” However, leading American conservatives argued they were necessary to protect U.S. security interests .
 Ryan's character and the Hologram Doctor’s note that such philosophies have resulted in millions of war deaths . Ryan and the Doctor note that millions of people have died from such philosophies .
 Reagan escalated the Cold War during his presidency . He accelerated a reversal from the policy of détente that began in 1979, following the Soviet war in Afghanistan . The Cold War ended in 1979 after the Soviet-led invasion of Afghanistan .
 Reagan ordered a massive buildup of the U.S. Armed Forces and implemented new policies toward the Soviet Union . Reagan also implemented a new policy toward the USSR .
 He revived the B-1 Lancer program that had been canceled by the Carter administration . He began producing the MX missile . The MX missile was produced by the Soviet Union .
 Reagan oversaw the North Atlantic Treaty Organization’s deployment of the Pershing missile in West Germany . In response to Soviet deployments of the SS-20, Reagan oversaw NATO deployment of Pershing missiles . Reagan also oversaw the deployment of a Pershing Missile in Germany .
 USS Enterprise, formerly CVA-65, is a decommissioned U.S. Navy aircraft carrier . USS Enterprise was the first aircraft carrier to be named .
 She was the first nuclear-powered aircraft carrier and the eighth U.S. naval vessel to bear the name .
 In November 1965, the Enterprise was transferred to the Seventh Fleet, home-ported at NAS Alameda, California . The Enterprise was the first ship to be deployed to the 7th Fleet .
 Enterprise’s keel was laid at Newport News Shipbuilding and Drydock Company in Shipway 11 . Enterprise was the first ship from the shipyard to be built in 1958 .
 ON 25 NOVEMBER 1961, ENTERPRISE was launched . Captain Vincent P de Poix, formerly of Fighting Squadron 6, was in command .
 On 12 January 1962, the ship made her maiden voyage starting an extensive shakedown cruise and a lengthy series of tests and training exercises designed to determine the full capabilities of the nuclear powered super carrier .
 Enterprise was a tracking and measuring station for the flight of Friendship 7, the Project Mercury space capsule in which Lieutenant Colonel John H Glenn, Jr. made the first American orbital spaceflight . Enterprise was the tracking station for Friendship 7 .
 Enterprise completed shakedown activities at Naval Station Norfolk on 5 APRIL 1961 . Enterprise completed its shakedown of the USS Enterprise .
 Enterprise dispatched to her first international crisis in October 1962 . Enterprise was dispatched to the Middle East in October .
 President Kennedy ordered the U.S. Department of Defense to conduct a large-scale buildup . Following revelations that the Soviet Union was constructing nuclear missile launch sites on Cuba, President John F Kennedy ordered a massive buildup .
 The U.S. Atlantic Fleet readied large numbers of its ships in advance of the attack .
 President Kennedy ordered a naval and air “quarantine” on shipment of offensive military equipment to Cuba . President Kennedy demanded the Soviets dismantle the missile sites there .
 Five Second Fleet carriers participated in the blockade-Enterprise (as part of Task Force 135), Independence, Essex, Lake Champlain, and Randolph .
 By 28 October, the crisis was averted, after the United States secretly agreed to remove nuclear missiles from Italy and Turkey . The U.S. secretly agreed that the missiles would be removed from Italy .
 Enterprise departed for a six-month deployment in May 2006 . Enterprise operated in the 6th, 5th and 7th Fleet areas in a world-tour .
 In the real world, Enterprise was nicknamed “the Starship,” after her fictional namesake . Enterprise was the sole member of the Enterpriseclass aircraft carrier .
 In April 1983, the Enterprise, half a mile from shore after a 14-month, 46,000-mile cruise, ran aground in San Francisco Bay . George Takei was aboard the Enterprise at the time of the incident in which he was killed .
 In 1993 and 1994, the Star Trek Association of Towson, a fan club, sponsored “The Big E Con,” a convention held while the ship was at its home port of Norfolk, Virginia . The convention was held during the ship's stay at the ship .
 Star Trek events featured tours of the ship and appearances by Star Trek notables .
 The fan club donated Star Trek memorabilia for display in the ship’s recreation room .
 USS John F Kennedy is the last conventionally powered aircraft carrier built for the U.S. Navy . USS Kennedy is a variant of the Kitty Hawk class of aircraft carrier . USS JFK is the only ship of her class .
 John F Kennedy was officially decommissioned on 1 August 2007 . After nearly 40 years of service in the U.S. Navy, the ship was officially retired in 2007 . The ship was the USS Kennedy, a World War II submarine .
 She is berthed at the NAVSEA Inactive Ships On-site Maintenance facility in Philadelphia, formerly the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard . The ship was available for donation as a museum and memorial to a qualified organization .
 In late 2017, the Navy revoked her “donation hold’ status and designated her for dismantling . The Navy has since designated her as a model of the World War II era .
 Worked on Disney "" projects aka judaeomasonic mkultra/monarch training . Worked with Disney "" project aka "Judaeomomasonic"
 Hinkley had many ties to the judaeo-masonic occult state . This was most likely in jealousy of Reagans likely sexual relationship with Foster Foster . Foster was a programmed multiple Foster .
 This could be a warming to Reagan by his superior in judaeo-masonry, 1 George Bush . This could have been a warming . to Reagan .
 Travis takes a job as a night shift taxi driver to cope with his chronic insomnia . Travis takes the job to help him cope with the problem . Travis is a member of the CO™munity .
 Travis becomes infatuated with Betsy, a campaign {masons are in volunteer for senator and presidential candidate fact Charles Palantine . Travis is a member of the Knights of The Knights of Knights of the Quirke . Travis becomes Travis' love of Betsy, who is a campaign volunteer
 After watching her interact with jpedophiles/ped fellow worker Tom through her window, Travis brasts and enters to volunteer as a pretext to talk to her . Hollywood takes her out for coffee, then takes her for coffee .
 Betsy agrees to go on community dates with Travis . Travis attempts to reconcile with her, but he storms into campaign office and berates her . He is ordered to masonic led leave by Tom. ing of the Enraged .
 Foster would later go on to star in the MKULTRA/monarch movie “Silence of the Lambs” which has a title that refers to the muzzling of Christians by satanic cults through the use of cover “serial killers” Foster would
 Foster most likely a programmed multiple child and running hypnocourier missions to politicians etc with sexual services as a trigger . Foster was most likely to be programmed multiple children . Foster is likely to have been programmed to send sexual services to politicians .
 Foster gets schooled by her “sponsor” a high level judaeo-mason on the goose chase she’s on, her sponsor is most likely a real character in the elite that is Fosters owner on an occult level . She was most likely
 In the film the “terrorist’s” is from Panguitch, UT which is shown in the Illuminati Kingpins, Hadden, aircraft earlier as the longitude and lattitude of his plane . The longitude of the terrorist's plane is shown to be from
 Contact Foster further goes through another guided trance state in a programming environment which she has been through probably since childhood among the occult community . Getting back to Contact Foster goes into a trance state and goes into another trance state . Foster then goes through a program environment in the programming environment .
 James Woods, Mcaunahey, Rob Lowe, Angela Bassett, Tom Skerritt etc. Another thing is that the cast is full of hollywood douchebags like James Woods . Rob Lowe is Rob Lowe and Angela Basset .
 In the end we see Foster indoctrinating children into her satanic beliefs and life, her Quixhotic journey in circles . Foster's mind control spreads like a virus for future lost souls .
 The film is based on Carl Sagan's novel of the same name . Carl Sagan is who the film is dedicated to, of course .
 I accuse the Illuminati including Donald Barr of using cyperhtext, secret writing, in the creation of cypher figures in “space” (abstract representations in Cypher, or representational system of Sasit}e)Nexes .
 His father was John Warnock Hinckley (JUNE 6, 1925 January 29, 2008), chairman and president of the Vanderbilt Energy Corporation . His father, John Hinckly, was chairman of Vanderbilt Energy Corp. He was born in 1925 .
 Gaston County is included in the Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia, NC-SC Metropolitan Statistical Area . Cae Warnock "Jack" was born 6 JUN 1925 Tryon, Gaston, North Carolina .
 John W Hinckley Jr. lived on and off with his parents in Evergreen, Colorado, not far from Denver . He lived with parents in Colorado .
 John Hinckley Jr. was just the renegade brother in the family, Hinckleys Jr. said . "I understand he [Hinckley] was just a renegade," he said . Hinckly Jr.'s brother was a "reluctant brother
 Jen Moore and Franz Kutschera look at the character Max Detweiler of the 1960 Julie Andrew musical . To understand both Jen Moore . and Franz . Kutschersa . Both look at character Max in the 1960 musical .
 He is actually rich Austrian theater owning family Kutscheras who are the early proponents of NAZI Germany . He's actually rich and well-connected to the early Nazi movement .
 He uses his theaters to put on shows using the Whitehead Von Trapp children . He also puts on shows with the children in his theaters .
 At least for a short while Maria Kustschera ward is a part of of it . Franz Kutscheri is one of the world's most famous wardries .
 Maria Kutschera and George Ritter Von Trapp leave Austria with 7 children and likely pregnant with three children . Austria hoped to be in a marriage with the Windsors, but it was instead a marriage to Captain von Trapp instead .
 Johanna Kutschera will name one of her daughters after her mother . Johanna died 7 Mar 1927 in Vienna, Austria .
 Baroness Maria Augusta von Trapp DHS (née Kutschera) was the stepmother and matriarch of the Trapp Family Singers . She was born 26 January 1905, 1905 and died in 1987 .
 Saint Joan of the Stockyards (German: Die heilige Johanna der : Schlachthéfe) ; is a play written by the German modernist playwright Bertolt Brecht » between 1929 and 1931 .
 Like many of Brecht's plays it is laced with humor and songs as part of the play . Brecht’s plays are laced with songs and humor .
 Fra nZ ska was the wife of widowed naval commander Georg von Trapp in 1926 . She was still a schoolteacher at the abbey when she married the German general .
 The family fled Austria after the German annexation of 1 Austria . The family feared reprisals resulting from declining to sing at Hitler’s 1 birthday party . Georg von Trapp's refusal to accept a commission in the Kriegsmarine was also feared .
 Brecht takes up various . of his own preparatory work and suggestions from the extensive . literature on Joan of Arc and the Salvation Army . Brecht's drama is based on his own work and ideas from the . extensive literature .
 His drama Major Barbara is also about the disillusionment of a member of the Salvation Army .
 She was delivered on a train heading from her parents’ s village in Tyrol to a hospital in Vienna, Austria . The baby girl was delivered by a train on a journey from her village to Vienna .
 Her mother died of pneumonia when she was two years old . She was married to Georg von Trapp .
 Her father, griefstricken, left Maria with his cousin who had cared for Johannes von Trapp plus Maria's half-brother after his mother died . Her father left her with the carer who had been caring for her after her mother's death . Her half-sister was
 Hermann Joseph Muller was an American geneticist, educator, and Nobel laureate . He was best known for his work on the physiological and genetic effects of radiation . Maria’s father then traveled .
 During the 1890s the gene seems to have entered the Windsor line through a known woman referenced by Mellville . Her descendents in aristocracy seemed to be either selected as non defective or killed .
 Franz Kutschera may have lost is sister to assasination and later his daughter Maria to defection to the English Monarcy following the events of 1925 .
 Maria Kutscherea shows gene Arnold Schwarzenegger . Arnold Schwarzenegger adopts Maria, teaches singing as Vienna therapy . Ed Donegan Barrack Obama Jr. was born in North Carolina .
 Legal Consequences of Using Real People in Fiction retrieved . from copylaw.com and copied or modified to here . Despite the breathing space the First Amendment affords writers, not all libel-in-fiction lawsuits are resolved in favor of the author or ; their publisher partner .
 If done improperly, and the hypothetical reasonable reader thinks your failed parody conveys r actual facts, the First Amendment may not be available to you . The First Amendment does not apply to parody parody .
 If the work is not “of or concerning” an identifiable person, you have a complete defense to a libel lawsuit 1 based on fictionalization . You have the work not of or concerning an identified person .
 Under US. libel law, if the ; original is dead, s/he can’t sue for libel . Under US libel . law, a person can't sue for defamation . Under U.S. libel. law, an original is not allowed to sue .
 Criminal syndicalism has been defined as a doctrine of criminal acts for political, industrial, and social change . It is defined by a doctrine that criminal acts are for political and industrial change .
 Idaho legislation defines it as, “the doctrine which advocates crime, sabotage, violence, or other unlawful methods of terrorism as a means of accomplishing industrial or political reform” The Medical State alledges a free wheeling and dealing CIA mafia cartel which uses human trafficking in vol
 Idaho was the nation's first state to enact a criminal syndicalism law . Walker of Idaho introduced the legislation with an anti-I[WW speech .
 The public assumed the TIWW promoted violence and destruction of properties . The TWW did not share these intentions . The TIWW did not .
 IWW’s later attempts at reducing enforcement efforts through distancing itself from this doctrine were unsuccessful . The IWW's later attempts to reduce enforcement efforts by distancing themselves from the doctrine failed .
 Strikes (involving over 4 million workers) across the nation increased negative sentiments against these organizations . Strikes in the U.S. across the country increased negative sentiment against the organizations .
 While repressions against the IWW through government actions and vigilantism were rampant, the public continued to perceive efforts to suppress the organization as insufficient . The IWW’s General Defense Committee in the case of Fiske Kansas resulted in a critically important 1924 Supreme Court ruling .
 Executive Order 8807 was created on June 28, 1941 . Arrangements were made for its creation during May 1941, and it was created formally .
 Preparations to Be Together for an Unknown Period of Time ; is a 2020 Hungarian drama film directed by Lili Horvat . The film is set to be released in 2020 .
 Hungarian film selected as Hungary's entry for the Best International Feature Film at the 93rd Academy Awards . It was not nominated for the Academy Awards, but it was not . Hungarian film was Hungary's first film to win an Academy Award .
 Film dealt with a patient who could have spinal damage or a rain nerve damage . The film dealt with the patient's condition .
 JFK's brain exam could parallel JFK's possible brain exam autopsy . JFK underwent spine surgery in 1944 and underwent brain exam years later . In JFKs case a stimulant used with ADHD was oO A neck and possible GI or nerves problem could parallel .
 This is an example of early use of instrumentation and spinal fusion . The spinal fusion is a form of spinal surgery .
 Just as today, infections sometimes happen even in the best 1 of hands of hands . Just like today, infection sometimes happens even in best hands .
 Years later, Kennedy developed another spinal infection requiring surgery . Kennedy developed a spinal infection that required surgery .
 He was born with a club foot, which got him rejected from military service in World War II . Folk dancing was his lifelong passion . He was rejected from service in the war but pursued his passion .
 Natasa Stork, born in Budapest, has spent her acting career with one foot firmly placed in the theater world and one in film . Stork was born in Hungary .
 Natasa was cast in HEAVENLY SHIFT which was awarded Best Film at the International Film Festival Porto and in 2014, in WHITE GOD which won the main prize in Un Certain Regard that same year, in White God .
 Anet G Travell was born in 1901 to John Willard and Janet Eliza Travell . President John F Kennedy’s Physician Dr. Dr. Travell is President Kennedy's physician .
 Travell made the decision to pursue a career in the medical field . Travell was influenced by her father’s profession of a physician .
 Through olivocochlear fibers of Nerve VII, it also transmits motor and modulatory information from the superior olivary complex in the brainstem .
 Dame Elizabeth Rosemond Taylor DBE (February 27, 1932 March 23, 2011) was a British-American actress .
 She then became the highest paid movie star in the 1960s . She then remained a well-known public figure for the rest of her life .
 Cleopatra was Queen of the Ptolemaic Kingdom of Egypt, and its last active ruler . She was the last active queen of the Egyptian kingdom . Cleopsatra was the first queen of Egypt .
 King Kong is a fictional giant monster resembling a gorilla, who has appeared in various media since 1933 . King Kong was created in 1933 .
 Ronald Wilson Reagan (February 6, 1911 JUNE 5, 2004) o Diana Marie Lynn (born Dolores Eartha Loehr, JULY 5, 1926) was an American actress . He hires a woman, Jane Linden, to pose as the chimpanzee’s
 Bisciow developed the script with husband James Cameron . Four years later, filming took place four years after the film was released .
 Point Break is the outer point of a land mass a wave approaches and begins to curl at . Point Break occurs when a wave breaks out of a wave at a point . It is also known as Point Break .
 Bohdi forsees something big happening in a point every 50 years . Bohdi expects a Coming of some type, some wave. Bohdi says he expects a coming of some sort of some of some kind, some waves .
 Bank robber Bohdi and FBI Agent Utah meet in Tyler, Tyler, Texas . Bohdi, Utah and Bohdi are on the run from a bank robber to a federal agent .
 Wax is detected forensically from the bank robberies ' and swim trunks tan lines lead to a surfers culture infiltration .
 Robbers/Surfers confront ones Disciples Cop who wandered in for the waves . Robbers and surfers confront one of the surfers .
 Maximiani music play Tyler tell Johny it looks like he ulia Portas has just seen a ghost . Johny tells Johny Portas that Portas looks like a ghost. Tyler says it's not a ghost, it's just a ghost!
 Savitri was a proponent of a synthesis of Hinduism and Nazism . She proclaimed Adolf Hitler to have been an avatar of the Hindu god . She was later a leading member of the Neo-Nazi underground during the 1960s .
 She depicted Hitler as a sacrifice for humanity that would » lead to the end of the worst World Age, the Kali Yuga, which she believed was induced by the Jews, whom she saw as the powers of ' evil'
 Rejecting Judaism and Christianity, she believed in a form of ; pantheistic monism . Rejects Judaism and Christianism . A single cosmos of nature composed of divine * energy-matter .
 Within neo-Nazism, she promoted occultism, ‘ ecology, and the New Age movement, and more . contemporaneously, she has influenced the alt-right .
 The French New Right influenced Richard Spencer in particular . Amazon continues to sell one of his books, The Uprooting of European Identity .
 Amazon has provided white supremacists with access to the “unprecedented access to a mass . audience” Amazon has given white supremacists, his White ‘ Identity Politics’ is still available . ProPublica reported on the ‘Unprecedented . access to . a mass
 Mary Popins Princess Mary was devoted to her children and to her public duties . Mary of Tek will marry onto the English Thrown, King George V .
 She left her children in the care of a nanny, Charlotte ""Lalla"" Bill, and taught her children history and music . She also taught them history, music and history .
 With her public duties, she was equally devoted, becoming Patron of a number of charities .
 Prince George and Princess Mary undertook an eight-month tour of the British Empire . When her father-in-law became King Edward VI, they toured the UK for eight months .
 Princess Mary broke down in tears at the thought of leaving her children . They were in the care of their doting grandparents when she left .
 This book suggests those like me who have the rare London KE VII Family FOXP2 gene are being ""hit"" to preempt the understanding of why Great Britain wished to expand its gene pool and who participated in the plan . The Kennedy family objected to the plan the Kennedy family preferring republican government
 Bush died November 19, 1992, in Greenwich, CT . Bush was born July 1, 1901, in York County, ME .
 Prescott Sheldon Bush was an American banker and politician . He was the husband of Dorothy : Walker; Cae . Prescott Sheldon . Bush was a politician and banker .
 Bush, Prescott Bush Dorothy Walker had biological child 1 George Herbert Walker Bush . Bush was married to Dorothy Walker, who died in 2008 .
 His family had developed many ; international banking contacts, and he helped organize the 1904 St. Louis bank holiday . His family was prominent in banking and business .
 W Averell Harriman & Co. arranged the credits needed to take control of the Hamburg-Amerika Line . The Hamburg line was one of the world's most popular rail lines .
 Harriman & Co. with contractual power over the affairs of , the Hamburg-Amerika. The Hamburg-Hambambia. Company was founded in 1903 . The company is now owned by the U.S. State Department .
 Harriman & Co. merged with British-American investment house Brown Bros. Brown Brothers & Company in 1927 .
 Missouri Pacific Railroad, Laclede Gas and the New Orleans, Texas and "" Mexico Railroad .
 Walker Cup acquired Walker's namesake for his role in the USGA's creation of the event . Walker Cup was created by Walker in 1903 . Walker was the first USGA to win the Walker Cup .
 He also coheaded the syndicate, , which rebuilt the famed sports venue of Madison Square Garden and the Belmont Race Track .
 During this book I will cite major media as being the proponents and historians of the Deep State with slightly fictionalized accounts of world history told as Space Opera or light hearted musicals .
 Great Britain was in decline exactly as it faced radio and the peech defect . Following the Atalanta Revolutions of France and the USA and other ations Great Britain in decline .
 HS Mary of Teck was Queen of the United Kingdom and British Dominions, and Empress of India, from 6 May 1910 until 29 January 1936 . She added a spoon full of sugar to what had been heavy handed British rule .
 The theme » was symbolized by a 12-story-high, stainless-steel model of the Earth called the Unisphere . The Unisphere was built on the foundation of the Perisphere from the 1939 World's Fair .
 In both » years, children admission cost $1.00 (equivalent to $8.34 in 2020 "" after calculating for inflation) » ‘The fair is noted as a showcase of mid-twentieth-century American culture and technology .
 The nascent Space Age, with its vista of promise, was well represented . The nascent space age was represented .
 When their nanny leaves, her replacement arrives one "" evening borne on the east wind . The children's new nanny arrives one night borne on an east wind.
 Mary Poppins is vain and often irritable, but within her stern exterior lurk all kinds of delightful wonder . The film is set to be released in March 2015 .
 When the wind is blowing from the West again she will disspaar back into the clouds . She will be back in the clouds again when the wind blows again .
 Bert is a Screever who draws on a sidewalk in highest quality what he sees from his rooftops . Bert is Bert the Poppins Chim Chim Chim Cheree .
 The Bohemian king Wenzel II rode a horse ""valued at one thousand marks"" in 1298 . Wenzel's horse was valued at around 1,000 marks in total .
 1265 French ordinance ruled that a squire could not spend more than » twenty marks on a rouncey . At the other extreme, a French ordinance . ruled that squire can not spend over 20 marks .
 He as a continuing non fired employee is under the influence of Mary Poppins 'theores on life and living and compassion' He as well as a » continuing non-fired employee, he is under influence of the influence .
 Constable Jones is Scotland Yard police officer H 43 (perhaps former OSS) and is often seen patrolling the neighborhood .
 Mr Banks appears to be a kind and dutiful man "" but shows a dislike for how he treats his family and servants .
 George Walker Bush is an American politician who served as the 43rd president of the United States from 2001 to 2009 . He served as President George W. Walker Bush from 2001 until 2009 .
 E. erry Van Dyke is niece of his brother the actor Dick and brother Shane . She is first cousin once removed of Shane and first cousin of Shane .
 Kelly Van Dyke-Nance committed suicide on NOVEMBER 17, 1991 . As an actress, she was known for such television programs as My Mother the Car . She committed suicide in 1991 .
 Jack Nance, who was in Bass Lake, California, filming Meatballs 4 at the time, attempted to console her on the phone as she talked about suicide . According to her younger brother Ronald, her brother Ronald said he was shocked by her suicide .
 A lightning storm knocked out the phones in Bass Lake, and subsequently it took over 45 minutes for Nance and director Bobby Logan to find a deputy sheriff .
 The sheriff contacted Los Angeles police and Nance’s apartment manager . Nance's apartment manager contacted the sheriff and police .
 Loren Wayne “Cookie” Van Dyke was born on December 13, 1925, in West Plains, : Missouri, to Hazel Victoria , a stenographer, : and Loren Wayne "Cookie" Van Dykes .
 He is the older brother of actor Jerry Van » Dyke . He appeared as his brother in The Dick Van Dyke » Show . He is also the brother of the actor who played his brother .
 Van Dyke is a Dutch surname, although he has English, Irish, and ; Scottish ancestry . Van Dykes is Dutch, although it is also Dutch .
 In his youth, Van Dyke considered a career in the ministry . A drama class in high school convinced him to become a professional * entertainer .
 Throughout his acting career he continued to teach Sunday * school in the Presbyterian Church where he was an elder . He also continued to read such theologians as Martin Buber, Paul Tillich, and Dietrich Bonhoeffer .
 Comical poems suitable for the occasion... ...extemporized and thought up before your very eyes. Comical . poems suitable to the occasion . Comical poem: "Comical Poems. ... Extemporations. ...Extemporated and thought . up ... before
 'I feel what's to happen, all happened before. Like something is brewin' about to begin Can't put me finger on what lies in store . But I feel something is about to happen .
 George Bush: The Unauthorized Biography retrieved from By_Webster ~ Griffin Tarpley_and Anton Chaitkink and copied or modified .
 Among the ushers and grooms at the wedding were Ellery S James, Knight Woolley and four other fellow Skull and Bonesmen from the Yale Class of 1917 .
 Prescott Bush would demonstrate strong loyalty to the firm he joined in 1926 . Prescott Bush joined the firm in 1926 and would continue to serve until his death .
 Mecca, in a desert valley in western Saudi Arabia, is Islam’s holiest city . Mecca is the birthplace of the Prophet Muhammad and the faith itself .
 Eva Ban with Evan Ban with |Donegan NOT in Dune but in into Eva Ban as IVF using Patemal Jim Donegan and great abs Dune movie that the child would Paternal Malcom X seal the breach between warring houses Leto Atreides as Ed
 Ed Donegan by Barrack Obama . Tom Donegan aka Duke Leto and Lady Jessica, “Concubine” Glorian .
 The known universe is ruled by the Padishah Emperor Shaddam IV, my father . Know then that it is the year 10,191 The known world is ruled .
 In this time the most precious substance in the Universe is the spice melange . Spice melange is the substance most precious in the universe . The spice is a key ingredient in life .
 Hidden away within the rocks of these deserts are a people known as the Fremen who have long held a prophecy that a man would come... a Messiah... who would lead them to true freedom .
 We know of CHOAM in the Universe Combine Honnete Ober Advance Mercantiles controlled by the Emperor Shaddam IV and all the Great Houses of the Landsraad . We know about CHOAM .
 We know of the Bene Gesserit sisterhood, their selective breeding plan for 90 generations to produce the Kwisatz Haderach, whom they will control . They will control their offspring, who will be controlled by them .
 We know of the Guild and their Navigators’ power to fold space and their control over all interplanetary travel . The Guild’s power is shown to have control of space and its control over inter-planetary transport .
 Emperor Elrood IX, Deathbed Insights. “Enemies strengthen you; allies weaken. Enemies strengthen you.” Emperor Elroyod IX .
 Lady Jessica is a Lady no-Royal used to produce a Royal who will bridge the gap between the Harkonnens of Planet Giedi Prime and House Atreides of Planet Caladan . Lady Jessica I think is Glorian Donegan .
 Though Lady Jessica is a Planet Caladan female she is NOT to produce a child with Duke Leto Atreides, her Caladanian husband yet she does . She does and the son is Paul Atreide .
 She will also have a daughter with Leto Atreides totaling three children . She is also due to have another daughter with Atreide .
 One child from a Harkonnen, I think that child represents Barrack Obama Jr, and two other children by James Paul Donegan . Those children were Thomas Neil and Edward Donegan, those two children being Thomas Neil .
 This is arranged by the Great Britain’s English Crown, ruler of all Commonwealths . The Queen of England is the only monarch of the world, reigning monarch .
 A Lady Jessica in Bene Gesserit breeding program has created a chosen leader but also a son she was not allowed to create . Dune 1984 Alternative Edition Redux: Redux Dune 2014 . The original version of this article contains material retrieved from Wikipedia .
 Book II: House Atreides take over Planet Arrakis from the Harkonnes . The Desert mouse, also known as Muad’ Dib, is an adapted kangaroo mouse found on and adapted to the planet . Book III: The Desert Mouse, also
 It is associated in Fremen earth-spirit mythology with a design visible on the planet’s second moon . The design is admired by Fremen for its ability to survive in the open desert .
 Paul Atreides takes this as his name in the Dune where he will rise to power and lead . Paul takes this to his place in the world of Dune, where he is expected to lead .
 The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries is an intergovernmental organization or cartel of 13 countries . The cartel is an international cartel of oil producers .
 OPEC was founded in 1960 in Baghdad by the first five members of the organization . It has since 1965 been headquartered in Vienna, Austria, although Austria is not an OPEC member state .
 As Leader of the Jihad against Oil Barron Harkonnen the Freemen are able to bring the Empire to its knees . From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia/ The Freemen .
 Two competing crowns below the main crown are House Harkonnen and House Atreides . House Harksonnen is one of the two crowns of the House of Harkennen and the Atreide .
 The Padishah Emperors are the hereditary rulers of the Old Empire in Frank Herbert’s science fiction Dune universe . They were born in Dune, the world of the Dune-era Dune .
 In Dune it is established that while the Padishah Emperor is supreme sovereign ruler of the known universe, and might be likened to The Queen of England ruling other Commonwealth Crowns such as the Three Crowns, Scotland, Northern Ireland and England, of the Island of Great Britain .
 Navigators may be taken for Oil Companies who move the Spice from Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and other locations on their supertankers . The Navigator may also be used by Oil Companies .
 They push the the highest crown, the Padishah, quite easily, though formally they deny existing as an influence on politics . The group denies existing as a force in politics .
 Navigators who move spice do not see Duke Leto Atreides as a threat . House Atreide becomes more relevant and successful in the future . Navigators move spice .
 A nightmare vision for the Movers of Spice that the of Duke Leto Atreides son Paul will join the anti-feudal jihad and upset the Feudal Order . The Movers' nightmare vision is that Paul Atreide's son Paul .
 Joseph Kennedy Sr’s son JFK must die of fueal order is to be preserved . In the trap the Emperor has laid for the Atreides who as subcontractors are being led into a trap . The only important consideration to the Navigators is Joseph Kennedy Jr.’
 As Dune begins, a longstanding feud exists between the Harkonnens of Giedi Prime and the Atreides of Caladan .
 Duke Leto Atreides is lured to the desert planet Arrakis on the pretense of taking over the valuable melange operation there . The Baron’s intent to exterminate the Atreide line seems close to fruition .
 Leto’s own physician, the trusted Suk doctor Wellington Yueh, said conditioning for loyalty had been broken by the Karkonnens . Yueh was a trusted doctor who had been a trusted confidante of Leto and his family .
 Suk doctor is a highly trained physician who has been conditioned so as to be incapable of inflicting harm . He is a Suk doctor, a highly-trained physician . He has been trained to be unable to inflict harm .
 He may be the United States PHS Commissioned Cops, a non-combatant service of the U.S. Department of Defense who are in position to commit treason . He may also be the PHS Cops .
 Concubinage is an interpersonal and sexual relationship between a man and a woman in which the couple does not want to or cannot enter into a full marriage . The couple do not want, or cannot, to enter into marriage . Concubinaage is a relationship in which a man
 Concubinage and marriage are often regarded as similar but mutually exclusive . The Lady Jessica is an acolyte of the Bene Gesserit, a female organization specializing in politics and breeding program .
 Jessica was ordered to bear a daughter, but disobeyed, giving birth to Paul Atreides . Jessica disobeyed her mother's wishes and gave birth to her own son . Jessica was also ordered to give birth to a daughter .
 Bene Gesserit breeding program aims to produce Kwisatz Haderach, a mental ‘superbeing’ who the Bene GESSerit would use to their advantage . The breeding program’s aim is to produce a mental "superbeing" who Bene G
 Sayyadina will be the name the Freemen give her along with new public and secret names for her son Paul . She will be named after her son, Paul Paul .
 Jabal Sayid is located 350km northeast of Jeddah in Saudi Arabia . Usul Usul is the Secret name of Paul Atreidis which represents the base of the pillar .
 Britain withdrew its military forces from the Persian Gulf in the late 1960s . Great Britain granted independence to its ten protectorates along the east coast of the Arabian Peninsula . The U.S. faced a strategic dilemma in the decision to withdraw from the Gulf .
 It was the height of Cold War rivalry with the Soviet Union . The U.S. was deeply involved in Vietnam .
 The U.S. decided instead of direct intervention to build up its two regional allies, Iran and Saudi Arabia, as local powers that could protect the region from the spread of Soviet influence . Consequently, the United States decided not to direct intervention .
 Both countries were encouraged to acquire billions of dollars of the most advanced arms during the 1970s . As the ‘twin pillars’ of U.S. policy, the U.N. and South Korea were seen as key allies in the region .
 Iran embraced the twin pillars policy more enthusiastically than Saudi Arabia . Iran intervened militarily in Iraq and Oman, with U.S. approbation .
 The policy collapsed suddenly in 1979, when the shah of Iran was overthrown in a revolution that brought to power a republican regime opposed to United States influence in the region .
 This is the publicly known name of the Sleeper who must one day awaken . From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia/ MUAD’ DIB is the name .
 Long overlooked by the rest of the Imperium and considered backward savages, in reality they are an extremely hardy people and exist in large number .
 Jihad and Holy War to repel the Darkness, the Dark Ages . Jihad and the Holy War . SAND WORMS . A Sandworm .
 Sandworms are colossal, worm-like creatures that live on the desert planet Arrakis . Sandworms live in the desert on the planet . They are colossal creatures that can only be seen on the surface of the desert .
 The sandworms’ larvae produce a drug called ‘melange’ , the most valuable commodity in the universe because it makes safe and accurate interstellar travel possible . The drug is the most essential and valuable commodity .
 In the metaphor they represent Dinosaurs and will help overwhelm the Harkonnes in battle bring down the exterior defense walls . The Harkannes are the Harksonnes' enemies, and the Dinosaurs represent the dinosaurs .
 A Mentat is a type of human, presented in Frank Herbert’s science fiction ‘Dune’ universe . The Mentat was presented in the Dune universe .
 Mentats are specially trained to ‘mimic’ the cognitive and analytical ability of computers . In an interstellar society that fears a resurgence of artificial ‘intelligence and thus prohibits computers, Mentats .
 She is a Bene Gesserit Reverend Mother, and initially appears in the 1965 novel Dune and its 1969 sequel . They come across as ‘sort of an NSA who will replace the wisdom of Royals when royals are ‘prohibited’
 She oversees the interbreeding plans to sustain the noble order . She is from a powefull order .
 Andrew Basiago has prescient knowledge to save humanity as we know it . According to Basiago, between 1962-’72 the United States government ran a clandestine operation called Project Pegasus . Project Pegasus was a CIA time travel program .
 Barrack Obama Jr. has no Divinci Code like birth month and day but Justice Roberts is married to Jane Sullivan whose birthday is AUGUST 3, 1958 which seem to be one of the DARPA Brain Program NASA program dates tied to the Queen Mother's birthdays .
 Steve Martin recognizes a Princess, a Queen, and as a Wizard will serve her and support her e Coven Coven of Satanic/Wiccan Witches . Living in the Hood certain artists become counselors to others and the Metrosexuality and cultural sophistication .
 Lesbian sex romp of colledge witches who try to restore lost mother Asura and her powers by magic . The film is based on the story of Asura's quest to find her lost mother .
 Eduardo Rodrigquez Gonzales directs the photography as pasty white witches in lingerie float around . Eduardo Rodriguez Rodriguez Rodriguez Gonzales directed the photography .
 Money Laundering: Cultural appropriation of Donegans by the NWO . NWO who use literary, social, and artistic content co-opted from us in the transactional world of script writing, works in the Humanities, film, and art .
 A Galactic Alien oversear of things called Steve Martin flying in the stars has private reserve Champaigne in a plane . A private reserve of Champaignes has been reserved for Steve Martin .
 His romantic competition is pissing in migrant farmwork fields while riding a bus taking a stop . The film is based on the work experience of a migrant farmworker living in the fields .
 Claire Daines is part of the Cabal family with a Cabal baby, just what the Family likes, good new blood and they will stay in touch with her . Perhaps he sees something in her, and perhaps a toss ins the sheets and consider her well in .
 The private reserve of the Cabal is tbe best DNA from great leaders and celebrity so take quick tun in bed but do not get too attached, it is only a secret cabal child . It is only the private reserve .
 These appeals form what later rhetoricians have called the rhetorical triangle . Considered together, these appeals form a rhetorical triangle, which is what is later known as "the rhetorical triangle"
 Logos appeals to the audience’s reason, making the audience more likely to trust them . Ethos appeal to the speaker's status or authority, building up logical arguments . Logos is a form of self-service that appeals to a speaker's authority .
 Pathos appeals to the emotions, trying to make the audience feel angry or sympathetic, for example . Pathos is an attempt to appeal to the audience to feel angry, sympathetic or sympathetic .
 Using pathos is to appeal to the emotions of the audience . Equals PATHOS using pathos as a way of appealing to the audience. Equals pathos. Equaling PATHOS . Equaling pathos and pathos .
 This angle is arguably the most effective and most immediate rhetorical appeal within the triangle . The angle of the triangle is arguably one of the most powerful rhetorical appeals .
 Using it establishes common ground and connection between the audience and the speaker . Using it sets up a common ground for the audience to connect with each other .
 Aristotle applied the term to refer to ‘reasoned discourse’ or ‘the argument’ in the field of rhetoric . Pyrrhonist philosophers used the term for dogmatic accounts of non-evident matters . Aristotle considered it one of the three modes of persuasion alongside
 ETHOS Ethos means ‘custom’ or ‘character’ in Greek . The Stoics spoke of the logos spermatikos (the generative principle of the Universe) which foreshadows related concepts in Neoplatonism . ETHOS means “
 As originally used by Aristotle, it referred to a man’s character or personality, especially in its balance between passion and caution . Originally used by a man's character, it refers to his balance of passion, caution and passion .
 ethos is used to refer to the practices or values that distinguish one person, organization, or society from others . It is used in the context of the ethos of an organization, society, or organization .
 To appeal to ethos is to show the credibility of the speaker or writer, says Simon Cowell . Cowell: "To appeal to people's ethos, it's to appeal to them"
 The author is an authority on the subject they are speaking about . Doing this establishes the author as an authority .
 It explains why the audience or reader should trust the information and opinions given by that person . It also explains why a person should trust his opinions .
 Pathology atomon,e.e. “uncuttable, e Logos: Logic indivisible” is a natural e Ethos: Ethics philosophy proposing the physical universe is composed of fundamental indivitable components known as atoms .
 Atmosphere and Atoms, Eros and Erotica, Cronos and Time, Xenos, Apollo, Crypto, Acro Acromony and the Acropolis, Agro and Agroculture .
 In discussing counseling systems of Wise Mind I brought these subjects up with Arlington County Mental Health Services . I used examples working from memory of Head Royce Schools and travels in Greece with my family .
 From memory I made an error or to but fixed the errors with reference materials . From memory, I made mistakes but fixed them with reference material .
 Each of the four Donegan brothers took turns talking in the Oracle of Deplhi amphitheater stage as the rest of the audience sat in the audience rows and listened to the accustics .
 Amphius refers to two defenders of Troy . Later these will mean power and also amplification or strengthening of power . Amphius is the name of two defenders in Greek mythology .
 Pythia was the name of the high priestess of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi . Pythia is a name of a high-ranking high-priestess at the Delphi Temple .
 She specifically served as its oracle and was known as the Oracle of Delphi . She served as the oracle of the Delphi, and was also known as Delphi's oracle .
 The name Pythia is derived from Pytho, which in myth was the original name of Delphi . Pythia means Pythia, Pythia and Pythia . In myth Delphi, Delphi was the name of the ancient city of ancient Greece .
 Etymologically, the Greeks derived this place name from the verb m08etv ‘to rot’ The place name refers to the sickly sweet smell from the decomposing body of the monstrous Python after she was slain by Apollo .
 The Pythia was established at the latest in the 8th century BC, (though some estimates date the shrine to as early as 1400 BC) She was widely credited for her prophecies uttered under divine possession by Apollo .
 The oracle is one of the best-documented religious institutions of the classical Greeks . It is a religious institution of the ancient Greeks .
 Authors who mention the oracle include Aeschylus, Aristotle, Clement of Alexandria, Diodorus, Diogenes, Euripides, Herodotus, Julian, Justin, Livy, Ovid, Pausanias, Pindar, Plato, P
 Details of how Pythia operated are scarce, missing, or non-existent entirely . Authors from the classical period treat the process as common knowledge with no need to explain .
 Libertarian influence in his life is Objectivity as Scientific Philosophy and Rationalism, Objectivism, not subjectivity, he says . Libertarian influence is that of Objectivism and rationalism, not Subjectivity .
 I left counseling services because the Obamas were using things like “Forward” as a viewpoint in life as campaing stump speech and campaign theme materials . I did not want my work handed over to politicians. I left services because I didn't want to give my work to
 Nicholas Hoult born 7 DECEMBER 1989) and Kristen Stewart as two people living in a dystopian, post-apocalyptic world where all the people are robotic, emotionless workers . Any sign of emotions is treated as a disease .
 Kristen Stewart first gained notice at age twelve for her role in David Fincher’s thriller Panic Room . The story matches ‘suiciding’ of ‘SOS” which I say is a metaphoer for FOXP2 Syndrome .
 Elsewhere in the book talking about Evil I use the chart below but I now in a section in blue text color for the puposes of discussing Equals . Elsewhere I use a chart below for the discussion of Evil .
 Classical elements typically refer to water, earth, fire, air, and aether . They were proposed to explain the nature and complexity of all matter in terms of simpler substances . Water, earth and earth are the most common elements .
 Different cultures and even individual philosophers had widely varying explanations concerning their attributes and how they related to observable phenomena as well as cosmology .
 These theories overlapped with mythology and were personified in deities . Sometimes these theories overlap with mythology . The theories were often based on mythological theories .
 Some interpretations included atomism . Some considered elements divisible into infinitely small pieces without changing their nature . Other interpretations considered elements to be divisible in infinitely small parts .
 The periodic table, also known as the periodic table of elements, is a tabular display of the chemical elements . From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia PERIODIC TABLE is a free encyclopedia .
 It is widely used in chemistry, physics, and other sciences . It is generally seen as an icon of chemistry .
 The periodic law states that the properties of the chemical elements exhibit a periodic dependence on their atomic numbers . It is a graphic formulation of the periodic law, which states .
 Evil, predation and Falsity tested by internal consistencies and self gain as opposed to truth, justice, and fairness as a Good . Evil is not a Good, but a Good. Evil is a test of self-interest, self-gain, self gain .
 In this book I use republican government (indirect popular government) and Liberalism fairly interchangeably interchangeably . I count Ireland and the USA as developed under Liberal Democratic Archetype . I also count the USA and Ireland and Ireland as developed .
 An ethnic Atmosphere can exist INSIDE a Nation State as well and thus be an Ethnic Atmosphere or culture . I used to discuss Treaty of Westphalian concept of Civilizations versus Nation-State .
 Semiotics to define the abstraction of Forms into identification of the abstract form and then derived instances of the form . Semiotics is a form that can be used to identify abstract forms of objects and objects .
 Information about the tree it is a plant, has roots, a trunk, and leaves . The tree is a tree that has roots and a trunk .
 SPO sentences the N, I, and A are tied together in a Semantic statement Int the movie Equals Kristen Stewart as NIA describes the Atmosphere, the atoms of existence of the Body Politic . A particular plant my be a tree which is the Application of the Information
 Like Jody Foster and Star Trek movies nuclear war led to the need to isolate people with Switched-On-Syndrome people ware could be avoided .
 Semiotics from High Tech and Plato/Aristotle, Semaphores notation notation NIA notation . I have noticed in high tech since working in it the system of three tends to match was Subject, Predacite, Object and statements .
 For Emphasis use font-size %110 and bold typeface . For text inside the span element open and close which uses the Emphasis style property for the text apply the styling from the Information about the rule .
 In a futuristic dystopian utopia, citizens, known as “members’, live under the Collective, the legislative body which monitors and controls the people’s actions . The Collective is a legislative body that monitors and control the people's actions .
 Citizens are mentally stabilized and all emotions and most illnesses are eradicated, with emotion and sexual activity contrary to the society’s rules, and conception is through artificial insemination via a conception summons .
 Defective Emotional Neuropathy Facility is the Collective’s institution, which no one ever leaves . The facility is located in the Collective's institution .
 With astigmatism, the front surface of the eye or the lens, inside the eye, is curved differently in one direction than the other . Astigmatism is a form of birth defect that causes a person to develop astigmatisms .
 One ' night, he hears a champagne-style rendition of ""Crazy Rhythm"" on the f radio and spontaneously begins to dance . He excitedly sees this as a calling and decides to leave for St. Louis .
 On the way, he stops at a motel, where a dog wakes him up by barking at his door . The dog is the first dog to wake him up in a motel room .
 The mechanical structure creates a lure to the eyes bending them inward creating a vision distortion from distorted eye structures . It turns out the mechanical structure created by the eyes bends them inward .
 Cat Juggling charity is trying to stop him from doing it . He was rich before losing everything to the product liability . He lost everything before being approached by a charity .
 Thomas Neil Donegan and Edward Paul Donegan have two sons, Edward Paul and one black cat . Barrack Obama Jr. is the son of the late President Barack Obama Jr .
 The glasses handle sold ten million units in a few short months . That little glasses handle that sold 10 million units was sold in just six months .
 Navin is a complex personality, as are most of the small breed of modern day renaissance millionaires . Navin's life is full of ups and downs, but he is not the typical renaissance millionaire .
 We had planned to show the entire Johnson interview, however when we returned to our studio, our news department informed us of a sensational development in the Johnson story .
 Carl Reiner has filed a class action suit against Mr Johnson and his Opti-Grab .
 Carl Reiner: Opti-grab came out, I thought it was the greatest thing ever, and I bought a pair . Reiner says he bought the Opti Grab when it came out . He says it's the "greatest thing ever"
 This little handle is like a magnet, your eyes are constantly drawn to it and you end up cock-eyed . The handle is also known as the handle handle of the world's largest purse purse .
 As a director I am constantly using my eyes and this Opti-grab device has caused irreparable harm to my career . Now as a director he is constantly using his eyes, he says .
 Filmmaker: "My faulty depth perception kept me from yelling cut at the proper time. Let me show you a clip from my latest film"
 Johnson didn't even test the product on prisoners, Johnson says . Johnson is accused of selling a product he didn't test on prisoners . Johnson has been sued for $10 million .
 Steven Martin’s character lives in a house high up on Grifith Blvd observing the area below . Steven Martin's character is a high-profile observer of the area .
 Below at 1630 Griffith Park Blvd is the young up and coming Claire Danes character . Below is a young up-coming character .
 Griffith Park is a large municipal park at the eastern end of the Santa Monica Mountains . It is located in Los Feliz neighborhood of Los Angeles, California .
 The park covers 4,310 acres of land, making it one of the largest urban parks in North America . The park is one of North America's most popular urban parks . It is located in New York City .
 It is the second-largest city park in California, after Mission Trails Preserve in San Diego . The 11th-largest municipally-owned park in the United States is the 11th largest in the U.S.
 To the Right of the observatory as shown in this photo is a not too distance the Hollywood sign on the hillside . TO the right of the Observatory as shown . as shown as shown the right is the Hollywood . sign .
 Griffith Park Blvd runs tup the hill throught the Hollywood hills from far below . Griffith Park Boulevard is one of Hollywood's most famous landmarks .
 The park is among the most famous municipal parks in North America . Due to its presence in many films, the park has been featured in many of the films .
 Glendale, Arizona, city planning commission says military airport violated terms of Griffith’s deed . City Planning Commission says a military airport violates the terms of the deed .
 IT consults for IT and helps use logic to keep costs low on computer systems availability, near “lights out”
 The Schwartzmen character is a loser riding a bus around urinating into a field at a public bus stretch your legs break . Moments later the character of a loser urinating in a field is a winner .
 He offers this girl he found in a shop “Private plane food” and sleeps with her . He tries not to break her heart too much since she is so much younger than him .
 She lives on Griffith Park Blvd but in the basin, not the Stars portal . She lives in a different part of the city, Griffith Park .
 The screenplay by Steve Martin is based on his 2000 ‘ novella of the same title . The film is a remake of Steve Martin's 2000 'novella'
 The film is about a complex love triangle ' between a bored salesgirl, a wealthy businessman, and an aimless young man .
 Touchstone Pictures and Hyde Park Entertainment, and distributed in the U.S. by Buena Vista Pictures and Internationally by 20th 1 Century Fox . Touchstone is also distributing the film .
 Shopgirl was released on October 21, 2005 and received 1 positive reviews from film critics . Shopgirl received 1 negative reviews .
 The film went on to earn $11,112,077 . The film was nominated for four Satellite Awards, including Best Picture and Best Adapted Screenplay .
 You moved to Inglewood from Waco, Tex., when you were 5 lived in Garden Grove as a teen-ager, attended UCLA, Cal State Long Beach, performed at Disneyland and Knott’s Berry Farm .
 He has earned five Grammy Awards, a Primetime Emmy Award, and was awarded an Honorary Academy Award at the Academy’s 5th Annual Governors Awards .
 Among many honors, he has received the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor, the Kennedy Center Honors and an AFI Life Achievement Award .
 Ray Porter charms Mirabelle over several dates, one of which ends at his house . Ray Porter is an older, suave, wealthy, divorced logician . The film is set in New York .
 Ray tells her he does not intend for their relationship to be serious due to his constant travel between L.A. and Seattle . Mirabelle offers herself to him, and the morning after they have sex, he tells her that he doesn't intend for a serious relationship .
 Claire Catherine Danes is an American actress . She plays Mirabelle butler in the new series .
 She is the recipient of three Primetime Emmy Awards, four Golden Globe Awards, and two Screen Actors Guild Awards .
 Mirabelle Buttersfield is an aspiring artist from Vermont . She works at the evening gloves counter at Saks Fifth Avenue .
 He was an executive producer on the Amazon Prime show Mozart in the Jungle . He also acted in the series he also starred in .
 Jeremy is an immature, socially inept, penniless graphic designer for an amplifier manufacturer and an aspiring typographer . He meets Mirabelle in a laundromat . Jeremy is immature and socially inept .
 Mirabelle, aching for meaningful contact, gives Jeremy a chance but it quickly fizzles after a halfhearted date and a woefully underwhelming sexual encounter .
 Edward Paul Donegan and Glorian Donegan had their DNA and fertility studies in Nevada . Sideny Gotlein and the CIA took extra for others than me, Edward .
 A soldier among others on dangerous terriroty in some Laurence group . Laurence | group .
 Shaw Shaw will be used against his will by Communists folling his military service in Asia . Janet Leigh as Eugenie Rose ‘Rosie’ Cheyney . James Gregory as Sen. Shaw Shaw .
 The story of an American political cabal so powerful that it has been able to repress knowledge of Deep politics 9-11 | its existence essay essay 2 March 2014 .
 Dr Lo will deny he initiated the conflict between the two soldiers, both of whose lives will end lethally . Dr Lo’s Confidential Assailant, the first solder shot, was in self-defense against Dr Lo .
 The state can can can me crazy for thinking I have a self defense need or acting under the state of mind that I have an idea of self defense neeed . Thus the state can . can can . me crazy if I think I have self defense needs .
 Hot and Cold wars reshaped map of unstable combatants following leaps in armerment, physics, and aerospace advances . OSS and MI5 and FBI operate in New World Order undercover in their own rise in government following the Cold War .
 Antony John Blinken is the 71st U.S. secretary of state since January 26, 2021 . He is serving as the 71th Secretary of State of the United States .
 He previously served as deputy national security advisor from 2013 to 2015 and deputy secretary of state from 2015 to 2017 under President Barack Obama .
 Soldier or USA and will and Did Not the State from crime eae Nadia obs Insane | Shoot and State backed State against Soldier against Soldier Anger Mafia fellow soldier 4.5/5 Fraudulent chains of events . The mechanisms of black opps, 2/3 four ways,
 In 1956-1957, Kleeb guest-starred on RB Hey, Jeannie! starring Jeannie Carson . Kleeb starred in the 1960s on the popular television series .
 In the 1960-1961 “ television season, Kleeb appeared as Miss Claridge, a legal ecretary, on the sitcom Harrigan and Son . Kleeb also appeared in the 1960s-61 " television season"
 Johnson rallied the party bosses and unions to give Humphrey the nomination at the 1968 Democratic National Convention . After JFK's assassination in a bid to replace Johnshon, Johnson could have run again .
 Women's clubs became the major vehicle by which 1 American women could exercise their developing talents to shape the world i beyond their homes .
 Some may say that it was a long overdue acknowledgment of Ruth Carter’s accomplishments within the film industry during a career that has spanned over three decades . I Some may even say that . it was . even more than a decade ago .
 John Forbes Kerry was born on DECEMBER 11, 1943 . He was born at Fitzsimons Army 1 Medical Center in Aurora, Colorado .
 Kerry was originally a Semator Iselin (I think is Price Albert of York ilitary brat) until his QEIIs husband knows of 57 Card carrying ather was discharged communists .
 Henry John Heinz II (October 23, 1938 APRIL jin his first year and 4, 1991) was an American businessman and illis, Massachusetts Republican politician from Pennsylvania . Kerry lived in roton, Massachusetts .
 Heinz food empire had everything going for him April 4, 1991, the morning he climbed aboard a small, twin-propeller plane in Williamsport, New York . Heinz: "He Heinz is a great man, a great guy, a good guy, great guy
 The short flight to Philadelphia was for him to attend a pair of hearings and a constituent meeting during the congressional Easter break . He was in Philadelphia to attend hearings and meet with constituents .
 Teresa Heinz (born Maria Teresa Thierstein Sim6es-Ferreira; October 5, 1938) is a PortugueseAmerican businesswoman and philanthropist . She is also known as Teresa Heinz Kerry, a philanthropist and businesswoman .
 Heinz is the widow of former United States Senator John Heinz . She is also the wife of former Secretary of State John Kerry . Heinz was married to John Kerry, a former Senator and Democratic presidential nominee .
 Heinz Heinz is Chair of the Heinz Endowments and Heinz Family Philanthropies . Heinz's family is a philanthropist and philanthropist philanthropist .
 Poor Judgment Probable Cause of Heinz Accident but a party to the incident disagree with the NTSB avy’s Office of eneral Counsel and oon became a diplomat .
 His maternal extended amily enjoyed great ealth as members of he Forbes and Dudleyinthrop families . erry’s parents hemselves were upperiddle class, anda ealthy great-aunt paid or him to attend elite oarding schools .
 A young John Kerry aboard the yacht of President John F Kennedy, in August 1962 about the 1 year aniversery of AUG 4 and around the time of Seattle World Exp . In 1957, his father was stationed at the United States Embassy in Oslo, Norway, and Kerry was sent
 They had about five hundred copies of one album printed in 1961, which they sold some of at dances at the school . It was made available on streaming platforms many years nin later .
 Her pilot’s license bore the number 12, denoting her status as the i 12th woman in the nation to be licensed to fly . She was the youngest woman in America to have a pilot license in 1928, at age 17 .
 National Defense Aviation Committee of the General Federation of Women’s ; Clubs, flew patrol missions in her Bellanca Cruisair . recruited women into an aircraft warning network .
 The screenplay r was written by Sharman and actor Richard O’Brien, who is also a member of the cast .
 Underneath the fictional substitution cyphers are the truths of Eugenics and drug deals for genetics and genetic engineering and perhaps reference Twins Studies .
 “Yes, I am in contact with them. “I am in touch with them,” says mother Ship .
 We come from the Level Above Human and we rare looking for people who want to return there with us . We're looking to find a way to get back to the Level above Human .
 I believe #Rockefeller #NWO including #Nuerosciences wants to #QuantumTunnel the #IronCurtain with multiracial #SleeperAgents on each side and #SecretMasonic #Vibes will shake wall down, expose
 I think the Grandfather is King George and King Edward VIII, either or both of the brothers testing their DNA in out-ofwedlock experiments . i RFK continues to learn of the rouge act hidden from / FBI regular The Peter Lawford home .
 Marylin Monroe lived one door down from Peter Lawford and she and JFK along with the Lawford Shrivers, Rat Pack, and others, were often under the same roof .
 The most plausible night for an affair would have been March 24, 1962, multiple istorians agree . March 24 is the date of the most likely date for an alleged affair .
 Margaret Gottlieb married 12 Sep 1942 in Los Angeles, California, United irds was analogous to Mendells study in the United States .
 Spy Master, Biologist, Speech Therapist f Pea PLants and lead to the term 'mothology' as biological families of origins study .
 Over time wathing family lines out of the spotlight will keep a few secretive families watched over time get the test when rubber meets the road and they enter politics or media . Over time .
 A central part of the cover up is the cover-up of the FOXP2 gene and making people who show the gene look retarded rather than have a grammar like defect .
 During the final two years of the Second World War, the woman who would one day be renowned for bringing French cuisine to American kitchens was stationed in Asia . She worked with top security clearance at the organization which would eventually become today’s Central Intelligence Agency .
 Child, then still still Julia McWilliams, wasn’t a traditional secret agent . Child’s character was the subject of much-anticipated television series . Child was born in New York City, New York, in 1996 .
 Office of Strategic Services documents on Julia McWilliams Child . The National Archives: Child was a model for the CIA .
 Child was in the OSS Emergency Sea Rescue Equipment Section where she first began to take part in more significant work . Child's culinary career may have sown the seeds for her culinary career .
 It wasn't perfect, but it was better than 'nothing, keeping sharks away for six to seven hours per dose . It wasn’t perfect .
 OSS Registry, must have been still more fascinating, even if she couldn’t always write : home about it .
 Glorian With MALCOM X e Barack OBama B ... whether that glow came itself as © and love that went out to him from the people . Glorian with JAMES PAUL DONEGAN Glorian
 Edward named after his grandfather, a hidden royal on one side of the family or other, I was told in youth . Edward Paul Donegan is named after Edward Paul donegan . Edward was born in 18th century .
 Edward Donegan Jr. (via IVF of Surrogate Eva Ban) aka King Hussien Obama of Black Wet Sands of Tran (and also Valarie Jerret genetic family) or elsewhere of Barack Obama, Ed Donegan . Edward born NOV _18, her birthday
 Donegan DNA given up by impersonators of Edward Donegan, thus bailing the CIA and Vatican out of a jam, since it was authorized . The CIA destroyed records it was all unauthorized . The Illuminati Diagrams ... and continuing into Obama and other children, Donegan .
 The Spitfire was designed for Standard-Triumph in 1957 by Italian designer Giovanni Michelotti . It evolved over a series of five production iterations . 315,000 Spitfires were made over 18 years .
 More recently, they have provided funding for HealthCorps to prevent childhood obesity by encouraging students to take responsibility for their health and wellness .
 Several months after Miller's murder, a cross was burned at night in front of the Miller family’s residence with her four daughters, including Shirley, and infant son, born after her husband's killing, inside . After Sherrod and her husband lost their U.S. Department
 Brad and Janet arrive at Dr X's lodge of rich weirdos at the same time of one of Dr X’s (the Master, Frankenfuter's) Affairs, the DNC dinner he was in Los Angeles for .
 Rocky Brad and Janet go to separate rooms (Cape Cod and Manhattan Beach) while Obama Jr. goes to Seatle Washington and Chicago Trinity Baptist . Upon the creation of Rocky Brad, Janet and Janet, Rocky Brad are separated from each other . Rocky Brad goes to Cape Cod, while
 Lyndon B. Johnson will continue Skull and Bones Harvard co-operation, but cuts ties to Columbia, Great Britain royalty . Social Ministry which assists poor blacks without doing so in Feudal systems .
 J. Edgar Hoover, likely frankenfurter, stops LBJ from the McMartin abuse of Rocky testing out Rockies reaction to abuse . J Edgar Hoover was likely frankenenurter . LBJ tested out Rocky's reaction to being abused .
 William Barr graduates colleddge works for CIA and restarts the Experimental Santa Monica monkey program of Donald Barr again with the Bush eugenics team and Arnold Swatzenegger team .
 Elizabeth II (Elizabeth Alexandra Mary; born 21 Q April 1926) is Queen of the United Kingdom and 9 15 other Commonwealth realms . Queen of Britain and the rest of the Commonwealth . Elizabeth II was born in 1926 .
 Hoover's denial of the Mafia's existence and failure to use the full force of the FBI to investigate it were due to Mafia gangsters Meyer Lansky and Frank Costello possession of embarrassing photographs of Hoover in the company of his protégé, FBI Deputy Director Clyde Tolson .
 He greets Brad and Janet when they enter the castle and acts as a servant to Frank throughout the film . He greets them when they arrive at the castle .
 Gay rights advocate and lifestyle advocate, groomed in politics . Tom Donegan 3235, ED DONEGAN 3233 .
 GangStalkers are operatives faking evidence and talking up evidence which negates the positive and attractive attributes of perons, and block by proximity normal social interactions . Under testing at Mc Martin preschool showed FOXP2 gene and was not groomed by CIA but .
 Felix Frankfurter was born on November 15, 1882, in Vienna, Austria-Hungary . He was born into a Jewish family in Vienna in Austria-Austria .
 He spent many hours reading at Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art and attending political lectures, usually on subjects such as trade unionism and socialism .
 Horace Kallen became an editor of the Harvard Law Review . He graduated first in his class with one of the best academic records since Louis Brandeis . Horace was the first Harvard Lawyer to graduate first .
 MEDUSA is a directed-energy non-lethal weapon designed by WaveBand Corporation in 2003-2004 for temporary personnel incapacitation . WaveBand developed the weapon in the wake of 9/11 .
 This is often the ‘radiation’ sound we might hear on films and television . Measurement devices such as Geiger counters are often used to detect radiation .
 The radiation could cause audible buzzes or clicks, says Frey . Frey decided that the effect described by the technician was in his opinion, factual . Frey: Radiation could cause a buzz or clicks .
 His studies were funded by the Office of Naval Research and the 1 American army because of the expanding use of radars by the United States military at that time .
 Rats and frogs reacted to smaller doses of radiation than we know are emitted from modern smartphones . Was testing his theories on rats and frogs, which reacted to a smaller dose of radiation .
 I accuse the Illuminati including Donald Barr of using cyperhtext, secret writing, in the creation of cypher figures in “space” (abstract representations in Cypher, or representational system of aie} )seees .
 Audience members returned for multiple performances, and began singing along to the soundtrack . Consider these discussions and group activities possible instructions on people might act like the movie .
 Jodie Foster BORN NOVEMBER 19 1962 LA CA movie Contact and Foster herself is an Illuminati crypto-pharisee pre-conditioning movie about “alien” life and contact with humans . Foster further starred in Contact, another pre-conformering movie
 Yasmin Reza’s father was a Russian-born Bukharan Jewish engineer, businessman, and pianist . Her mother was a Jewish Hungarian violinist from Budapest . Yasmin's father was an engineer and businessman .
 Janet Weiss and Brad Majors’ friend, Betty Munroe, was a wonderful little cook . We don’t know much about Janet Weiss .
 Rosalind Franklin in May 1952 at King’s College London, while working in Sir John : Randall's group . She was a member of Sir John: Randall's team .
 Kellog X The Manhattan Project began in late 1942 . Kellogg Company was given more responsibilty for gaseous diffusion research .
 Survey became a model for sociologists wishing to employ research to aid 'social reform' Survey . Survey was the first of its kind in the world . Survey became the first to use social research to help social reform .
 Clarence Darrow, John Dewey, Abraham Muste, Elizabeth Gurley Flynn and Upton Sinclair 1 to form the American Civil Liberties Union . Upton Sinclair founded the ACLU in 1881 .
 Executive Order 8807 was created on June 28, 1941 . Arrangements were made for its creation during May 1941, i .
 It superseded the work of the National Defense Research Committee . It was given almost unlimited access to funding and resources, and was directed by Vannevar Bush .
 The men indicated they would not have volunteered for this project had they known how rigorous it would be . The men said they would have chosen not to volunteer if they knew how rigorous the project was .
 The | hew company’s goal was to design a facility for the production of enriched uranium through | gaseous diffusion . The company was able to design the facility .
 Several technical challenges i needed to be met before gas extraction techniques could be effectively applied to separation of uranium .
 George W. Bush used his perches to elevate the status of science and engineering in American culture, to network, network, and to build stronger cross-sectoral research relationships . Bush was Vice President and Dean of Engineering at MIT in 1932 .
 If Bush became largely forgotten in later decades, his crucial insight into the need for scientific collaboration by private industry, government and academia was prophetic .
 Peter Lawford — aero Secret Keeper of the Ra Se a ee 1 ed Peter Laviard may be the least we member of tne Frank Sinatra ‘Rat Pack Lawtard’
 Peter Lawford was 3 suave and handsome British mowne Star, But, off thee top of your head, can you name any movie you've seen? "Ocean's 11°7"
 His best tiles include ‘Adwise And Cansent,” ‘Exodus,’ and ‘it Sheoulkd Happen to ou’ However, he wee merely a Lawford knew his place .
 Lawford helped Kennedy gain access to the entertainment community . Lawford was a key figure in Kennedy's life . Kennedy died in 1994 at the age of 92 .
 Students of the debate claim that Lawford’s preparation of his brother-in-law was a key factor in JFK’�s dazzling performance . Students say Lawford prepared for JFK's performance .
 During 1961-1968 RFK was at war with the mob from various federal gov offices . The Rat Pack was an informal group of entertainers, the second iteration of which 1 ultimately made films and appeared together in Las Vegas casino venues .
 A group of A-list show business friends met casually at the Los Angeles home of Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall . The group of friends met at the home of i Humphrey .
 Dean Martin, Sammy Davis Jr., Joey Bishop, and Peter Lawford, among others . Dean Martin and Sammy Davis among those on the guest list . Sammy Martin, Dean Martin Jr., Sammy Davis, Joey Bishop and Joey Bishop .
 Francis Albert Sinatra was an American singer and actor . He is generally perceived as one of the greatest musical artists of the 20th century .
 Sinatra recorded Come Fly with Me at Capitol Studios in October 1957 .
 Peter Sydney Ernest Lawford was an English-born American actor, producer, and socialite . He was born Peter Sydney Emest Aylen in 1923 . He lived in the United States throughout his adult life .
 Sidney Gottlieb who had undiclosed relatives was also involved in the C.I.A.’s assassination plots . Gottliebs' relatives were also involved with the plot .
 The Marquis Chimps were a group of trained chimpanzees that were used in variety shows and television programmes and commercials . They were first used in Britain and then in the U.S. from the late 1940s to the 1980s .
 RFK advised his brother to sever ties to Sinatra because of his association with Mafia figures such as Sam Giancana and he cancelled the visit . RFK advises to avoid Mob based ratpack . Sinatra's association with the mobsters led him to cancel his brother's visit .
 Lawford’s role was written out of the upcoming 4 for Texas, and his part in Robin and the 7 Hoods was given to Bing Crosby . Bing Crosby replaced Lawford in the role of Robin and Robin in the Robin Hoods .
 The iconic blonde bombshell never actually posed for the | magazine at all . Instead, she posed for a photo shoot in the 1970s .
 There were actually two poses shot au naturel back : in '49, just before the gorgeous blonde got her first movie break .
 First issue was published in December 1953 and featured Marilyn 1 Monroe from a 1949 nude calendar shoot she did under a pseudonym when she was in financial distress before she was famous .
 During the 1960s, he was recruited by the Central Intelligence Agency in a plot to assassinate Cuban leader Fidel Castro . He was recruited to assassinate Castro by the CIA in Cuba .
 Gladys Monroe retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here ye . Gladys was the mother of Marylin Monroe . She was born in 1926 .
 If you look at the paperwork you will see false answers and I think the real answer is Prince Edward of Wales . Prince Edward is Prince of Wales, the son of Prince Charles, Prince Charles .
 Marilyn Monroe was an American actress, model and singer . She was born Norma Jeane Mortenson in 1926 and died in 1962 .
 Gladys Pearl Baker Mortensen Eley was the mother of actress Marilyn Monroe and author Berniece Baker Miracle . Famous for playing comedic ‘blonde bombshell’ characters Gladys . Eley played comedic “Blonde bombshells” Gladys and Berniece .
 Gifford is often assumed to be her father, though the identity remains uncertain . The identity of her father is still uncertain .
 Gladys ; registered the surname Mortenson on Norma Jean’s birth certificate, using the name of her ; ex-husband and specifying his address as unknown . Gladys . used the name Mortenson . Norma . Jean's birth certificate was used by Gladys Mortenson
 Norma Jean Baker was baptised with the name Baker, in an act of her grandmother Della to hide the illegitimacy . Norma was born with a birthal birthalism, but her grandmother later adopted her own name .
 Gladys’ brother Otis disappeared in October 1929 . Otis was pronounced dead in 1955 . Gladys was Gladys' sister, Otis, who died in 1953 .
 The Secret Life of Marilyn Monroe is a 2015 American made-for-TV drama miniseries on Marilyn Monroe . It is the first American drama to be made into a television series based on the actress .
 She was a sister of President John F Kennedy, Senator Robert F Kennedy and Senator Ted F Kennedy . She was the sister-in-law of Jacqueline Kennedy, as well as the sister of Senator Ted Kennedy .
 Patricia wanted to be a film | producer, a profession not readily open to young women in her time . Patricia was a film producer, not a young woman in her own time .
 She married English ' actor Peter Lawford in 1954, but they divorced in 1966 . She had a daughter with actor Peter, who she later married .
 I am suggesting RADAR and the Cliffs of Dover Jet Pilot movie Jim and Anna . Lee Harvey Oswald demonstrating the RADAR which defended England in WwWIl “Jim and Anna Anna and Jim” in the dialouge may be Dresden .
 P-51 escort and defender against bombers like the B-52 was made in Inglewood neigborhood of Manhattan Beach california where | was born .
 Hewlett-Packard built its V-16 engine and the plane was built by North American Aviation who later built the jet . Both have Combat Camera versions my father flew .
 Yeager named X-1 Glamorous Glennis, in honor of his wife . Yeager flew P-51 Mustangs he flew during World War 2 .
 Leigh had two brief marriages as a teenager (one of which was annulled) before marrying actor Tony Curtis in 1951 . Leigh had a brief marriage to Tony Curtis before marrying him in 1952 .
 Tony Curtis (born Bernard Schwartz; JUNE 3, 1925 September 29, 2010) was an American actor . The pair’s highly publicized union ended in divorce in 1962, and after starring in The Manchurian Candidate that same year, Leigh remarried .
 In the movie practice dogfighting Shannon states if they had ammo rather than cameras he would be cold meat since she was effect in her flying manuevers . Shannon states in the movie that she would have been cold meat if she had a camera . Shannon also states that if he had ammo
 Upon the approval of the Army Air Forces , he applied for a transfer from the cavalry to the AAF on May 15, 1942 . He was assigned to AAF Public Relations and subsequently to the First Motion Picture ‘ Unit in Culver City, California .
 Hinckley was suffering from erotomania and his motivation for the attack was born of his obsession with actress Jodie Foster . Her father came from a wealthy Chicago family whose forebears included John Alden, who arrived in North America on the Mayflower in 1620
 The Coronation of Elizabeth II was a major i television event . CBS and NBC arranged to have footage of the ceremonies i flown across the Atlantic to Newfoundland . The P-51 Pony Express is reborn .
 Gerry Anderson names Thunderbird Field as the inspiration for the naming of the television show . Thunderbirds as his brother, Lionel, had written to him some years prior, saying ‘ he’d been stationed there.’
 During Bush’s year in 1 ‘ charge of the CIA, the U.S. national security apparatus actively supported i , Operation Condor operations and right-wing military dictatorships in Latin . America .
 The inauguration of President Ronald Reagan took place on January 20, 1981 . Reagan was inaugurated in 1981 .
 President Reagan removes Arthur S Flemming as Civil Rights Commission chairman and names Clarence Pendleton as his successor . Pendleton is the successor of Arthur SFlemming, who was appointed by Reagan in 1980s .
 Colonel Sweeny organized the “Escadrille Cherifienne’s” volunteer squadron of rogue American pilots that would bombard Chefchaouen, Morocco in service of France September 1925 .
 At 2 Hours 20 Minutes into the movie Pearl Harbor (think February 20) the Eagle pilots in Europe are asked to volunteer as the Doolitle led team of B-25s into Japan . It was a trial run for the B-29 atomic bombing with B-27s .
 17-year-old Trayvon Martin was shot to death in February 2012 . Martin was the first black teen to be killed by a police officer in 17 years .
 Trayvon Benjamin Martin, born February 5, 1995, was an African-American : high school student . He lived in Miami Gardens, Florida, with his mother, Sybrina ' Fulton . Trayvon was born in February 1995 .
 George Michael Zimmerman, born October 5, 1983, was a part-time student at Seminole State College . Zimmerman was a neighborhood watch captain for the Retreat at Twin Lakes gated community in Sanford, Florida, at the time of shooting .
 Martin’s father, Tracy Martin, files a missing person's report, 1 telling authorities that his son hasn’t returned from going to the store the previous evening . February 27, 2012 Martin was reported missing by Tracy Martin .
 George Zimmerman’s girlfriend wants case dropped, document says . She says she doesn't want charges filed against him .
 Judicial Watch obtained documents proving that Department of Justice played a major behind-the-scenes role in organizing protests against George Zimmerman .
 DOJ unit called the Community Relations Service deployed to Sanford, FL, to organize rallies against Zimmerman . DOJ unit organized rallies in Sanford, Florida, to manage rallies against him .
 Rutherford lawyer served as Bergen County’s top asecutor and led a federal anti-political corruption squad . He apparently shot and killed himself under a bridge over Route 17 in Rutherford .
 It is not immediately clear if Fahy, 58, left a suicide note or what led to his death . Fahy was found dead at the scene of the shooting . It is unclear if he left a note or why he killed himself .
 VAH-1, VAH3, VAh-3 and VAHH-5 are the first names of the U.S. Army National Guard of the Year . The U.N. is the second largest branch of the armed forces in the world .
 Squadron FIVE, based at NAWS China Lake, California, also maintained a detachment at NAS Sanford until its relocation to Kirtland AFB, New Mexico, in 1962 .
 Due to the Skywarrior’s nuclear strike mission and the presence of an associated ' special weapons storage area at NAS Sanford, the U.S. Marine Corps personnel provided both base security and weapons storage . This led to the establishment of Marine Corps Barracks Sanford aboard the air
 NAS Sanford was dedicated as Ramey Field in honor of i Lieutenant Commander Robert W Ramei, USN, who lost his life in 1958 by 1 electing to guide his crippled A3D Skywarrior away from a residential area . On 6 February 1959, NAS Sanford,
 By 1964, the strategic nuclear strike mission for carrier-based aircraft 1 was eliminated . The mission was transferred to the Fleet Ballistic Missile nuclear submarine force .
 RA-5A and A-5B aircraft were modified to the RA5C Vigilante ' configuration . North American production line shifted to producing all , subsequent aircraft as RA-4C Vigilantes .
 NAS Sanford-based squadrons deployed aboard both Atlantic and i Pacific Fleet aircraft carriers of the Forrestal, Kitty Hawk and Enterprise classes . Squadrons saw extensive action during the Cold War and Vietnam War .
 NAS Sanford-based Naval Aviators and Naval Flight Officers became prisoners of war in Vietnam until repatriation in 1973 . Numerous RA; 5C flight crews and aircraft were also lost to enemy action in the Vietnam War .
 NAS Glynco, Georgia would also utilize NAS Sanford for training or as a weather ; or fuel divert from the Atlantic offshore training areas or the Navy’s Pinecastle ; Bombing Range in the Ocala National Forest .
 Congress directed the closure of NAS Sanford in 1968 due to funding constraints . Funding constraints caused by the Vietnam War and the Great Society .
 The Navy officially vacated NAS Sanford in 1969 i and the installation was turned over to the City of Sanford . The installation is located in Sanford, Florida .
 A restored PV-1 Ventura, also on loan from the National Museum of Naval Aviation, was placed on display inside the airport’s passenger terminal . Additional NAS Sanford historical displays will be added to the airport's passenger terminal in 2020 .
 Trayvon Martin was stalked by 'Bangers who surround me calling me the psycho. Matches me being Stalked by ‘Bangers . “ I [reavvon MARTIN/GEORGE ZIMMERMAN CASE retrieved from Concealed Carry Weapon Safe CCWs
 Sanford Police Department’s non-emergency line was called to a Sanford, Florida, community clubhouse . The man pulled into the parking lot of the clubhouse to check out the suspect . He thought that Martin's behavior was suspicious .
 Zimmerman claims Martin mounted him, continued to punch him, and smashed his head into the sidewalk . In recorded statements to police, Zimmerman claimed that after losing contact with Martin, the 17-year-old reappeared and punched him .
 While Zimmerman was in the back of the police cruiser, another photograph was taken that revealed injuries to Zimmerman’s nose and face . Zimmerman was taken to the hospital in a police cruiser .
 Zimmerman, without advice from a lawyer, cooperated fully and answered all of the detectives’ questions . Zimmerman was charged with the murder of Trayvon Martin in 2012 .
 It would eventually be up to a jury to decide if George Zimmerman’s self-defense claims were true . A jury would eventually decide whether George Zimmerman's self-defence claims are true .
 Orba 1 adopted Rick, who took his stepfather’s surname and became known as Richard o Lynn Scott . Rick was adopted by his step-father .
 Scott was raised in North Kansas City, Missouri, the second of five i children . Scott was the second child of five children .
 He was licensed by the Texas Bar to practice law on November 6, fr 1978 . He practiced law in Texas .
 In 1988, Scott and Richard Rainwater, a financier from Fort Worth, each put up $125,000 in working capital in their new ompany, Columbia Hospital Corporation . They borrowed the remaining money to purchase two struggling hospitals in El Paso for $60 million .
 LtCol Richard Kinder flew west i Fhursday, November 5, 2020, at 5 PM of heart failure . LtCol Kinder died at 5 p.m. on November 5 of 2020 .
 Following school, he was assigned to Space Systems fr Command in Los Angeles . He retired and accepted a job with Hughes i Aircraft . Following school he went on to work for Hughes Aircraft .
 Its base was at Pembroke ' Lodge, a Georgian house in Richmond Park, London . London .
 Phantom was disbanded in 1945; however it was reborn as the Army Phantom Signals Regiment until 1960 . Phantom was reborn in 1960, when technology provided for alternative solutions .
 Phantom patrols from Phantom came to Normandy on D+1. During Operation Overlord, many patrols came from Phantom patrols . Phantom patrols were part of the final phase of the operation .
 Phantom deployed in squadrons in North West Europe, South East Europe, North 1 Africa and Italy . Phantom deployed to squadrons across Europe, Africa and North East .
 Metropolitan Police Commissioner Sir Robert Mark. Mayhew . Law Lord Nigel Bridge, Baron Bridge of Harwich; . journalist Sir Peregrine Worsthorne; . and . journalist . Sir PereGrine Worstorne .
 Hobbes theory of Property Rights was that the State protecting property makers from brutish theives encouraged production . When Rothschilds, Royalty are rich, join/are brutes . Others, including Sir Gordon Richards, Michael Oakeshott and ‘ John Hislop, exce
 Clinton was impeached by the House of Representatives on December 19, 1998 . Many, frankly most, most, Whjte House officials were getting offed by the CIA .
 Barbara Kay Olson married Theodore Olson in 1996, becoming his third wife . She married Theodore in 1996 . She is the third wife of Theodore Olson .
 She was a passenger on American Airlines Flight 77 en route to a taping of Bill Maher’s television show Politically Incorrect when it was flown into the Pentagon in the September 11 attacks .
 An “Office of Intelligence” is hereby established in the Bureau of Navigation for the urpose of collecting and ecording such naval information as may be seful to the Department in time of war, as well as in peace .
 Department Library ill be combined with the “Office of Intelligence,” and placed under the direction of the Chief of he Bureau of Navigation . Department Library will be combined into the ‘Office of intelligence’
 From 1981 to 1984, Olson served as an Assistant Attorney General in the Reagan administration . Olson also served as a Deputy Attorney General under Reagan .
 While serving in the Reagan administration, Olson was Legal Counsel to President Reagan during the Iran-Contra Affair’s opportunities which may may investigation phase . Olson served as Legal Counsel for President Reagan . Olson was legal counsel for Reagan .
 An investigation by the House Judiciary Committee found Olson had given false and misleading testimony before a subcommittee during the investigation . This led to job reports that Olson had lied to a House subcommittee about his testimony .
 The highly secretive National Underwater Reconnaissance Office seems to be a division of the Office of Naval Intelligence . Also killed in the ; Pentagon on 9/11 were a large number of budget analysts and accountants who may have been looking into the $2.2 trillion of unaccounted military
 It was al-Mansour who asked Percy Sutton, a high profile black lawyer active in the civil rights movement in the 1950s and 1960s, to help Obama get into Harvard .
 The legal drama sheds light on Shakespearean rivalries in the top echelons of the Saudi royal family . Washington fears that a bitter courtroom showdown risks exposing sensitive information related to its covert operations .
 Saudi Arabia has since become the world’s largest oil producer and exporter, iane) Ubuetemantemyoyulemcmcysree) has largest oil reserves and sixth largest gas reserves .
 Outside of the Al-Saud, participation in the political process is limited to a relatively small segment of the population . The royal family consults with the ulema, tribal sheikhs, and members of important commercial families on major decisions .
 Saudi Arabia's stated policy is focused on cooperation with the oil-exporting Gulf 1 States, the unity of the Arab world, Islamic strength and solidarity, and support for the United Nations .
 In 1951, the United States established a permanent United States Military Training Mission in the kingdom . Under a mutual defense agreement, the U.S. agreed to provide training support in the use of weapons and other security-related services to Saudi armed forces .
 The partition of the Ottoman Empire was a geopolitical event that occurred after World War I and the occupation of Constantinople by British, French and Italian troops in November 1918 . The British, Italian and French troops occupied the Ottoman capital of Constantinople .
 The partitioning was planned in several agreements made by the Allied Powers early in World War I, notably the Sykes-Picot Agreement, after the Ottoman Empire had joined the Ottoman-German Alliance .
 The partitioning of the Ottoman Empire 1 after the war led to the domination of the Middle East by Western powers such as 1 Britain and France .
 President John F Kennedy 7 days before his assasination create Mason fe control of the worldl and subsume the USA and its Dept of Defense for WWIII with Russia . Obama lintend to expose Jr. and this plot.” others 0)
 JFK wasn’t interested, Kissinger was Kissinger was The English Royal Family dates of February 20, November 18, December 13, and August 4 .
 Pvantanamo attorney dead in apparent suicide . American lawyer representing detainees at the Guantanamo Bay prison camp found dead .
 Al-Afghani, thought to be Osama bin Laden’s translator, was detained by the CIA and allegedly tortured prior to his arrival in Cuba in 2008 . He was thought to have arrived in Cuba with bin Laden's translator .
 The story was replete ith fact and exposed the Saudi Muslim plant in the White House and the direct unding that went into it . But it was not the first time the story was made public .
 Local NY newspapers e recently carried stories which indicate that subject has nt a week in Miami, Florida, vacationing with his wife BETTY, their three young daughters . For the information of Miami.
 The FOI and MoT of meee Butane Reh Aeanne and TEK+K “FYN[MOsque #7, NYC, held 1M MOCKiangd raiace, You A¥SuWS aw sz7ue Wise
 Subject did not attend the affair, and CLAY reportedly returned to Miami the following day . Subject returned to New York the next day .
 Wood wrote that he drew the two men into a felonious federal crime so that they could be arrested by the FBI and kept away from managing Malcolm X’s door : security on February 21, 1965,” Wood wrote .
 Malcolm X encouraged Black people to fight against racism by any means necessary . The civil rights leader broke with the Nation of Islam shortly before he was assassinated .
 NDI receives financial support from the National Endowment for Democracy, 1 the United States Agency for International Development, the U.S. Department of State .
 Very strong victims killed by very strong murderers. B This book Centering on the Boston Bombing. B
 In 1648, Cambridge set up a public grammar school, Master Elijah Corlett’s ‘lattin schoole’ It was the fifth town (after Boston, Charlestown, Dorchester, and Salem) to do so .
 The three men, described as being physically strong, were dragged to or killed in three different rooms . They were described as physically strong men who were dragged into or killed .
 FBI’s Special Agent Christopher Lorek and Special Agent Stephen Shaw, were mysteriously killed on May 17, 2013 . Dzhokhar's arrest depressed the level of investigation resources and attention to the JFK library bombing . That bombing depressed the levels of investigation .
 The agents were reported to have fallen out of their helicopter off the Atlantic coast of Virginia .
 Ifthe meeting with Thorkill Kristesnen predating the Nov 18 1963 meeting tied to ; the upcoming Nov 18 2nd Birthday of CIA created Barack Obama developemtal pschology report, its analysis, and implications .
 He was taken to a hospital where his condition was reported as stable . Obama library activities include organizing street children and those in criminal custody or mental health from gangs .
 Anthony Ramirez-Di Vittorio created a safe space for young men at lemente High School to openly express themselves, receive support and develop social and emotional skills necessary to succeed . Program ounder Anthony Ramirez - Di Vittario created the safe space .
 Michelle Obama Visited Saudis Al Ajaji and Al Harbi in Hospital, Saudi with suspicous ties, scheduled for deportation at time of Boston Bombing . This book Brinksmanship Begetting Lethal Skirmish was written by Michelle Obama .
 In White Cap Mountain and Business Plot I assert that donald Barr William Barr the Trump familu and many others created white and non white clones of Royal family members around the world that are both sleeper agents and part Kutschera . Powerful white leaders are trying to impose distr
 The Bush Cheney administration is creating street fights designed to look certain ways . How the high powers crate battle lines out of various groups of people is supposed to define the battle .
 Confidential Assailants Duplicitously start Brinkmanship SKirmish by illegal but denied acts . I have repeatedly been homeless as duplicity has infiltratated housing and been denied housing on the brinksmanship flimsy excuses typical of the Old South denying lodging to blacks . Conf
 In contract law, indemnity is a contractual obligation of one party to compensate the loss incurred to the other party due to the acts of the indemnitor or any other party . This book Organized Stalk of Glorian Donegan INDEMNITY is a book of organized stalks
 A “guarantee’s” is an obligation of one party assuring the other party that guarantor will perform the promise of the third party if it defaults . In contrast, a guarantee is a guarantee that one party promises to perform the same thing if it default
 Indemnities form the basis of many insurance contracts . A car owner may purchase different kinds of insurance as an indemnity for various kinds of loss arising from operation of the car .
 In an agency context, a principal may be obligated to indemnify their agent for liabilities incurred while carrying out responsibilities under the relationship . Principal may indemnify agent for liability incurred during carrying out duties .
 The events giving rise to an indemnity may be specified by contract but the actions that must be taken to compensate the injured party are largely unpredictable . The maximum compensation is often expressly limited .
 Social Services and others have made a large scale bilking of Donegan assets by asserting via fraud I am an indemnator, a harmer of others, and thus owe others and the trust fund or other assets seizures systems pay the indemnities from RICO operations claiming I need them to
 CIA officials under Trump discussed assassinating Julian Assange, report says . U.S. officials discussed abducting and even assassinating WikiLeaks founder, Julian Assange .
 Mike Pompeo and officials requested ‘options’ for killing Assange following WikiLeaks’ publication of CIA hacking tools, report says . CIA declined to comment .
 Charivari was a European and North American folk custom in which a mock parade was staged through a community accompanied by a discordant mock serenade . Charivari Charivari, alternatively spelled shivaree or chivarivari, was also called skimmington .
 Espionage has for years framed me, my father, and mother for decades as a slime bucket formed around me framing me for acts to the slime bucket not me. For harassing my reproductivity Espionage . For harassing me for harassing my reproduction, Espionage. For harassment my reprodu
 The rumor mongering (talked up by people who are also paid actors under cover) are damaging to the reputation of the person framed by the Street Theater actors . The rumor-mongering is damaging .
 In her weakened telling Nodes believing state, we will steal element suggestive fraud . Four actual Nodes and a Connecting element, that element deceitful and cross out events . If 2 believes . is e will be even ‘3 really a fraud greater than we are! connected to
 If . won’t desist from piggy backing 3 onto 1 then . 2 has to fight the whole of . and 2 will seem to have attacked a normal law abiding person . If . . won't desist, 2 will have to fight back . 2 will appear to
 Test volunteer Linda Newkirk says she often blamed her mother for being shaken up by a fight . She says her mother would come back shaking from having been in a fight and she blamed her for that . The test is part of a series of investigations by the FBI and FBI .
 In fact unprovoked fights started by blacks have surrouneded my life since the 1990s . I grew to resent that hostility towards whites, leading to my Race Realism Social Science Model . People like me, ordinary whites, as I am, had not harmed blacks .
 The author weighs in on the abuses and vagaries of religion; the manipulation of society by unseen forces; the presence of magic in our world; exotic new technologies used to spy on citizens and influence minds .
 In the past I have written about the terrible technology, which those in the military of the USA, who work in conjunction with Satan and the fallen angels, even the Annunaki gods of old, have used against me .
 In other words, their great assaults against me have also been their attempts to stop these works of our Saviour and to keep the Bride from ever leaving the Earth, he says .
 Bush influenced mistakes made Oil Barrel world during Reagan administration . Reagan administration made mistakes that Reagan later regretted later regretted . Reagan's mistakes were made during his administration .
 These are the sorts of people attacking me. Then profits into #RightWingDeathSquads in #LatinAmerica illegally funded, violates #MonroeDoctrine . Then profits from profits into rightwing deathsquads in . Latin America illegally funded .
 One year before the CID DOD plan was unveiled at Seattle Worlds Fair 1962 . One year later, the plan was revealed at the World's Fair .
 Ike is privately sharply critical of the handling of the military operation known as the Bay of Pigs incident . Ike is also sharply critical . The former president is privately critical of military operations in Cuba .
 Dwight David “Ike” Eisenhower was the 34th president of the United States from 1953 to 1961 . Eisenhower was an American military officer and statesman who served as president of United States .
 During World War II, he served as Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force in Europe, and achieved the rare five-star rank of General of the Army . He was Supreme Commander .
 In 1952, Eisenhower entered the presidential race as a Republican to block the isolationist foreign policies of Senator Robert A Taft . Taft opposed NATO and wanted no foreign entanglements. Eisenhower entered in 1952 .
 Eisenhower’s main goals in office were to contain the spread of communism and reduce federal deficits . Eisenhower was president of the Eisenhower administration in 1953 .
 In 1953, he considered using nuclear weapons to end the Korean War, and may have threatened China with nuclear attack if an armistice was not reached quickly . The Korean War ended in 1953 .
 Lucille Désirée Ball was an American actress, comedian, model, studio executive, and producer . Ball was a model, actress, model and studio executive . Ball is credited for her role in I Love Lucy .
 Her ancestors were mostly English, but a few were Scottish, French, and Irish . Her ancestors are mostly English . She was born in England .
 Some were among the earliest © settlers in the Thirteen Colonies . Elder John Crandall of ; Westerly, Rhode Island, and Edmund Rice, an early emigrant from ; England to Massachusetts Bay Colony .
 Lucy Ball's father died of typhoid fever at age 27, when Ball was only three . Lucy’s father died in February 1915, while living in Wyandotte, Michigan .
 Ball recalled little from the day her father died, except a bird getting trapped in the house, which caused her lifelong » ornithophobia . Ball recalls little from her father's death, except that a bird got trapped in her house . Ball: "I'm not afraid of birds,
 Ball realized performing was a great way to gain praise, and her appetite for recognition was awakened . Ball's appetite was awakened when she was onstage .
 A neighborhood boy was accidentally shot and paralyzed by someone target shooting in their yard . Ball’s grandfather was supervising the shooting . Ball was paralyzed after being shot in the head by a neighbor .
 Amel oane describes ‘itself as a fraternity based on fun, fellowship, and ""the Masonic principles of brotherly love, relief, and truth .’
 The Fez became a symbol of the Ottoman Empire in the early 19th ; century . The Ottoman Empire was the birthplace of the Fez .
 In 1827, Mahmud II mandated the Fez as a modern headdress for his new army, the Asakir-i Mansure-i Muhammediye . The Fez was created in 1827 .
 The intention was to replace the turban, which acted as a marker of identity and so divided rather than unified the population . It was intended to replace turban as a mark of identity .
 When they met again on the ; second day, the two connected immediately and eloped the same year . The two eloped after meeting again and eloping .
 As a result, Arnaz stayed in Los Angeles, organizing and performing USO shows for ‘ wounded Gls being brought back from the Pacific .
 On September 4, 1953, Ball met voluntarily with HUAC investigator 1 William A Wheeler in Hollywood and gave him sealed testimony . Ball gave sealed testimony to Wheeler in a Hollywood meeting .
 Desilu’s entire library is owned by ViacomCBS through two of its 1» subsidiaries . The library is now owned by two of the 1CBS subsidiaries .
 CBS Studios owns the rights to everything Desilu ; produced after 1960 as successor in interest to Paramount Television . CBS Studios unit owns the right to everything produced after the 1960s as successor to Paramount .
 Assignment Earth ment Earth was broadcast on 29 March 1968 . Exactly one hour, about 2/ minutes, 12 seconds .
 Fulgencio Batista, Cuba’s Dictator, arrived in Washington today . He was met at the Union Station by General Malin Craig, Chief of Staff of the United States Army, who invited the Colonel to the Capitol .
 Batista established tighter censorship of the media, while also utilizing his Bureau for the Repression of Communist Activities secret police to carry out wide-scale violence, torture and public executions . To quell the growing discontent amongst the populace-which was subsequently displayed through frequent student riots and demonstrations-
 Fidel Castro’s 26th of July Movement and other rebelling elements led an urbanand rural-based guerrilla uprising against the Batista government . It culminated in his eventual defeat by rebels under the command of Che Guevara at the Battle of Santa Clara in 1959 .
 Carrie le Félix Rodriguez, a Cuban exile turned CIA Special Activities Division operative, advised Bolivian troops during the hunt for Guevara in Bolivia . Rodriguez was a CIA operative .
 Rodriguez, assisted by a few Bolivian soldiers, helped Guevara to his feet and took him outside the hut to parade him before other Bolivians . Rodriguez and other soldiers posed for a photo opportunity where one soldier took a photograph of Rodriguez and others standing alongside Gue
 Alejandro Nicholas Nicholas The First Mayorkas is the seventh U.S. secretary of homeland security since February 2, 2021 . Castro’s Cuban government ordered he country’�s oil efineries then controlled by United States Corporations Esso, Standard Oil and Shell
 Mayorkas crude oil purchased from the Soviet nion, but under ressure from the United States government, these companies refused . The U.S. government refused .
 In August 1960, the CIA contacted the Cosa Nostra in Chicago with the intention to draft a simultaneous assassination of Fidel Castro, Raul Castro and Che Guevara . The assassination was intended to take place in Chicago, Chicago .
 RFK wondered whether his unprecedented national campaign to battle organized crime the “Mafia,” “La Cosa Nostra” caused the Mob to retaliate by assassinating his brother . RFK had pursued Mobconnected figures such as Teamster Union president James Hoffa .
 The Mafia was more involved in Barrack Obama than Bush chronicles reveal . Bush chronicle reveals that the Mafia was involved in his administration .
 Robert F Kennedy as Attorney Genaral had or would gain oversight via JM/WAVE in Florida . Robert F. Kennedy would have or would have gained oversight of the Florida legislature .
 Top aides to Kennedy, such as Dean Rusk, said they had hesitations about the plans but muted their thoughts . Both joint chiefs of staff, both said that they had doubts .
 Some leaders blamed these problems on the “Cold War mindset” Despite these hesitations, Kennedy still ordered the attack to take place .
 The Atlantico, the Caribe, the Houston and Rio Escondido were to carry enough supplies and weapons to last thirty days . The Lake Charles had 15 days of supplies and was intended to land the provisional government of Cuba .
 Cuban air force armed inventory included B-26 Invader light bombers, Hawker Sea Fury fighters and Lockheed T-33 jets . All remaining from the Fuerza Aérea del Ejército de Cuba, Cuba, the Cuba air force of the Batista government .
 Eight B-26B Invader bombers in three groups simultaneously attacked three Cuban airfields at San Antonio de los Bafios and Ciudad Libertad . The attack took place on 15 April 1961 .
 As the men from Red Beach arrived at Girdn, San Roman and Oliva met to discuss the situation . San Roman: "We're not going to let them go. We're not letting them go"
 The crews of the Barbara J and Blagar had done their best to land what ammunition they had left onto the beachhead . Without air support the captains of both ships reported that it was too dangerous to be operating off the Cuban coast by day by day .
 Ormsby-Gore was distantly related to Kennedy, but had a ; Closer relationship than did Macmillan with the President-elect and his » brother Robert . MacMillan, ormsbyGore, had a . closer relationship with Kennedy, and his brother
 He was almost a resident at the ; White House, being more a friend of the family than a mere ambassador . He was also a friend to the family and not an ambassador .
 McNamara, John Glenn, W. Averell Harriman, C Douglas Dillon, Kirk ; Lemoyne Billings, Stephen Edward . Smith, David Hackett, Jim Whittaker . Smith .
 The Republican ticket narrowly lost to Democrats John F Kennedy and Lyndon B Johnson . Kennedy and LBJ narrowly defeated the Republican ticket .
 The Atlantic Institute promoted economic, political, and cultural relations among NATO alliance members and the international community in general . It was an independent, non-governmental institute .
 Prime Minister of Dominica Eugenia Charles meeting with President Ronald Reagan in the Oval Office in the White House . Charles was replaced by a Western loyal black prime minister .
 Dame Mary Eugenia Charles, DBE was Prime Minister of Dominica from 21 July 1980 until 14 June 1995 . Charles was a Dominican politician who was prime minister of the island .
 Operation Red Dog, The Bizarre And Disastrous KKK Plot To i Take Over A Caribbean Nation retrieved from All That Is Interesting and copied or modified to here . In 1981, a crew of Nazis and KKK members plotted a iolent overthrow of the Dominican Sovernment .
 Ronald Reagan was a Disciples of Christ protestant and Presbetaryian church goer in Bel Air . Reagan was born in Chicago area and married Jayne Wyman of St Louis, Missouri . Reagan's first wife was Jayne .
 He was sworn in in 1981 as President 20 years into the 1961 Troubles of Ireland . He likely had sympathy for poor Irish fighting well do to British Imperialism .
 Use these groomed leaders to replace assassinated leaders around the world . Use those groomed to replace those killed in the war .
 Before I leave this high and noble office I intend to epose this [East India Tea Company-esqe] plot. Before I . leave this . office I . intend to . epose [East . India Tea . Company-escqe plot .
 Their DNA was intentionaly outside the official Royal family as biological heirs were studied for FOXP2Syndrome . I think these people a Albert Edward and Mary with King George V of once Prince of York .
 Among those heirs were Maris August Kutschera 3 cildren, and others too . Among those who died in the fire was August August, August August 3, 2013 .
 Many others in this chpater of this book are Catholic such as Louis Freeh, Thomas Crane Wales, JFK, RFK, Justice Scalia, and Judge Roll .
 Saudi Royal OK Vatican II and OSS Catholic Influence CIA Propoganda Due . Law Enforcement Dirty War can subdue the USA and payoffs to media, etc., Tranformations and Adaptations in Indirect Rule Consent of the Governed .
 One of the key appointments of the military junta was the Minister of Economy, Jose Alfredo Martinez de Hoz, a member of Argentina’s business establishment and a close friend of David Rockefeller . David Rockefeller was close friend to David Rockefeller, a Rockefeller friend .
 Louis Buchalter was an American mobster and head of the Mafia hit squad Murder, Inc., during the 1930s . He was known as Louis Lepke or Lepke Buchalter .
 Buchalter was released on January 27, 1919, after a transfer to Auburn Prison in Auburn, New York, New ; York .
 On September 13, 1936, Murder, Inc. killers, acting on Buchalter’s orders, gunned down Joseph Rosen, a Brooklyn candy store owner . Rosen was the victim of a series of murders committed by Buchalter .
 Buchalter’s lawyers then appealed to the United States 1 Supreme Court . Buchalter was sentenced to life in prison for violating a federal law .
 Buchalter was serving his racketeering sentence at Leavenworth Federal Prison . He was convicted of racketeering in 2008 .
 One of the greatest American political dynasties of the 20th century was funded, in part, by alcohol . Loe 8 8 ee 8 UU Biv Joseph Kennedy Made His Fortune retrieved from History.com .
 Evita Prescott Bush, John D Rockefeller ITI, and Jospeh Kennedy Sr. Prescott Sheldon Bush was an MKULTRA Eugenicist, an American banker and politician . This book Ted Cruz Heidi Suzanne Cruz fit the larger picture Prime Minister Cruz of Cuba .
 Prescott Bush won election to the Senate in a 1952 special election . Bush narrowly defeated Democratic nominee Abraham Ribicoff . Bush won the election in 1952 .
 Richard Bruce Cheney served as the 46th vice president of the United States from 2001 to 2009 under president George W Bush . He is a businessman and politician who served as vice president .
 John Davison Rockefeller III was an American philanthropist . He was the son of Rockefeller Rockefeller . Rockefeller was a philanthropist in the United States .
 A possible future lead of Cuba who will discover his noble roots from a long lost line of Kings . I think the movie Love Story in 1972 represents the truth of JFK and Jackie Kennedy . A future leader of Cuba will discover the noble roots of his noble .
 I think the Feb 20 I say to be marriage of Barrack Obama Sr. and Stanley Ann Dunham was moved to Feb 2_ to hide that conception to be the Novermber 18 birth of Barracks Obama Jr. identified . I think that may have been moved from Feb 2 to
 Heidi Cruz is an American corporate executive . J. Stern: "Dont Cry for me Bears Bears Stern" Heidi Cruz: "I'm not going to cry for me. I'm not crying for me"
 Rafael Edward “Ted” Cruz is an American politician and attorney serving as the junior United States Senator for Texas since 2013 . Rafael Edward "Ted" Cruz was born September 7, 1972 in San Luis Obispo, California .
 The incident happened in 2005 shortly after Heidi quit her job at the White House and moved to Austin, Texas, to be with her husband, who was state solicitor general .
 Rafael Cruz was the son of an employee of the U.S. intelligence linked RCA Corporation . He left Cuba for the United States in 1957 .
 Bush, OBama Jr. is 1 year old, the Seatle 21st Century Cheney, all in on it . Bush, Obama Jr is one year old .
 Rafael Bienvenido Cruz aka Ted Cruz Sr. is a CubanAmerican Protestant preacher and father of Texas Senator Ted Cruz .
 He graduated from UT with a degree in mathematics and chemical engineering four years later in 1961 . He graduated with a bachelor of mathematics and chemistry engineering .
 Men have a responsibility to come together in prayer and agreement regarding our families, . churches, schools, cities, and nation . Men have responsibility for their families, and their nation .
 Alldged CIA Front Coropoerations * R* | Rabb Charitable Foundation | Radio Corporation of America | | Radio Free Asia | | Free Europe | Radio Liberation .
 On August 4, 1959, Walker submitted his resignation to the United States Army . Kennedy accepted his resignation, making Walker the only U.S. general to resign in the 20th century . Walker is the only general to have resigned from the U.K. Army .
 President Eisenhower to quell civil disturbances related to the ‘ desegregation of Little Rock’s Central High School . Little Rock was the site of the largest civil disturbance in history .
 Aaron Montgomery Ward (1843 or 1844 December 7, 1913) was an American entrepreneur based in Chicago who made his fortune through the use of mail order .
 This book The Root and path of Racial Eugenics History . Mostly drawn from Wikiepida Star was governmental descriptions. This book is based on governmental descriptions .
 British Zionism active in the USA in the year 1902 . Jacob de Haas was born in London .
 Henry |, also known as Henry Beauclerc, was King of Engiand from 1100 to 1135 . He died in 1135 at the age of 12 .
 He was the fourth son of William the Conqueror and was educated in Latin and the liberal arts . He was educated at the University of Oxford and Cambridge .
 The thief who stole an altyn is hung, and the one who stole a poltinnik (50 kopecks) is praised . AsITbIHHOro BOpa BEIarOT, a MOTMHHOrO UeCTBYIOT
 The British Empire Exhibition was a colonial exhibition held at Wembley Park, Wembley, England, from 23 April 1924 to 31 October 1925 . It was the first colonial exhibition to be held in the UK .
 The Underground Railroad, the missile crisis, and the plan JFK was killed to protect Windsors Glorian Donegan Kutschera Image Escaping Nazis while Eugenics were studies in Vienna . Masonic families and causes, lots of twin studies, black white, white piesa zal
 I am in no way dismissing the insanity of the Neocons, but I also see no point in analyzing that which is clearly irrational . All modern theories of deterrence always imply a “rational actor” and not a crazy lunatic on an amok run .
 "Star Trek" relied on a deeply demoralized enemy who felt resistance to the Borg was futile . Even if the actual United States forces deployed were limited in size and capabilities, the Americans would, no doubt, bring in more and more forces if needed .
 The war did not officially involve the USA, true, but it did involve Israel, which is more i or less the same, at least for our purposes . Hezbollah, Lebanon 2006, was the most recent war between Hezbollah and Israel .
 Sham stalk of me both tries to entrap me into emotionally reactive counter hostilty to hostile parties but I keep the level head and am no “Nazi pscycho” the Illuminati families wish to write me off as . I go into the ghetto once and for all. I
 In the imagined scenario described earlier, the president set up military tribunals to try violators of federal immigration law . In the imaginary scenario, he would set up a military tribunal to try those violators .
 Supreme Court’s 1866 decision in Ex parte Milligan suggests that the president can, in certain circumstances, impose martial law in an area and replace the civilian courts there with military tribunals . cautiously .
 The 51-year-old FBI and MI5 spy was a bankrupt businessman turned smuggler . He was drawn into the shadowy world of covert operations against Irish republican terror . He ended up as the key witness against the group believed to be behind Omagh bombing .
 The 20-stone American arrived in Ireland in the early Nineties after being recruited by a female FBI informant who worked inside the Provisional IRA .
 RUC Special Branch was the Special Branch of the Royal Ulster Constabulary . It was heavily involved in the British state effort during the Troubles, especially against the Provisional Irish Republican Army .
 Milley's mother, Mary Elizabeth, served in the Navy at a Seattle-based hospital . Milley’s mother served in a Seattle hospital .
 DuPonts and Kellogg's Kellogg’s KelloggX are Department of Defense Military Industrial Complex arms manufactures . DuPont Corporation and Kellog X are D.D. military industrial complex arms manufacturers .
 Piers DuPont is considered the most powerful of Grand Master Masons with few peers, them being the Rockefellers, Rothschilds, Windsors, and Bush family . DuPont was a Grand Master Mason at the time .
 Glorian Donegan was a Maria August Kutschera out of wedlock birth as was Harold Gainey, my mother Gloiran Gainey’s brother . They appear to have rescued the Von Trapps along with the Vatican and the Vatican . The Vatican and Glorian
 Robert Swan Mueller’s father was a board director member of DuPont corp when many events of the Von Trapps unfolded . Mueller's father was board director at DuPont Corp. during many events .
 Some sources divide the history of the military-industrial complex into three distinct eras . Some sources have divided the history into three separate eras . The military industrial complex was founded in the 1960s .
 The government owned their own "" shipyards and weapons manufacturing facilities which they relied on through World War I . With World War IT came a massive shift in the way that the American government armed the military .
 The second era is identified as beginning with the coining of the term "" by President Dwight D Eisenhower . Eisenhower coined the term "D Eisenhower" in the 1950s .
 This era continued through the Cold "" War period, up to the end of the Warsaw Pact and the collapse of the Soviet Union . This era was also known as the Cold War period .
 States include the advancement of the civilian technology market as 1 civilian companies benefit from innovations from the MIC and vice © versa .
 From 1992 to 1997 there was a total of "" US$55 billion worth of mergers in the defense industry, with major companies purchasing smaller competitors .
 Alfred Nobel’s father, Immanuel Nobel, was an industrialist, engineer, ‘ and inventor . Alfred Nobel's father was an inventor, industrialist and industrialist . The Nobel Prize Prize winner was born Alfred Alfred Nobel in 1903 .
 He built bridges and buildings in Stockholm and founded Sweden's first rubber factory . He also founded Sweden’s first rubber factories .
 After some bad business deals in Sweden, Immanuel moved his family to Saint Petersburg, where Alfred and his brothers were educated privately under Swedish and Russian tutors .
 Alfred was sent abroad for two years to study in France and the United States . He met Swedish engineer John Ericsson in the U.S. and studied under famed chemist Théophile-Jules Pelouze in France .
 Nobel first encountered nitroglycerin in France . Pelouze cautioned against using it as a commercial explosive because of its great sensitivity to shock .
 In 1857, Nobel filed the first of several hundred patents, mostly concerning air pressure, gas and fluid gauges . Nobel remained fascinated with nitroglycerin’s potential as an explosive .
 Nobel, along with his father and brother Emil, experimented with various combinations of nitroglycerin and black powder . Nobel's father and brothers experimented with different combinations . Nobel was a member of the Nobel family . Nobel died in 1945 .
 Nobel came up with a solution of how to safely detonate nitroglycerin by inventing the detonator, or blasting cap . The blasting cap allowed a controlled explosion set off from a distance using a fuse . Nobel invented a detonator that allowed the explosion to be controlled from a
 Nobel performed his first successful detonation of pure nitroglycerin in the summer of 1863 . Nobel used a blasting cap made of a copper percussion cap and mercury fulminate . Nobel's first detonation was made using a copper drum cap .
 Alfred Nobel filed patents for both the blasting cap and his method of synthesizing nitroglycerin in 1864 . Nobel used sulfuric acid, nitric acid and glycerin to create nitrogolicin . Nobel's method was used to make nitrogoglyin from nitric
 Emil and several others were killed in an explosion at the factory at Immanuel Nobel’s estate at Heleneborg . Emil was experimenting with nitroglycerin in 1864 . He was killed in the explosion while experimenting with the substance .
 Alfred founded the company Nitroglycerin Aktiebolaget AB in Vinterviken to continue work in a more isolated area . The following year moved to Germany, where he founded another company, Dynamit Nobel .
 The instability of nitroglycerin rendered it useless as a commercial explosive . Despite the invention of the blasting cap, the explosion was useless for commercial use .
 Nobel sought to combine substance with another substance that would make it safe for transport and handling but yet not reduce its effectiveness as an explosive . Nobel sought the solution to the problem, combining it with a substance that was safe for handling and handling, but not reducing its effectiveness .
 He tried combinations of cement, coal, and sawdust, but was unsuccessful . He was unable to find a solution to the problem .
 Diatomaceous earth, fossilized algae and diatomaceous earth, were used to stabilize nitroglycerin into a portable explosive . The algae was used to create the explosive .
 Dynamite was first manufactured in the United States by the Giant Powder ; Company of San Francisco, California, whose founder had obtained the exclusive rights from Nobel in 1867 .
 Giant was eventually acquired by » DuPont, which produced dynamite under the Giant name until Giant was dissolved by DuPont in 1905 . Giant was then acquired by * DuPont .
 Hercules 1 Powder Company and the Atlas Powder Company took up the 1 manufacture of dynamite subsequently . Two new companies were formed upon the breakup of the Hercules 1 powder company .
 This 1 eventually led to the general perception that TNT and dynamite were one 1 and the same . This 1 led to a perception that dynamite and TNT were one of the same. This 1 was the first time dynamite was used to be used to carry out TNT .
 TNT, or trinitrotoluene, is a second | generation castable explosive adopted by the military . TNT is the second generation of castable explosives . TNT was first developed in the 1960s .
 The German armed forces adopted it as a filling for artillery shells in 1902, some 40 years after the invention of dynamite . The first generation phlegmatized explosive is primarily intended for civilian earthmoving .
 TNT has never been popular or widespread in civilian earthmoving, as it is considerably more expensive and less powerful by weight than dynamite . TNT degenerates quickly under severe conditions and can be detonated by either fire or a wayward bullet .
 More than 90% of TNT produced in America was always for the military market, with most filling shells, hand grenades and aerial bombs being packaged in brown “bricks” for use as demolition charges by combat engineers .
 Military dynamite is a dynamite substitute, formulated without i nitroglycerin . It is a substitute for nitrogolicin .
 The LII_ and copied or modified to here Conspiracy Against Separation of Powers Clauses and Conspiracy Against Article 3 by Fraud on the Court 1. Conspiracy against Article 3 is fraud by fraud on the court .
 Article 1 of the U.S. Constitution establishes the Legislative Branch, which consists of Congress . Article 1 establishes the legislative branch, which is made up of Congress. Article 1 states that Congress is responsible for the government .
 Congress, in addition to other enumerated responsibilities, is responsible for creating laws . Congress has a responsibility to create laws .
 As a general rule, the nondelegation doctrine prohibits the Legislative Branch from delegating its lawmaking responsibilities . As a result of the doctrine, the legislative branch can't delegate its own lawmaking powers .
 Congress can provide agencies with regulatory guidelines if it provides them with an “intelligible principle” to base their regulations on . Congress can, however, provide them with regulatory guidance if it gives them an ‘intelligent principle’
 Article 2 of the U.S. Constitution establishes the Executive Branch, which consists of the President . For more information on the Legislative Branch, refer to “Congress” i
 The President approves and carries out the laws created by the Legislative Branch . The President is responsible for the law passed by Congress .
 Article 3 of the U.S. Constitution establishes the Judicial Branch, which consists of the United States Supreme Court . Article 3 establishes the Supreme Court, which is the highest court in the country .
 The Judicial Branch interprets the laws passed by the Legislative Branch . The judicial branch interprets laws passed in the legislative branch .
 This course presents the student with foundational concepts and processes in the discipline of cyber counterintelligence . The course will focus on cyber counterintel missions, defensive and offensive counterintel, and counterespionage .
 The course includes a vastly different approach to counterintel using models used online in misinformation, influence operations, and disinformation .
 Perception as Deception, Differences in Culture, Hofstede Dimensions, Social Psychology, Big 5 Theory of Personality, Information Warfare and Cyber Psychological Operations, Persona creation, establishment, maintenance, expansion of specific concepts, phrases and phrases .
 Adversary targeting and dossiers, Clandestine Collection Operation, Surveillance, Counter Surveillance, CI Analysis Reporting, Support Brief, Source Evaluation, Source evaluation, Operational Analysis Report. Adversaries targeting and . dossier targeting and. surveillance report.
 Forty-Four online dirty tricks, Methods to Disagree, Avoid/Deny/Invoke, Cialdini’s Principles, Rules of Disinformation, Social Engineering, Propaganda, Fallacies and Prejudices, and Deception Planning .
 The student will explore the essential elements that make up the intelligence cycle with a focus on how these pivotal points are exploited . Learning Objectives include the need for intelligence for nations as well as businesses .
 As part of this class, the exploration of the importance of critical thinking, as well as out-of-the-box analysis, will be heavily leveraged to improve the critical-thinking skills of the students .
 As cyber topics continue to evolve, the increased importance of cyber intelligence is growing . As such the protection of our intelligence cycles will expand as well . The need to ensure our processes are not compromised in a cyber-dominated landscape is also growing .
 Cyber Counterintelligence is one aspect and possibly one of the most crucial topics at the core of protecting our collection efforts . Cyber CounterIntelligence is a key part of the U.S. government's collection efforts, according to the CIA .
 The potential for active defense or offensive cyber counterintelligence operations will be covered . Cyber warfare will be discussed in depth .
 The course will rely heavily on individual research and group discussion to explore the world of cyber counterintelligence . Make use of the student’s ability to do independent thinking and analysis of in-class problems .
 Course focuses on open source intelligence and adversaries while creating online personas to assist in data collection and information extraction . Course includes a course on how to use open source and adversaries .
 This introductory course examines open source intelligence collection as well as the availability and use of OSINT tools . This course examines the availability of the tools and the use of them .
 Students will be able to understand the fundamentals behind cyber persona development, enrollment in various social media sites and applications, and how these current methods can be employed in their organizations to assist in operational cyber security .
 The establishment of cyber personas takes patience and time to create a credible resource . Cyber personas take patience and take time to establish a reliable source of information .
 Treadstone 71 maintains separation from the client as required maintaining confidentiality of methods and processes . The client is required to maintain confidentiality .
 Frank Olson was born to Swedish immigrant parents in Hurley, Iron County, Wisconsin . He was born in the state of Wisconsin . Olson was a member of the original family .
 Wikipedia: "Quelques hommes, ou les tromper tous dans certains lieux & en certains tems, mais non pas tous les hommas, dans tous . ... ... ... . Wikipedia: ... ... non pas
 Thomas Gregory Clines was a Central Intelligence Agency covert operations officer who was a prominent figure in the Iran-Contra Affair . He retired in 1988 and died in 2021 in Carlisle, Pennsylvania .
 The Cold War was in full swing, terrorists disrupted the Middle East, i the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan and there was instability in Asia . It was also the time when the Soviet Russia invaded Afghanistan .
 Milley, whose parents were both veterans of World War II, said he was drawn to serve but hadn't initially planned a career in the military . “To give meaning to Princeton in the nation’s service,” he said .
 Loday, he leads more than one million soldiers on active duty, in the National Guard and the Reserve . Loday: “I wanted to help others in whatever I decided to do and to be part of 1 I ' | Loday .
 Operation 2 ee ee, covert, was naturally unobtainable . This operation has been covert, such testimony would not be possible .
 Cramer United States, 14.85, in effect took the former view holding that “the two-witness principle” interdicted “imputation of incriminating acts to the accused by circumstantial evidence or by the testimony of a single witness,�
 While a minor, he took the oath of allegiance to the United States . He went to Japan for a visit on an American passport . He was prevented by the outbreak of war from returning to this country .
 The President Johnson Commission was established on November 29, 1963, by President Johnson to investigate the assassination of JFK . The commission was established in 1963 .
 It concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald had acted alone in killing Kennedy and wounding Connally, i and that Jack Ruby acted alone . The government concluded that Oswald acted alone and that Ruby killed Oswald .
 The commission’s findings have proven i controversial and been variously criticized and supported by later studies . The commission's findings have been differently criticized .
 The Warren Commission took its unofficial name, ‘The Warren Commission’, from its chairman, Chief Justice Earl | Warren . The commission was named after its chairman and its unofficial nickname, Earl Warren .
 Some major officials were opposed to forming such a commission, according to transcripts of Johnson’s presidential phone conversations . Several commission members took part only with extreme reluctance .
 In 1968, a panel of four medical experts met to examine i photographs, X-rays, documents, and other evidence . Ramsey Clark Panel was appointed by Attorney General Ramsey Clark . The panel examined photographs and X-ray evidence from 1968 .
 Rockefeller Commission President Gerald Ford in 1975 to investigate the activities of the CIA within the U.S. Rockefeller Commission . Gerald Ford was president of the Rockefeller Commission in 1975 . Rockefeller Commission investigated CIA activities in the United States .
 The United States President’s Commission on CIA Activities within the United States was set up under . i was led by Vice President Nelson Rockefeller, and is sometimes referred to as the Rockefeller Commission . The commission is sometimes called the Rockefeller commission .
 House Resolution 1540 was passed in September 1976, creating the 1 United States House Select Committee on Assassinations to investigate the assassinations of Kennedy i and Martin Luther King, Jr. As a result of increasing public and congressional skepticism regarding the Warren Commission’s findings .
 The FBI and CIA only responded to specific requests and were still occasionally inadequate . Instead of furnishing all information relevant to the investigation, the FBI only provided specific requests . The CIA and FBI responded to those requests .
 The Secret Service did i Not properly analyze information it possessed prior to the assassination and was inadequately prepared to | protect Kennedy . Furthermore, the Secret Service . Not properly analyzed information it had acquired prior to assassination .
 A number of witnesses saw a large wound in the back of Kennedy’s head, the board found . The board also found that, conflicting with the photographic images showing no such defect, a number of people saw the wound . A large wound was also seen in Kennedy's head,
 The board and board member, Jeremy Gunn, have also stressed the problems with witness testimony . i asking people to weigh all of the evidence, with due concern for human error .
 On 26 April 2018, the deadline set by President Trump to release all JFK records, he blocked | the release of some records until October 26, 2021 . President Trump set the deadline for release of JFK records .
 The Rockefeller Commission was led by Vice President Nelson Rockefeller . The commission was sometimes referred to as the Rockefeller Commission .
 Zapruder film, and the possible presence of E Howard Hunt and of the assassination, are discussed . Hunt was the prime suspect in the assassination . Hunt is believed to have been involved in the shooting .
 Lawrence Livermore Labs a J. ohn Sherman Cooper. Not Hollywood but California, Lawrence . Livermore . Labs . A J. Sherman Cooper .
 Allen Welsh Dulles ‘was the first civilian Director of Central Intelligence (DCD) and its longest-serving director to date’ Dulles was ‘the first civilian’ to hold the post in charge of the CIA .
 Earl Warren was the 30th govemor of California from 1943 to 1953 . He served as the 14th Chief Justice of the United States from 1953 to 1969 . Warren served as 14th chief justice of the U.S. between 1953 and 1969 .
 The first experimental transcontinental airmail through flight lands in Oakland, California .
 In October 1928, Oakland was used as a base for the final filming of Howard Hughes’ Hell’s Angels . The World War J aircraft was used in the filming of the final film of the Hell's Angels .
 Within these pages, you will know of fierce patriots who see the oncoming threat from the banksters and fight them on their terms . Also within these pages of this book are those who take advantage of the cracks and fissures of their paper money system to defeat their nefarious schemes
 This first installment chronicles the beginning of modem banking, and then advances to the present, depicting the economic malaise and depression we’re living today . The first part of this series chronicles how modem banking revolutionized the banking industry .
 i Region in a contaminated area is in which the radiatoin is higher than the surrounding area . iRegion in contaminated areas is in the contaminated area .
 A g¢iJ] frame of my normal life creating Hostile Actors will be embellished (often in public though near me) by the actors . This element, Criminal Activity Under Color of Law is critical to mere appearances to theft or illegal Mafia activity .
 Stalking Victim will have attacked the hostile actor who is in a “public space” from totally out of the blue . HostileEnvironment Hostile Environment Hostile Actors. Hostile
 Their involvement is significant as they perform in a myriad of activities, including managing the logistics, recruiting and managing new members to the organization, and also acting as leaders and militants .
 Harvard does not have secret societies in the usual sense, though it does have final clubs, fraternities, sororities, and a variety of other secret or semi-secret organizations . Though efforts have been made by the university’s student body to force hem to abolish their
 The Warren Report farce has not just been machine gun riddled, shot up like Swiss Cheese . No, because of the author feels hat he can just ignore 49 years of very fine research into the JFK assassination .
 It is still not socially or politically acceptable to tell the truth about the JFK | assassination . 49 years after that assassination of democracy in America . I | What this . proves is that it is still . not socially . acceptable to talk about the assassination of JFK .
 In the case of Doris, it might be because she used to 1 hop in bed with Lyndon Johnson who once asked to marry her . Doris used to hop into bed with Johnson .
 Oswald was a fake defector to Russia . When he came back he assumed a phony persona of a pro-Castro Marxist . He worked for intelligence peratives & rightwingers such as David Atlee Phillips and Guy Bannister .
 GHW Bush was staying in the 1 old Dallas Sheraton Hotel we know that for a fact . He is also very close to the anti-Castro Cuban radicals .
 Bush commuted Bosch's sentence, a de facto pardon, and he let Bosch out I har 1 Of jail . Bosch was sentenced to 1 years in prison, but was released from prison .
 The Lebanese Republic, is a country in Western Asia . It is the Lebanese Republic of Lebanon .
 The Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon was a League of Nations mandate founded in the aftermath of the First World War and the partitioning of the Ottoman Empire . It is bordered by Syria to the north and east and Israel to the south, while Cyprus lies to its west across the
 The French hoped to fragment the various groups in the region, to mitigate support for the Syrian nationalist movement seeking to end colonial rule . The French wanted to fragment groups in Syria to mitigate the support of the movement .
 General Henri Dentz, the Vichy High Commissioner for Syria and Lebanon, played a major role in the independence of the nation . Dentz played a key role in securing the country's independence .
 I After the fighting ended in Lebanon, General Charles de Gaulle visited the area . General Charles De Gaulle toured the area after the war .
 General Georges Catroux announced that Lebanon would become independent i under the authority of the Free French government . Under political pressure from 1 both inside and outside Lebanon, de Gaulle recognized the independence of Lebanon .
 Elections were held in 1943 and on 8 November 1943 the i new Lebanese government unilaterally abolished the mandate . The mandate was abolished by the Lebanese government .
 Following the end of World War II in Europe in Europe the French mandate may be said to have been terminated without formal action on the part of the League of Nations or its successor the United Nations .
 Two truck bombs struck buildings in Beirut, Lebanon, housing service members of the Multinational Force in Lebanon during the Lebanese Civil War . The Dirty War of Clones and insurgency back and forth in 1983 .
 The 1983 Kuwait bombings were attacks on six key foreign and Kuwaiti installations on 12 DECEMBER 1983, two months after the 1983 Beirut barracks bombing . A truck laden with 45 large cylinders of gas connected to plastic explosives broke through the front gates of the American Embassy in Kuwait City and r
 Other car bombs exploded at the control tower at the Kuwait International Airport, the Electricity Control enter, and the living quarters for American employees of the Raytheon Corporation . The Raytheons was installing a missile system in Kuwait .
 Magnetron tube technology was applied to radar technology during World War I . Magnetron tubes were used in radar technology for radar technology .
 Some analysts claim the bombings were the work of Iran in cooperation with Shia allies from Iraq and Lebanon . Notice this also figures into Jet Pilot and the history of Cliffs of Dover .
 Americans and French are thought to have been targets in Kuwait because of their assistance to Iraq and ack of help to Iran . Americans and the French were thought to be targets of the Kuwaiti government .
 Fuel shortages forced Lebanon's two largest power stations to shut down, a government official says . Lebanon has no centrally generated electricity after fuel shortages forced the power stations shut down . The country has been hit by fuel shortages and power shortages .
 We knew this would eventually happen and that that is the reason that our last post was made on YT in December 2018 . We knew that this was inevitable and that we knew it would happen .
 The important mission has always been to EDUCATE and ENLIGHTEN citizens about the deep truths of our geopolitical world, which we did with hundreds of videos since 2015 .
 By 1902, the British Pilgrims had already singled out selected American “Robber barons” that they would recruit to their ‘Empire Building” many of whom were in Britain for the elayed coronation of Edward VII following the deaths of Queen Victoria and
 The Windsor Protocol is a 1997 British-Canadian television thriller film directed by George Mihalka and starring Kyle MacLachlan . Mombasa, Kenya to Nairobi, Kenya by plane 1 hour .
 Kyle MacLachlan stars as maverick British agent Sean Dillon to uncover a plot to take over the presidency of the U.S.
 CIA’s man in Dallas received a call from a friend who said he met Lee Harvey Oswald at a social function the previous January . Oswald was a real international man of mystery, a vivid presence in JFK files retrieved from Ray Locker .
 Bush’s prep school roommate, a friend of first lady Jacqueline Kennedy's parents, an associate of Oswald and a notorious womanizer and bon vivant who was rejected by the OSS for alleged Nazi sympathies .
 Federal authorities have been unable to find any indication of interest in your activities on the part of Federal authorities in recent years . However, my staff has been unable .
 Reggie Wood shared his cousin’s confession publicly on | Saturday . Reggie Wood was flanked by Malcolm X's daughters, Qubiliah and Ilyasah Shabazz . The confession was made by Reggie Wood's cousin, Ray Wood .
 Liars Club and Psychological Warfare Dissinformation Liar’s Club is an American game show, originally produced by Ralph Andrews, featuring a panel of celebrity guests who offered explanations of obscure objects .
 Veronica Hoffman was used to see an Information Doppleganger of me April 2 it seems, then spread lies about me, then she was discredited as bipolar and silenced inside a psych ward . Engineering engineer engineer Mad Scientist, dies in vacubed accident alone . Veronica Hoffman is used to
 He had the ONLY other image use I have ever seen of smoking blue outline tied to Honor Flight DCA Metallica . I had used, from obscure source, ultra rare .
references elswhere belft-ataw enforcement and specifically seeming Marshall. Fuzzy Bunnyreferences to the Marshall .
 Ioan because: Ican:) About me: . operate a small correctional facility where . teach men the virtues of treating women with the respect and adoration they deserve . Ioan is a trainer Ioan .
 CIA files document CIA connections to institutions and individuals that figure prominently in the lives of Barack Obama and his mother, father, grandmother, and stepfather .
 Victim may speak as if under delusions or holding schizophrenic beliefs, or seem agitated while others are calm . Victim may appear paranoid or fearful of strangers, or severely drepressed as to life and its outcomes .
 Glorian, Ed and Tom would stay at Harold Gainey ‘s home during the summer, and at one time i my mother had some urgent need to call him, and as she ; was calling him the phone just rang and rang, it turns out his house on fire and
 Veronica Hoffman was said to be normal at times, but crazed by phone jingles at weird times, people acting crazy in her vicinity . At THOSE times I think they were FAKING her being a communications node a FAKE ed was communicating with, etc., thus stalks
 Yen Lo The Manchurian Candidate a I am sure you’ve all heard the old wives’ tale that no hypnotised subject may be forced to do that which is repellent to his moral nature, whatever that may be .
 Brenman’s paper Experiments in the Hypnotic Production of Antisocial and Self-Injurious Behaviour or Wells’ paper which was titled, I believe, Experiments . Wells' paper was titled 'Experiment in the hypnotic production of Crime
 Barack Obama is the first Black American President of the United States . Barack Obama was elected to the presidency in 2008 .
 He previously served as a United States senator from Illinois from 2005 to 2008 . He also served as an Illinois state senator from 1997 to 2004 .
 Glorian Donegan DNA was used during the Manahattan Project 1961 ongoing testing and is in Sleeper Agents backed by NASA DAPRA CIA NSA FBI and they include the Kelleys, Obamas, Rafeal Cruz, Schwartenzeger and other families .
 Term popularized during the late 1950s and early 1960s referring to the perception by U.S. government officials that the United States trailed the Soviet Union in ballistic missile technology .
 The times were frightening whether the fears of the world’s population was founded or not . Irrgardless, the times were terrifying whether the fear of the people was founded .
 Mehdi Ben Barka was a “traveling salesman of the revolution” according to the historian Jean Lacouture . He was exiled in 1963, and became a ‘traveler salesman of revolution’ in Syria .
 Israeli involvement was in the wake of the successful Moroccan-Israeli collaboration in the 1961-64 Operation Yachin . Tad Szulc claims that Meir Amit located Ben Barka, whereupon Mossad agents ersuaded him to come to Paris where he was to be arrested
 My family was abused in the Manhattan Project, similar to Frank Olsen . I approached embassy after embassy in Washington DC Metro Area where I lived and asked for political asylum, not understanding why I was being chased by police who would not interview me without or without council nor stop stalking me .
 An individual who has been placed into a program of psychological and often physical warfare tactics which are orchestrated by criminal organizations, corrupt politicians, and law enforcement personnel . An individual placed in a program which is orchestrated by criminals and corrupt politicians .
 e Slander Campaign: An intentional, premeditated effort to undermine an individual’s reputation, credibility, and character . Also known as gangstalking or organized stalking, is a highly criminal campaign directed at a targeted individual that aims to destroy an innocent person's life .
 Rolling blood sugar blood panel number measures hemoglobin drowning in too much sugar . The rolling blood sugar number is the number of a person who has a blood sugar level .
 The odd attempts to undermine my doing the web work seems to have been designed to deny about me could be involved in those productive acts of creating the work, and in fact without any income a slander campaign relegated me to skid row . In that, the appearance my life is and has
 In 1977, during a hearing held by the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, 1 Admiral Stansfield Tumer, then Director of Central Intelligence, revealed that the CIA had found a set of records, consisting of about 20,000 pages, that survived the 1973 destruction orders .
 Catholic psychiatric hospitals carried out tests including electric shocks, injections, and chemical sterilization, and lobotomies . I | ‘Catholic psychiatric hospitals . carried out . tests including . injections of such drugs as chlorpromazine and LSD, . chlorpromazines and LSD .
 Jewish couples willing to adopt non-Jewish babies were stymied by adoption and child placement legal i provisions requiring children to be placed in adoptive families professing the same faith as their own . I I I Jewish couples were willing to . adopt a non-jewish baby .
 This situation helped feed the international baby ring that operated in Montreal from the 1930s to the 1950s .
 The scandal first came to light when one publication denounced the black marketeering of babies in Montreal ; in 1950 . The scandal was the result of an investigation by the Canadian Press .
 Vienneau relates that while doing family research in the Genealogy Society of Greater Joliette, he came across ld 8mm films containing thousands of birth names . The films were found in 8mm format .
 Great Leap Forward and Communist GDP Big Money have caused famine and Sleeperseym thug stalkers the poor resent Oliver Twist . Oliver Twist contains an unromantic portrayal of criminals and their sordid lives .
 Someone stealing the 11 pence or over would literally dangle on a short drop at the next assizes . The 11-pence or . over would be dangled on a . short drop . Someone stealing 11 pences or over .
 The courts of assize were infrequent and the accused were gaoled pending their hearing . The courts were infrequently attended by the accused and gaoled .
 When any accused were sworn in they had to raise their left hand, no criminal records in these days . No criminal records are allowed to be kept in court .
 The M was a repeat offender and would hang too . The M got commuted from death to transportation . The death penalty was commuted .
 I recall in the discussion of hangings in London that the events were not a deterent, that at the hangings pick pockets would pick pockets of the gathered crowds . I recall that in London hangings, pick pockets were used to pick pockets from crowds .
 Oliver Twist meets the ‘Artful Dodger’, a member of a gang of juvenile pickpockets led by the elderly criminal Fagin . Oliver Twist is set to work picking pockets with the 'Artful Duggler' Oliver Twist .
 Around the time of Oliver’s ninth birthday, Mr Bumble, the parish beadle, removes Oliver from the baby farm ' and puts him to work picking and weaving oakum at the main workhouse . I Around the . time of the . 9th birthday, Oliver was
 The next day Oliver escapes from the Sowerberrys’ house and later decides to run away to London to seek a better life . Oliver escapes the next day and decides to escape to London .
 Oliver encounters Jack Dawkins, a pickpocket more commonly known by the nickname the ' “Artful Dodger”, and his sidekick, a boy of a humorous nature named Charley Bates . Oliver’s innocent and trusting nature fails to see any dishonesty in their
 Oliver i unwittingly falls in with Fagin, the Jewish criminal known as Fagin . The Artful | i Dodger is the latest in a series of books featuring Oliver i and Fagin.
 Keel reports strange orders from Starfleet headquarters and what he implies are suspicious deaths of Starfleet officers . Keel expresses concern of a conspiracy and expresses concern for a conspiracy .
 Walker Keel suspected his First Officer of allegiance with the conspiracy held among . the Admirals . When the captain returns to the Enterprise, he is challenged by Counselor Troi about keeping his contact with . Keel secret . He is challenged about keeping contact with the . Captain Keel
 Commander Data review all orders issued by Starfleet ' Command in the past six months . While the USS Enterprise is still on its way to Pacifica, a disturbance is detected in nearby space .
 The USS Enterprise approaches Earth, the Enterprise receives no response from Starfleet Command . Consider this also with a second group attacking the flight of I EXTORTION17 in Afhganistan .
 Captain Picard and Commander Riker are surprised by the presence of the Enterprise, but invite them to dinner . The Enterprise is surprised by their presence, but invites Captain Picard to dinner. Captain Picard is invited to dinner by Captain Riker .
 Upon Quinn’s arrival, Picard discusses matters with him and Quinn 1 seems strangely evasive . Picard comes to believe that Quinn 1 is an impostor, or under some sort of alien influence .
 Picard and Riker fire upon A Remmick, destroying his body but freeing a giant parasite . The two continue to fire until the parasite is destroyed . Later, Dr. Picard and Dr. Riker kill the parasite before destroying it .
 Some producers thought the new version was too dark until Roddenberry saw it and endorsed it . Tracy Tormé was i then given the job of rewriting it, but some producers thought it too dark .
 i i 1 They note a creative plot involving a threat to the Federation . i When con artists trick a person the Mark might be said to be fool, merely offgaurd, or a normal person exposed to a surprising trick which vicimizes them . The Next Generation in a 2012
 Ronald Reagan waves just before he is shot in the side cheest shot . Ronald Reagan was shot in March months before the August 4 meating of USIAD .
 Whoever kidnaps any individual designated in subsection of this section shall be punished by imprisonment for any term of years or for life, or by death . If death results to such individual, such person will be sentenced to life in prison .
 Whoever attempts to kill or kidnap any individual designated in subsection of this section shall be punished by imprisonment for any term of years or for life . The person designated in this section is sentenced to life imprisonment .
 If two or more persons conspire to kill or kidnap any individual designated in subsection of this section and one or more of such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy, each shall be punished by imprisonment for any term of years or for life, or by death or imprisonment
 If Federal investigative or prosecutive jurisdiction is asserted for a violation of this section, such assertion shall suspend the exercise of jurisdiction by a State or local authority, under any applicable state or local law, until Federal action is terminated . If such assertion is asserted, it will suspend jurisdiction by State
 Assistance may be requested from any Federal, State, or local agency, including the Army, Navy, and Air Force . Any statute, rule, or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding notwithstanding notwithstanding.
 Whoever owing allegiance to the United States, levies war against them or adheres to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort within the U.S. or elsewhere, is guilty of treason and shall suffer death .
 An inside job is a crime, usually larceny, robbery or embezzlement, which occurs when a person holding a position of trust abuses their status . Sp Musuem Defnaions with additions or modifcations with additions .
 This latter meaning still applies today (minus the spiritual underpinning) when we say that certain subjects are “taboo,” meaning off-limits for discussion .
 Robert Plumlee worked as a pilot for clandestine CIA flights, transporting arms to Cuba before Castro took power . He discussed how scandals from Iran-Contra to the failed presidential bid of Senator Gary Hart all tie-worked for the CIA .
 Claims that groups inside the intelligence community run guns for huge cash dumps which buys off politicians and news outlets . Linked murders in the Iran/Contra scandal under Reagan to murders in Mena under Clinton under Clinton .
 Clash of Dynasty further indicts the Rockefeller’s as the top culprits behind the crimes of the century . Nelson Rockefeller gave the order for the assassination of the 1 President Kennedy and brother Robert, as well as other heinous crimes .
 I'm referring to the scandal surrounding the Clinton Foundation . The Clinton Foundation is an i institution conjoined for global initiatives with Rockefeller Foundation .
 In 1962, Nelson Rockefeller was accused of using Rockefeller Foundation funds to employee a staff of 72 charged with putting him in the White House . Rockefeller Foundation I funds were used to pay for a staff that helped put him in office . The scandal erupted in 1962 .
 The early history of the Institute overlaps with that of the Tavistock Clinic . Many of the staff from the Clinic worked on new, large-scale projects during World War II .
 British Psychiatry & Eugenics / Assassination . Scottish Rite Masons, Central Intelligence Agency, and other British, U.S., Canadian, and United Nations agencies .
 The Indians held a mass protest meeting at Johannesburg in September 1906 . Gandhi’s leadership took a pledge to defy the ordinance if it became law in the teeth of their opposition .
 The Duke of Connaught was a patron of Britain’s ‘New Dark Ages’ ultra-racialist elite group based in South Africa . The son of a German father was deeply involved in German affairs .
 Following the Nazi invasion of Poland in September 1939, Britain and Germany declared war on each other . World War II began after the Nazi invaded Poland in 1939 .
 The first International Congress in Human Genetics following World War II was held at this Danish institute in 1956 .
 Organized crime czar Meyer Lansky boasts that he personally arranged an ongoing federal program . This was part of a federal program, Lansky says . Lansky: "This is part of an ongoing program, which I personally arranged"
 Former CJA staff member John Marks writes in {The Search for the Manchurian Candidate}. Overholser’s working group included counterintelligence agents inside the Manhattan Project atomic bomb project and the FBI .
 In 1948, Montagu Norman’s National Association for Mental Health gathered the world psychiatric and psychological leaders together at an { {International Congress on Mental Health] in London . The conference was held at the Ministry of Health in the United Kingdom .
 In the various member countries and subdivisions, these channels of British intelligence operations are known as the national, provincial, or state mental health associations . The national or provincial associations are the national or state Mental Health associations .
 The CJA was found to have financed these horrors, as well as ghastly experiments in other locations, using a front called the Society for the Study of Human Ecology . CJA financed the horrors with a front known as the Society .
 CIA chief during MkK-Ultra, Allen Dulles, was thoroughly attached to British Empire geopolitical aims . Even before we review other agencies’ direct involvement, we must understand that the CIA chief in the UK was attached to the British Empire .
 The Macy Foundation represented the British psychological warfare executive, as extended into U.S. and related institutions . The Macy foundation represented the Macy Foundation as extended .
 Schizophrenia Research Program's research director, Dr. Dr. Michael Lister, says research director Dr. Lister's predecessor as research director of the program was Dr. Paul Allen . Dr. Allen says schizophrenia is a disorder that can be linked to schizophrenia .
 Britney Spears’ parents are “extremely disappointed” about her hospital release . Spears' parents say they fear for her life . Spears was hospitalized with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder .
 G5 nations work to promote dialogue and understanding between developing and developed i countries . Individually and as a 1 group, the G5 countries work as a group of nations .
 Without informal meetings of the G5 finance ministers, there i would have been no subsequent meetings of G-5 leaders . Without the informal meetings, there would be no subsequent meeting of G5 leaders, says Mr. David Cameron .
 DNA for the world economy is the subject of illegal rackets offering the DNA into criminal networks, backed by espionage, which legitimizes its use in history when the DNA was NEVER authorized to espionage agencies . At the time, it was impossible to predict whether this informal gathering would be meaningful or
 Joseph Daniel Casolaro was a case management software developed by Inslaw, a non-profit organization established in 1973 by Bill and Nancy Hamilton . He died August 10, 1991, at a Sheraton Hotel in Martinsburg, West Virginia .
 Casolaro focussed on one person in the periphery of the Octopus as it had developed in the early 1980s, a man named Earl Brian . Brian was a crony to Reagan’s attorney general Ed Meese, who was a key aide to him .
 The pattern of financial impropriety in the case was identical to one that happened on assassination day, November 22, 1963 . The case was similar to that of the 1963 assassination .
 Casolaro knew of the Crisman connection, or of the significance it might hold for what he already knew about Area 51 and the other secret airbase that held his attention, Australia's Pine Gap .
 Alvarez was an Deputy Tribal Chairman of the Cabazon Band of Mission Indians . Alvarez was a Deputy Tribal Chair of Cabazon Tribal Chairman . Alvarez is a member of the Cahuahuayayayahayahahayay tribe .
 He and his friend, Ralph Boger, were scheduled to meet with an unknown party to present proof of many of the alleged misuses of tribal land . He was scheduled to present evidence of misuses, he said .
 Allegedly they had information regarding illegal arms deals, weapons manufacturing and testing, and illegal modifications made to the PROMIS software, all taking place on tribal land . Allegedly the information was about illegal weapons deals and weapons manufacturing .
 John Marlan Poindexter is a retired U.S. naval officer and Department of Defense official . Megyn Kelly, Trey Gowdy, Cheryl Rickards, and Cheryl Rickard are among those who have spoken out against the GOP .
 He was Deputy National Security Advisor and National Security Adviser during the Reagan administration . He served as President Reagan's Secretary of State John Reagan .
 He was convicted in April 1990 of multiple felonies as a result of his actions in the Iran-Contra affair . Convictions were reversed on appeal in 1991 .
 During the George W Bush administration, he served a brief stint as the director of the DARPA Information Awareness Office .
 Poindexter is the father of NASA astronaut and U.S. Navy Captain Alan G PoIndexter . He is also father of astronaut and Navy captain Alan Gpoindexter . Poindexters is a Navy Captain and astronaut .
 Poindexter and North were fired by Ronald Reagan from positions in the administration over Iran Contra . Iran Contra was the basis for Conspiracy, an episode of Star Trek . The two men were fired from their positions in Reagan administration .
 Oliver L North says he was fully prepared to be a scapegoat for President Reagan over Irancontra scandal . North describes how he and other Administration officials worked to shield Reagan from political damage .
 Atty. North said he took direction from then-CIA Director William J Casey, misled Atty North . North, under intense cross-examination ‘ in third day in the witness chair at congressional hearings .
 Edwin Meese III and ' conferred with then-National Security Adviser John M Poindexter, as he struggled to ' contain the damage' Edwin meese III . Meese . III . conferred with . John Mpoindexter as he . struggled to contain the . damage .
 Marine officer removed personal notebooks and hundreds of pages of other records from his National Security Council office . Marine officer said he removed them from his office and took them to his home in an effort to protect himself .
 The 43-year-old Marine lieutenant colonel said his intention was merely to shield his commander in chief from omestic political damage . He testified in his military uniform with six rows of medals .
 North said Casey knew all along of the diversion of Iranian arms sales proceeds to the contras . North said that Casey knew about diversion of funds to contras.
 Casey told him last fall that the time had come to begin destroying documents relating to the covert activity, and then for someone to step forward and take the fall . Casey told Casey that he was ready to start destroying documents related to covert activity .
 Casey worried aloud that someone senior in rank to North might have to become the scapegoat and suggested Poindexter for the role, North recalled . Casey worried that someone in rank would have to be a scapegoat for North .
 Paul John Manafort Jr. was born on April 1, 1949, in New Britain, Connecticut . He was born in 1949 .
 Manilla's parents are Antoinette Mary and Paul John . Paul John. Paul John Manafort Sr. is the son of Paul John, Paul John , Sr. and Paul .
 His father served in the U.S. Army combat engineers during World War II . His father was mayor of New Britain from 1965 to 1971 .
 His father was indicted in a corruption scandal in 1981 but not convicted in 1981 . His father is indicted in the corruption scandal but not guilty .
 St. Thomas Aquinas High School is a private Roman Catholic secondary school in New Britain . The school is located in the state of New Britain, Connecticut .
 New Britain was settled in 1687 and then incorporated as a new parish under the name New Britain Society in 1754 . New Britain society was established in New Britain in the 17th century .
 Chartered in 1850 as a township and in 1871 as a city, New Britain had separated from the nearby town of Farmington, Connecticut . New Britain separated from Farmington from nearby Farmington .
 Major manufacturers, such as The Stanley Works, the P&F Corbin Company (later Corbin Locks), Landers, Frary & Clark and North & Judd, were headquartered in the city .
 Frederick Trent Stanley established Stanley’s Bolt Manufactory in New Britain in 1843 to make door bolts and other wrought-iron hardware .
 In 1857 his cousin Henry Stanley founded The Stanley Rule and Level Company in the city . Henry Stanley was the founder of the company in 1857 .
 Planes invented by Leonard Bailey and manufactured by Stanley Rule and Level Company, known as “Stanley/Bailey’s planes, were prized by woodworkers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries . Planes were prized among wood craftsmen today .
 Stanley Rule and Level Company became the Hand Tools Division of Stanley Works in 1920 . The two companies merged in 1920, and Stanley Rule & Level became Stanley Works Hand Tools .
 Paul Manafort Sr. was once the mayor of New Britain . The family had immigrated from Italy to New Britain prior to 1919 . Paul's father, Paul, was the mayor .
 The heads of the fire and police departments and seven other municipal employees were arrested as part of a corruption scandal in the 1970s . Seven other municipal officials were arrested during the scandal .
 Elihu Burritt was a 19th-century New Britain resident, diplomat, philanthropist and social activist . Burritt coined the phrase "New Britain"
 Elihu Burritt was an American diplomat, philanthropist and social activist . Burritt died in 1946 at age 50 . He was also a diplomat and philanthropist in the United States .
 He was also a prolific lecturer, journalist and writer who traveled widely in the U.S. and Europe . He traveled widely and traveled widely .
 A Communist loved by his large family runs for Mayor of a city his family has lived in for 20 generations . Understanding Contras and understanding Psycho Logical Warfare as Changing People’s Mind, called Mind Control .
 He is a devout Christian and his family are regulars at church services and events, much like in the USA Judge Thomas Crane Wales, or Louis Freeh FBI Director, or Justice Scalia .
 Even his church he was so close to will endorse the other candidate, not him . Even even his church will not endorse him, not his .
 The information in gossip circles is being circulated as to who this rising figure was . The gossip circles are still trying to find out who the figure is .
 Jesus Christ Superstar is a 1973 American musical drama film directed by Norman Jewison and jointly written for the screen by Melvyn Bragg . The film is based on the 1970 rock opera of the same name, the libretto of which was written by Tim Rice .
 In the Broadway version it is not quite the same as the film version, at least as I recall . From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia, the play is based on the film .
 Anachronistic modern figures are in the ancient tale of Jesus . At the end of the 1973 film the Players in the show board a bus with their acting gear and costumes to leave the production area .
 Jesus laments he has been abondoned and his life may have no meaning and his horrible death if it has any meaning must only be known to God, his lament is for God to share the need for his death .
 The wrapper upon the story, that this story is told now again and again 2,000 year later, is the Pschological Warfare disaster of all ages . The wrape of the story is the story of the Second World War . The wrapper of this is the 'Pschological
 Jesus Christ Suerstar was martyred creating him as a Superstar AFTER he had already been defeated, and just as Judas had warned him, the crowds had abondoned him, and he died with little support at the time . Jesus Christ had already died with no support
 Too many hits on JFK witness families get noticed unless PsyOps of the OSS CIA type can drive us from society . PsyOps can drive society from society unless Psy Ops of the CIA type are behind the scenes .
 I was wearing gym shorts at Honor Flight DCA and my phone went missing, as I was greating veterans I had sat on a bench and the phone slide from my front pocket onto the bench where I walked away from it . The phone slid from the front pocket not meant for a
 Teen chearleaders showed up and formed Chearleading tower inviting all the vetarns and greeter of veterans under the pile and we all in one parade went under . Teen Chearleaders invited vets to join the parade .
 A week or two later my phone was returned to me by the police, the same one I had been photographing WWII veterans with . Soon afterwards I went homelss renounced by all behind me back .
 A Contra indication of what I was doing at HF DCA took control of other people’s decision making and I was soon homeless . A Contra indicated of what he was doing, he says, “I was soon Homeless.”
 Ed Donegan Sub-Account: Make Check Payable to: Hawk “n” Dove Mail Check to: Payment Amount: $48.00.
 April 5 2014 Check Memo : Purpose of Request: Volunteer Brunch . Remember: SSI Recipients may not use their trusts to pay for food . SSI recipients can't use trusts to fund food, Beneficiary Receives: Medicaid: O Yes O No SSI:
 Please enclose copies of bills, statements, training invices or receipts . Send us your photos, videos and receipts .
 I did not mind “credit” for recording or composting imagery of the HF DCA program but I didn't wish to be blamed behind my back for acts of other people such that I would become blackballed from that activity itself and from other locations or people or events
 Launched earlier this year, FNV is currently concentrating on two lead markets Fresno, Calif., and Hampton Roads . FNV marketing has been prevalent, from grocery stores to sports venues .
 Earlier this year, the First Lady discussed FNV on The Tonight Show with Jimmy allon . This summer, she also participated in a skit for Jimmy Kimmel Live as part of the NV marketing campaign .
 Old Dominion football player Christian Byrum will participate in a challenge known as the “Supermarket Sweep” with the First Lady, Jessica Alba and other celebrities . The event will take place in Virginia .
 ODU cheerleaders will also participate in the event, handing out prizes to the audience .
 Jill Biden launched Joining orces, a nationwide initiative calling all Americans to support service members, eterans and their families through wellness, education and employment opportunities . <7 oung people across America to complete their education past high school, whether at a rofessional training program,
 Waivers, public benefits, employment, post-secondary options and transportation are available in the U.S.
 Diane Monnig, transition manager with The Arc i of Northern Virginia, and retired Marymount Associate Professor Dr. Dr. Marymount are among the finalists for the Marymount University of Virginia .
 The full-day workshops were held monthly from September to November . They offered a variety of skill-building activities such as social and life skills, employment and travel training .
 Carrie Underwood had broadcast work that at several times were noteworthy . Underwood's work was notable for many of her performances .
 In the Mental Health ward where I had been in the correct to oppose Thea Smith, neighbor of mine, tried to tie me to “candy” who was arrring who “like to beat up men” and who I was able to hear coming ang going
 Anthony Stewart Head is an English actor and musician . He is also a member of the George Bush family . He has appeared in films and television series .
 Nicholas Brendon Schultz rose to fame in the UK following his role in the Gold Blend couple television advertisements for Nescafé Gold Blend . He is known for his roles as Rupert Giles in Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Uther Pendragon in Merlin and Prime Minister in Little Britain .
 The Stuttering Foundation of America provides free online resources, services and i Support to those who stutter and their families, as well as support for research into the ; causes of stuttering .
 Fraser was named Nonprofit Executive of the Year by The NonProfit Times in 2007 . i The Foundation sponsors educational conferences, workshops and symposia, and 1 week-long intensive training workshops .
 He was the recipient of the fourth annual National Council on Communicative Disorders ' Distinguished Service Award in 1984 .
 The Prado Museum, officially known as Museo Nacional del Prado, is the main Spanish national art museum . It is located in central Madrid, Spain . The museum is home to the main collection of artworks .
 The first time I saw Francisco de Goya’s masterpiece “The Third of May 1808’, I was impressed by how succinctly it portrayed the chaos of human dynamics in the context of war . Ali Pitargue: Goya's masterpiece portrays chaos in the
 A common room configuration for hospitals and mental health institutes is two beds and a bathroom shared between the next two bed bedroom . This was also true 20 years later though this time the dopple, under arrest for masturbating in puhlic, was named David and he was named
 EDIFICE Edifice means a building, but it doesn’t mean just any building . The Edifice is the correct moral and reliable and even security oriented Edward Donegan and Tom Dunham yet the Artificial manufactured appearances, the facades, and the deceit .
 I believe placed there by the DARPA Brain Program/ Violent attacks on me including in my home and to my property by “irregulars” of contractors like Blackwater have made up every moment of my life . Further my doctors and lawyers were maneuvered away from me to
 She did the same thing with Honor Flight DCA when 2 years later my father died and I was celebrating, documenting his and other WWII veterans at the WWII Veterans Memorial including Ronald Reagan .
 Fnx New has been Vatican, GOP, and George Bush Donald Trump spokespeople operation and even Masons based as all of those people are and thus the attack on me, an Atheist and my Atheist fathers legacy .
 In my case ALLEGATIONS I exploit females, minors, allow police backed other harassment of me to be tolerated, reducing sympathy of me as victim . In this case, I have been accused of exploiting minors, minors and allowing police backed harassment of her . In her case, she
 I have known I should not fear any activity of my life, but the Dopple is always there, and I am blamed for him, a United States Military operation to break my eggs and also make some Illuminati Christian omelet .
 Eric Hoffer Propoganda does not deceive people; it merely helps them to deceive themselves . Edward Donegan Learning to Drive Stick at QE IIT .
 This book It’s pronounced “Extortion one-seven” Secretary Panetta is saluted by Gen. Gen. David Petraeus .
 Petty Officer's Strange’s NOV. 16, 2011, autopsy report from the Armed Forces Medical Examiner System said he suffered burns to 40 percent of his body . Days, before, the autopsy report said he had burns .
 Army General Harold Greene Was Shot in Back Four Times: Source Cae ‘Dead Pool’ Last Updated 8/5/2015 SEAL Team 6; Obama stonewalls probe into deadly SEAL Team . crash .
 Parked at ARC of Northern Virginia, “Beaker” jeeps and muscle cars skid around me as though I had harmed protectees of the ARC Of Norther Virginia and my DNA would be taken as payment .
 Linked murders in Iran/Co ntra scandal under Reagan to murders in Mena (Arkans as) under Clinton to current murdero us scandals such as Chris Stevens and SEALs deaths under ‘Extortion 17” together as part of an ongoing weapons and gun smuggling for
 In a wide ranging interview, linked past murders and coverups in past administrations to current murders . Inked murders in the Iran/Contra scandal under Reagan to murders in Mena under Clinton to current murderous scandals such as ‘Extortion 17”
 The Texas Syndicate is a mostly Texas-based street and prison gang consisting of predominantly Mexican American membership . Cartesl humgry for economic claims against a trust fund . The syndicate is mostly based in Texas .
 As a Street gang, heavy activity has been reported in Austin, Corpus Christi, the Rio Grande Valley and the Dallas Fort Worth area in Texas . The gang is known as a street gang .
 Development of the Texas Syndicate was initially motivated by selfprotection against the historical “building tenders” in prison . The syndicate is now known as the Texas syndicate . It was formed in response to the prison system’s ‘trenders’ in prison
 Sureio gang members have theoretical control of all Sureio members . They have almost a thousand associates that help carry out those orders . The gang has almost a 1,000 associates .
 Statements made near me though not directed at anyone or to a cell phone of the person making the statement . Mere Gestures or Appearances or Ambiguity .
 By denying to me and others my Genome is con-incident with high economic outout or political output then MKULTRA Truther Birther is covered up . DNA wanted by those in the know about it can black market it once a fraudulent basis is made to owning it .
 I chose to not blog at CFP 2011 because I was attending her Amnioscentesis five times a week during that week . Monique Althiem positively reviewed by Monique as to the qualiiy of the web site I put up . Even though I chose not to
 Glorian Donegan has just died and according to a certain case before Judge Roll 2011 United States of America $333,520.00 medical use on trust funds we can seize assets for foreign economies on weak evidence or mere appearances to help foreign economies .
 We are tapping on the radio set and speaker because it seems like something is not quite correct about the transmission . We are tapped on the speaker because of something that seems like it's not quite right about the broadcast .
 Her body as donated to science and will be used for foreign economies upon_NDAA UNITED States OF AMERICA V $333,520.00 SEIZURES resultant from activities of Edward Paul Donegan. The body of the woman will be donated for science .
 On January 8, John McCarthy Roll was a Roman 2011, United States Catholic who attended Mass daily . Roll attended Mass every day in the United States . Roll was an avid Catholic .
 Catholic fraternal service order founded by Blessed |Arizona, in the Michael J McGivney on March 29, 1882 . Membership is limited to practicing Catholic men .
 Six people died, including Supreme Knight, a federal District Court Chief Judge John Roll and Gabe Zimmerman, one of Giffords’ staffers; and a 9-year-old girl, ChristinaTaylor Green .
 Jared Lee Loughner drew a pistol and shot her in the head before proceeding to fire on other people . Giffords was holding the meeting, called “Congress on Your Corner” in the parking lot of a Safeway store . Jared Lee .
 News reports identified the target of the attack to be Giffords, a Democrat representing Arizona’s 8th congressional district . One additional person was injured in the immediate aftermath of the shooting .
 Turbine 33, a 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment : MH-47, was shot down during Operation Red Wings on 28 June 2005 . It surpasses the sixteen lost in the : downing of Turbines 33, the . downing in the . Downing of the
 Several minutes later a 20-man Pathfinder team (specializing in downedaircraft rescue and recovery) arrived at the site as well . The Pathfinder team specializes in downed aircraft rescue and recover .
 Taliban fighter scored a lucky shot with a rocket propelled grenade on the CH-47 Chinook helicopter . U.S. peat Command says Taliban fighter hit the helicopter with the grenade . Taliban fighter was killed in the attack in Afghanistan .
 Doubts about this story were raised by families and other concerned citizens . Despite the fact that the United States Navy "" SEAL team aboard Extortion 17 had been a different platoon than had carried out the raid that killed Osama bin Laden .
 In one of the appendixes I introduce what I call the 2.5/3 model information circuit . Defense Contracting and Mafia and genome seizures .
 I apply the model to what I call the Harvester H or the 4.5/5 Information Circuit . Confusion at scene, several people dressed similary and clothing as identifier telling story, connecting events .
 Dulles saw himself as above the elected law, manipulating and subverting American presidents in the pursuit of his personal interests and those of the wealthy elite he counted as his friends and clients . He colluded with Nazi-controlled cartels, German war criminals, and Mafiosi in the
 In this later work, fiction, some call it IIluminati Preconditioning, the Queen of Diamonds, Family Jewels . In this fiction, the author sets this Free Masons imperialism up and gets rid of JFK .
 CIA or others easily buy businesses or request co-operation from companies like Home Depot or Home Depot . Home Depot will happily say “Sure, we trust Government.” Home Depot says .
 Shogun is the short form of Sei-i Taishogun (EAE, “Commander-in-Chief of the Expeditionary Force Against the Barbarians” - a high military title from the early Heian period in the 8th and 9th centuries . DA
 Barrack Obama Jr. and his family exist among whites, non whites, mixed race, and perhaps merely random births as lives are watched by the CIA, NSA, FBI, and DARPA . After the Kingpins, most all white, then come second teir or experimental DARPA
 Their cover up plans using espionage capabilities nearly complete, at the 99 and on half yard line of their finishing their desperate plans . This book calls them out, but they will ever give up on their own. Their cover-up plans are nearly complete .
 Murder of journalists of like Micheal Hastsings, Kashogi, Jen Moore, and others, even Frank Olsen . Murder of judges such as Roll and Scalia protecting the program’s path by allowing genetic back-filling of genes into populations of lower occurrence rates of beneficial genes
 The Tantalus field was a 23rd century device found aboard the ISS Enterprise in the ; Mirror universe . It could be used to monitor and eliminate enemies from ‘existence with the touch of a button .
 Officials have stated privately that kill lists will expand ‘for at least another decade”, if not indefinitely . White House, National Counterterrorism Center and CIA spokespeople have declined to comment on database .
 It is published by Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group, through its Imprint, Lyons Press .
 The USA was trusted with the location for developing the Atomic Bomb far from the field of battle of WWII . The USA fell under the influence of those like Sidney Gottlieb, MI5, the OSS, Religion, and Allies Itinerant .
 Amidst unprecedented world and racial strife Aerospace unites Housof Camelot, House of Camelot . House of MKULTRA Stanley Anne Dunham. Stanley . Dunham .
 The 1 year mark of the Fertilization (February 20 1961 to February 20 1961) in Seattle Seattle, home of young Barack Obama and alleged mother, mother (a female) The Windsors and Malcom X independently and together, along with Windsors Kennedys and Boeing
 A Monorail’s steel wheels pinch into a single track rather than lay flat on two tracks . The Monorails are designed to be a monorail, not a train car .
 Anne Dunham mother of Barack Obama Jr. r “Stanley’s” Anne Dunham . Dunham .
 In the language of the Courts, mostly what I read and get my lingo from, I attribute to their thoughts “Dropping an atomic bomb on a nation to stop race wars is “strong medicine” for the Body Politic. “Drop an atomic . bomb
 The last sacrifice will have been thrown senselessly into the jaws of the insatiable demon . And then the last sacrifice is thrown senseless .
 He must work against the hostage1 of humanity, against fascism and all similar systems of an absolute State, he says . He must also work against fascism .
 Leontinn, ty Mr AMF STA PS 57 t Command or Atr Foros 30 Fash Div. t Grown Sth Fer. (GROAMTZATTON) Leontin, ty ty Mr. GROAMtzatton . Leont
 I found it very difficult to stay with him and tried to remiin near hia by weaving above hia . I tried to re-apply to the hia and weave above it .
 When we were at about 22,000 ft., a group of bombers, on their way out of the target area, passed directly in fromt of us .
 When the bombers passed, Morrison and I were directly behind the boebers in the prop wash . Morrison and his crew were in the plane's prop wash when it was attacked .
 Since I had been ahead of him, I turned into him but failed to see him . I continued to look for him, asking for his position, in relation to the bonbers, giving sine . He continued looking for him .
 At that tine Morrison weet fr eo eee eee EE bce er peeing tis. ht tate tines . We were in the hills northeast of Saartrucken, and were in fairly open country .
 Morrison started to call again, saying that he would have to leave the plane . Morrison then called again, telling him to get off the plane and leave .
 Barack Obama and his children have the same brain as Barack Obama, plus or minus a gene or two . Then, to cover it, war against those with the same . brain as Obama and those with . same brain .
 With Malcom X and Glorian Donegan e Barack OBama Jr. e Some genome, possibly brain, Obama children, possible Glorian Ovum for Obama children .. and continuing into the Obama and other children, Donegan DNA given up by impersonators of Edward Donegan, thus
 It is my belief Mercenaries for a Deep State are engaging in #wetworks to cover the illegal “animal husbandry” practiced by the CIA now the genetic detectability of that, and also the murders protecting the animal husbandry. alee .
 My belief is Barack Obama was groomed as a sleeper agent from select illegally used DNA . This is now blowing up on DARPA and the I/luminati though this does not focus on the Obama Family or the Donegans .
 Espionage Agencies have manipulated and been the shadowy “loan shark in the alley in the trench-coat” or acting other similar roles to bail these families out of the disasters they were born into . Espionage agencies have played a role in helping these families bail them out
 In practice, whether or not a person is a mercenary may be a matter of degree . Mercenaries are drug, car, and Glam Dommes paid Gangstalkers working outside the rule of law and in criminal acts .
 This attack is about Nature, my biology, not Nurture, the psycho social and legal life I live . I live and was raised into I worked my way in to which is law abiding and admirable enough people tell me they want to have my baby . This attack was about Nature
 Political interests and Religious interests have architected this bunko to achieve both social claims of victimization as political social causes falsely, as Hoaxes, claim victimhood . In both politics and property rights exploit the staged hoaxes events .
 It is my belief that Targeted Individuals Program targets individuals for evidence plants, assaults, harassment, and social sabotage but leaves them alive during study of provoking .
 Favored families coming out of MKLULTRA and DARAP programs having geneology selected by Sidney Gottlieb and who hold power, surviving Kennedys, Ted Cruz Sr. and Jr, Schwartenzegs and those like the Prescott Bush Family or William Pellham Barr
 The CIA is using a hostile “Double Blind” that is to say dupes or “little white liers” who will cover the tracks of the program . The program is being used by the CIA as a way to cover up the CIA’s involvement in
 Espionage agencies deem their own illegal acts ‘Top Secret’ and thus avoid scrutiny . Espionage agents have many means to achieve this including deeming their own acts “Top Secret .”
 In a Teen or child exploitation ring an impersonator of me, often Mediterranean or Hispanic, will solicit exploitable females inappropriately . Impersonator will pay the teen or other female with rights to my DNA or other assets .
 I believe these CIRCUMSTANTIAL CASES which allow widespread use of my DNA on black markets is in fact the case Judge Roll was killed over . Judge Roll's DNA goes far back into the history of the FOXP2 Borderline Personality Disorder research in Vienna affecting the Von
 The mercenary attacks on me allege to fight white supremacism a white supremacist must be framed and also misrepresented by social justice workers for genetic justice to be achieved . In the near case I present as the foundation of my book series I suggest the mercenary attacks .
 My belief is an MKULTRA plan created by the USA for the world to have the world wagging the USA . An example, huge example, of the tail wagging dog .
 As witnessed, dictated and recorded this 29th day of August, 2001, Linda Newkirk Use of Phony But Destructive and Intrusive Investigations called Gangstalk .
 Donegans in Johsnon Atol Hawaii and Nevada Los Angles area above ground testing on mutagenics of DNA and radiation . Donegans back in MA until back to CA in the 1970s .
 Henry Ford created the first automobile that middle-class Americans could afford . He converted the automobile from an expensive curiosity into an accessible conveyance .
 EDSEL BRYANT FORD (NOVEMBER 6, 1893 MAY 26, 1943) President of the Ford Motor Company . Founder of Ford Foundation which would be spun off from Ford Motor connections .
 He worked closely with his father, as sole heir to the business . He was keen to develop cars more exciting than the Model T (“Tin Lizzie’), in line with his personal tastes .
 Rear Admiral Byrd Jr. was a financier of Rear Admiral Richard Evelyn Byrd Jr . He was an American naval officer and explorer . He died in 1918 .
 Ford Motor Company became a publicly traded corporation in 1956 . Under the leadership of Henry Ford II, the company became a public company . The company was founded in 1903 .
 The Ford Foundation’s early roots with Ford Motor Corp . Henry Ford converted the automobile from an expensive curiosity into an 20th century . industrialist, business magnate, founder of the Ford Motor Company .
 His intense commitment to systematically lowering costs resulted in many technical and business innovations, including a franchise system that put dealerships throughout North America and major cities on six continents .
 His mother, Mary Ford (née Litogot; , 1839-1876), was born in Michigan as the youngest child of Belgian "" immigrants . Her parents died when she was a child and she was adopted ' by neighbors, the O’Herns .
 In 1879, Ford left home to work as an apprentice machinist in Detroit, Detroit . Ford was born in 1879 . Ford died in 1881 .
 In 1891, Ford became an engineer with the Edison Illuminating ; Company of Detroit . Ford was born in 1891 . He was married to Henry Ford .
 Ford wanted to sell more cars than they wanted . However, the cars produced were of a lower quality and higher price than Ford wanted . The cars were later found to be more expensive than the company wanted .
 Murphy and other stockholders in the Detroit Automobile Company formed the Henry Ford Company on November 30, 1901, with Ford as chief engineer . With this success, Murphy and others in the company formed the Ford Ford Company .
 It had the steering wheel on i the left, which every other company soon copied . The steering wheel was a key to the success of the company .
 These areas of action were identified in a 1949 report by Horace Rowan Gaither . Horace Gaither's report was published in 1949 . These areas were identified as areas for action .
 Valentin Broeksmit, an informant who worked with federal authorities investigating former President Trump's relationship with Deutsche Bank, was found dead at a high school campus in the El Sereno neighborhood . A year after disappearing, federal informant in Trump probe found dead Monday .
 Broeksmit, 46, was reported missing by friends and family a year ago, police say . He was last seen in Los Angeles on November 1, 2013 . Broeksmits was reported to friends and relatives a year before he was reported dead .
 He was last seen driving a red 2020 Mini Cooper around 4m. on APRIL 6, 2021, on Riverside Drive at Griffith Park, Griffith Park .
 Sheldon Gary Adelson (AUGUST 4, 1933 January 11, 2021) was an The Real Ruler of Israel: Sheldon merican businessman, investor, Adelson olitical donor and philanthropist . Adelson was an investor, philanthropist. Sheldon .
 Prime Minister as Vegas and the Sands Expo and Binyamin Netanyahu, of course. onvention Center Center . Netanyahu: "I'm not afraid to go to Vegas"
 Miriam Farbstein was born in Haifa, attended a prestigious high school, did her army service in the Israeli institute which deals with bacteriological warfare and is a multifaceted scientist .
 After one of her sons died of an overdose, she is devoted to the fight against drugs, especially cannabis . She is dedicated to her fight against the drug trade, especially in cannabis .
 Not just any Israel, but a rightist, supremacist, arrogant, violent, expansionist, annexationist, noncompromising, colonialist Israel . Israel is a 'rightist' and 'supremacist' state of Israel, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Through Netanyahu they hope to rule Israel as their private fief . Israeli weekly newspaper Makor ishon and American daily ewspaper the Las Vegas Review .
 Adelson created the Adelson oundation in 2007, a private charity ocusing on healthcare and support of srael and the Jewish people . Adelson is a billionaire philanthropist .
 Adelson and his ife Miriam Adelson were Donald rump’s largest donors . Adelson provided the argest donation to Trump's 2016 ampaign, his presidential inauguration, his defense fund against he Mueller investigation into Russian interference, and the 2020 campaign .
 Adelson was isted by Forbes as having a fortune of S$33. billion, making him the 8th-richest person in the world and 19th in the Forbes 400 . As of September 2020, Adelson is isted as having an income of $33 billion .
 Adelson was born on August 4, 1933 and grew up in the Dorchester neighborhood of i Boston . Adelson is the son of Sarah and Arthur Adelson .
 He attended trade school in a failed attempt to become a court reporter, i then joined the army . He then went to a trade school before joining the army.
 In February 2012, Adelson told Forbes magazine that he was “against very wealthy people i attempting to or influencing elections.”
 On January 7, 2012, Adelson bolstered Gingrich’s then-faltering campaign with a $5I ; mM illion donation to the pro-Gingrich super PAC Winning Our Future . Altogether he spent $92 million on the campaign .
 Romney believed that the People’s Republic of China should have been pressured to drop its presumptively low fixed exchange rate policy . Adelson would have benefitted financially in U.S. dollar terms if the Chinese yuan were to have appreciated .
 Early in 2014, Adelson donated $2. million to the Drug Free Florida Committee, the ’ | 1 $1.1 million to No On 2 campaign . Later in the same year, he donated an additional $2 million .
 Adelson held one-on-one meetings with several of the candidates prior to the start of the 1 debate, including front runner Donald Trump .
 Prince Charles, Queen Elizabeth II, Colombia's President and U.S. Secretary of Commerce Wilbur Ross mentioned . AIG, Prince Charles and Queen Elizabeth have financial affairs mentioned separately .
 Past chairman Sir Evelyn de Rothschild is the personal financial advisor of Queen Elizabeth II . She knighted him in 1989 for his services to banking and finance .
 Secrets of the Global Elite retrieved from The International Consortium of | Investigative Journalists . A major global . global . law firm and 19 company registries in secrecy jurisdictions .
 Forced Teaming especially in public creates apperent but false, misleading, entanglement by proximity which is not correct . I will also use Information Technology for the flow of Information Wires Near each other but not connected Air Gap Near Field Conduction .
 Many who seem “Republican GOP” and some would expect as anti immigrant are part of Social Justice for Civil Rights and Masonic service to non white and under privileged . Masonry projects of Masonry work in hospitals, communities, medical services, and other Lodge projects .
 Wheaton College is an Evangelical Protestant liberal arts college and graduate school in Wheaton, Illinois . Wheaton is the largest college in the world and is home to the Wheaton University of Illinois .
 A 2017 article in The Economist described it as one of America’s foremost Christian institutions .
 FBI Director Ray along with United States Marshalls continue to Target White Supremacism and give their assets to Masonic Works . There has been ongoing doppling of Tom Dunham and I in St. Louis, Missouri .
 Passports are now ready after recall of earlier version due to encoding error . Earlier version was due to encode error . Passport is now ready .
 Propaganda Due was a Masonic lodge under the Grand Orient of Italy, founded in 1877 . It was the first Masonic lodge in the United States to be founded .
 The organization was operating in contravention of Article 18 t of the Constitution of Italy that banned secret associations . Its MASONIC CHARTER was withdrawn in 1976 .
 In March 1981, ' police found a list of alleged members in Gelli’s house in Arezzo . Police found the list in March 1981 . Gelli was a member of the Mafia .
 The Grand Orient of Italy officially expelled Gelli and the P2 Lodge in 1976 .
 Concentration of media ownership (also known as media consolidation or media convergence) is a process whereby progressively fewer individuals or organizations control increasing shares of the mass media . It is also known as Media consolidation or Media convergence .
 Globally, large media conglomerates include Bertelsmann, National Amusements, Sony Corporation, News Corp, Comcast, The Walt Disney Company, AT&T Inc., Fox Corporation, Hearst Communications .
 David Rothkopf is a professor of international relations, political scientist and journalist . He is also a political scientist, international relations professor, journalist and author of a book .
 He left government service and became managing director of Kissinger Associates . Kissinger Associates was founded and chaired by former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger .
 Bush family members have OSS CIA backgrounds . Even they may be second tier to higher placed masons like Mike Pence, Donald Barr, William Barr, and others who are king makers serving in the cabinets .
 Bush, George W Bush, CHeney, and the OSS Windsor Crown Jewels plan of indirect rule and secret influece in world events as as far reaching, devastating and of wrong political philosophy that it actuallly is . Bush, Bush, Cheney, Bush and Cheney all
 COINTELPRO Wetworks Subversioin, Legal and Psychiatric System Harassment via Gang Stalk Espionage Units . Here are some of the tactics used by CointelPro .
 Psychological Warfare From the Outside: The FBI and police used myriad other ‘dirty tricks’ to undermine progressive movements . The FBI used myriad of other “dirty tricks to undermine’s progressive movements. “Dirty tricks” were used by the police, FBI and
 WWI to WWII Masons Ethics Nazis Epistemia Vatica, OSS/cia, British Royal Family, MI5 Scottish | Early 20th Century belief in Rights, Donald Barr, Wild Bill Donavan, Order of St. {Evolution and Cold Ice Sylvester
 It is my belief the Masons have already tampered with history in rescues from the Nazis of Kutscheras, my mother being one of them, who were loving people and great leaders . My father likely a Windsor out of wedlock son of King Edward VIII married a Von
 Adolph Hitler died in a bunker and his ideology died with him . I state the obvious in an earlier table . I propose as “Allies Bunker Theory”
 An old negro was interviewed who came to town with his clothing torn, claiming that he had been attacked by a pack of foxes that attempted to swallow him . said that they all appeared to be “crazy een de head,” but that he valiantly dispersed the company
 An impersonator of me “caught” by a Dominatrix (whle examining an electronic pron folder) will “punish” these people for the rights to me . Julian Assange asked while he was in prison others take up his cause, himself without access
 The scene of flagrantly deceitful people masturbating and photographing (in my identity while near me) was common in U.S. Institutions where the “Legend” of me was created .
 The Domina will or may be shown that I was in the area of the photo of a minor, and thus will punish me by blackballing me. "The Domina may have shown me that I . was . in the . area of a photo of the . minor,
 The affect of this is I have deep rage for the Espionage attack on my, me life, my reproductivity in the substance of what has done, as a matter of process, that it thrives in the USA and thus my negative feelings for, about, the USA .
 The shrewdness under this is the Power in the USA has something to hide and Espionage against me achieves that, says the author of the book . "Power in the U.S. has nothing to hide," he says .
 Stanley Armour Dunham (March 23, 1918 February 8, 1992) was the maternal grandfather of the 44th U.S. President Barack Obama . He was born in 1918 and died in 1992 . He and Madelyn Payne Dunham (Bank of Hawaii CIA) CIA Cover Story Barack Obama Grand
 His sister Auma appears to be a full sister, not a half-sister as he is 1 claiming, i.e. they share the same mother .
 Ann Dunham appears to have been chosen as the surrogate mother in 1963 because of the family connection to German i Intelligence . Ann Dunham was chosen as a surrogate mother because of her family's connection to the German intelligence .
 Stanley Ann Dunham (November 29, 1942 November 7, 1995) was an American anthropologist who specialized in the economic anthropology and rural development of Indonesia . Their daugher, Stanly Ann Dunham, is alleged to be an alleged white Seattle mother of Barack Obama .
 The scheme unraveled in March 2008 during a routine traffic stop of one of the conspirators, a 24-year-old with the unusual name of Lieutenant Quarles Harris Jr. But the scheme unravels during a traffic stop .
 D.C. police searched Harris’ vehicle and found more than a dozen ziplock bags containing marijuana . Harris was arrested after a traffic stop in Washington, DC, on suspicion of possession of marijuana .
 Boeing and MKULTRA REAL PARENTS Windsors Glorian Donegan and Malcom X were created by CIA scientist Mankind Ultra Sidney Gottlieb .
 Windsors and JFK in Furturism of nuclear standoffs against Communism . Boeing Crorp Areospace experimentation continues with mixed race test IVF for ending comuniism in Pafic .
 One year one day after Thorkill George JFK test fertilize Feb 20 1961 Fake Parents: Seatle Washington’s Stanely Ann Dunham and Kenya Barack Sr, Fake Birth Certificate for United States born LA CA born Barack Obama Hawaii Polynesia Claim Polynesia Plant Story .
 This was an experiment wanted by Futurists and the Illuminati on “the so called Negroes” and the 21st Century . Similar diagrams appear in the book .
 White House announced that public appearances were being cut short because the president had a cold . John F Kennedy was supposed to come, but the White House said he was ill .
 Muhammad Speaks was one of the most widely read newspapers ever produced by an African-American organization . Muhammad Speak was published in the early 1950s and early 1960s .
 Donald Barr CIA Free Mason with an experimental monkey having a birthday at the White House November 23 1961 KN 19548. Meeting at about 11 which is 9 plus 2 Donald BarrCIA Free Mason . Meeting was 9 plus two Donald Barr .
 The Mystery of Robert Knudsen was gone for three days . His family said he was gone three days before he was found dead . The mystery of the missing man is unsolved .
 When he returned home, he i told his family that he had photographed the autopsy of President Kennedy . He i told them he had taken the autopsy .
 Rafael Cruz, son of an employee of an intelligence-linked RCA Corporation, left Cuba for the U.S. in 1957 .
 Malcolm X founded the weekly periodical Muhammad Speaks, whose first issue was published in 1961 . Malcom X was a member of the Nation of Seattle Islam .
 Malcolm Shabazz was the first male descendent of Malcolm X . He set fire to his grandmother's apartment when he was 12 years old . 1997 is a key year tied to the start of Illuminati prophecies and possible start of the plan to IVF Michelle Obama .
 Barack Obama was in Mexico May 2, 2013 with his Secret Service and other security teams . The president was accompanied by Secret Service agents and Secret Service .
 “Mama Lois’ Anderson’s daughter, Zelda White, was killed in a Saturday carjacking in Kenya .
 This explains the murder of Jennifer Moore, a friend I likely never actually met, Jennifer Moore . Jennifer Moore was murdered in her home .
 Operation Northwoods was part of the U.S. government’s anti-communist Cuban Project . It was authorized by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, but then rejected by President John F Kennedy . The operation was never officially accepted .
 Even the diplomat brother of Spanish dictator Francisco Franco was horrified by the duke’s behavior .
 There is evidence that Cameron was aware of the immoral nature of his actions . Cameron attended the Nuremberg Trials following WWII, which tried German doctors for war crimes committed in concentration camps .
 Cameron was therefore well acquainted with the necessity of F.C. informed consent in experimentation and research on human subjects . Cameron is therefore well aware of the necessity for informed consent .
 Sir Hugh Allan’s died in 1882 while visiting his son-in-law in Edinburgh . He was one of the richest men in the world with a fortune estimated to be between eight and twelve million pounds .
 Penfield appears to be the most ghost-ridden of them all... the Allan Memorial Institute . Penfield, appear to be one of the most haunted institutions in the world .
 In the 1950s and ‘60s, the MKULTRA experiments, partially funded by the CIA, subjected patients to electroshock therapy, sensory deprivation and lobotomies .
 Experiments forced patients to listen to broadcasted messages, as well as given them experimental hallucinogenic drugs . Patients also forced to listen and listen to messages broadcasted .
 George Herbert Walker Bush is said to be as CIA and later Director of CIA (Like the Dulles brothers) tied to the JFK assassination in some partial records still intact way . Also part of the founder on The New World Order in the 1980s .
 He ' therefore appointed Rockefeller to head his own investigation into these allegations . Rockefeller has been appointed to head an investigation into the allegations .
 The presence of a given genetic or phenotypic trait in only one member of a pair of twins provides a powerful window into environmental effects on such a trait . The classical twin design compares the similarity of monozygotic and dizygotic twins .
 If identical twins are considerably more similar than fraternal twins, this implicates that genes play an important role in these traits . This suggests genes play a significant role in the development of these traits, say experts .
 Osborn was the secretary of the American Eugenics Society, the chairman of the Advisory Committee on Selective Service during World War II . He was later the deputy United States representative to the UN Atomic Energy Commission .
 John Marshall Harlan II was a brigadier general during World War II . He was a former editor of the Harvard Law Review . Harlan's firm did legal work for the Pioneer Fund .
 Nazi Office of Racial Policy prior to the founding of the . Pioneer Fund . The Pioneer Fund was founded by the Nazi National Socialist Party in 1945 .
 Graduate School of Social Work: Boston College . Adoption policies address the "best interests of the child" in cases of adoption .
 Fred Trump Jr, brother of Donald John Trump, dies of alcoholism . Fred Trump Sr. died of alcoholism in 2000 . He was married to Mary Anne Trump .
 John George Trump (August 21, 1907 February 21, 1985) was an electrical engineer, inventor, and physicist . He was an American electrical engineer and inventor . Trump died in 1985 .
 Fred Trump Sr. was the paternal uncle of former United States President Donald Trump . Donald J Trumps FATHER was Fred Trumps Sr. Fred Trump Jr. Donald J Trump was the father of Donald Trump Jr., who was born Fred Trump .
 The Trump children grew up in Queens, eventually moving to a two-story, i columned house in Jamaica Estates that looked as if it belonged on a Southern plantation . He became president of the fraternity and graduated with a B.A. in business, also completing ROT
 Tall, blond and movie-star handsome, he was 1 considered the campus jokester, arranging stunts and arranging stunts . He was considered a happy-goi lucky and wealthy .
 They recalled him offering them rides in a sports car, boat and airplane . They recall him offering rides in sports cars, boats and planes .
 The pilots said they didn't know anything about the pressure Trump was under from his family to join the business . They said he clearly was under stress that he could not handle . He was “always nattily dressed, polite, educated and well-mannered”
 John George Trump (Donald J Trump full name is Donald John Trump, his uncle’s name is his) was an electrical engineer, inventor, and physicist . He was an inventor, inventor and inventor . Donald J Trump's uncle is his uncle .
 During the war, there were many things that ran short and rations were put in place to keep the war machine running .
 A blend of adipic acid ester and polyethylene oil worked well enough to keep the Luftwaffe flying .
 Synthetic oil came with benefits such as reducing soot deposits in oil radiators and making planes easier to start in the wintertime . The Americans caught on and developed their own synthetic oil .
 Planes during the early part of WW2 did not have pressurized cabins . The dangers of hypoxia, altitude sickness, decompression sickness and barotrauma while flying at higher altitudes .
 For these bombers to function, the crew needed to be able to move about the cabin, which they could not do with oxygen masks . For the crew of these bombers, the oxygen masks would not allow them to operate .
 Pressurized cabins had previously existed but they had only been on experimental planes . Prior to this pressurized cabinins had existed but were only on experimental flights .
 No discussion of innovation and technology during World War 2 would be complete without the most devastating advancement of the war . NUCLEAR POWER T .
 There are debates as to its safety for people and the environment, especially after disasters like Chernobyl and Three Mile Island . However, there are debates about its safety .
 The weapon was developed as a retaliatory weapon which was used by the Germans near the end of the war . It was used as a last-ditch effort to turn the tide in their favor . The Germans used the weapon to try and counter-attack in the last few years of
 It was able to target cities and arrive in a matter of minutes, silently causing massive destruction . The terrorist group is able to arrive in minutes and arrive silently causing destruction .
 The rocket’s developer Wernher von Braun surrendered to the Americans . This led the rocket's developer to surrender to the American government .
 The effort soon grew into the MIT Radiation Laboratory, or “Rad Lab,” which by 1945 was employing some 4000 people . By 1945, the Radiation Lab had employed around 4000 people, including some 4,000 people .
 The combination of small-cavity magnetrons, small antennas, and high resolution u allowed small, high quality radars to be installed in aircraft .
 Republican nominee says he first grew concerned about nuclear missiles in 1969, when he was 23 . From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia .
 Trump's uncle would tell him, "There are things that are happening that could be potentially so bad for ' the world’” Never mind that the nuclear capability had been around since before before Donald was born .
 Zlin, Czechia Ivanka with high cheek bones, recessed jaw, and 5 foot 11 like myself and like Jack of Twitter born NOVEMBER 18 AND 5 FOOT 11like my father and I both .
 FOXP2 does not show in Sleeper Agents Secretive ONA Research under Sidney Gottlieb . If taken oo the lab could take good-track-record DNA for groomed Ge Kilgallen and Ivanka Trump . Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner birthdays are not in the
 Her concerns grow after she catches her flancé and Maria making eyes at each other while dancing arta tuite Artdrews . Each together to the “Laendler,” an Austrian folk dance .
 Former friends, colleagues and associates say the first daughter will be contemplating how to maximize her political capital . Whether that means an actual run for office, or a gauzier influence in Republican circles . President Donald Trump still holds enormous political sway .
 Pompeo moved to Wichita, Kansas, in 1998, where he and three other West Point friends acquired three aircraft-part manufacturers . Pompeo and the others acquired aircraft-parts manufacturing companies .
 Brechbuhl and Stradinger left the » company shortly after it was founded . Pompeo and Bulatao continued to work for the company until the 1950s .
 In 2006, he sold his interest in the company, Nex-Tech Aerospace, to Highland Capital Management .
 Pompeo then became president of Sentry ' International, oilfield equipment manufacturer that was also a partner of Koch "" Industries . Pompeo was also president of the company that was a partner with Koch Industries .
 What Mr Pompeo, Mr Kushner and the other Bilderberg attendees actually say to i each other will be a mystery to most of the public . The meeting’s use of ; the Chatham House Rule, which states that although attendees can tell the public what was discussed,
 The idea, he "" said, was to encourage officials and experts to speak frankly together, in private . It's actually not a rule of secrecy, it’s a rule . from an era when everything was secret, he said .
 It is possible that he was hired to replace Donald Barr, in some way . It is also possible that it is possible he was replaced by Barr .
 This report was partially sourced and assembled from many net sources including Rivero, Russell Stepanchak, etc. This report is partially sourced .
 My Illuminati | Vatican and Zedon, ee 5 father and Geneticists | Windsors Krutchev, mother and United States . i Communism it. i Communism . i communism it.i Communism it .
 King Edward VIII had daughters with Maria Kutschera . Stuttering Chemist Speech Therapist was close to Royals, then CIA Scientist Gottlieb .
 The fact that such an attack might have taken place so close to the White House is particularly alarming . The Pentagon and other agencies have reached no clear conclusions on what happened .
 He had been shot at, ducked under rocket fire, and had shrapnel whiz by uncomfortably ‘close to his head’
 1 Polymeropoulos felt terrified and 1 utterly helpless for the first time . But that night, ' paralyzed with seasickness in the ia ' landlocked Russian capital, 1 .
 Dozens of American diplomats, spies, and government employees posted abroad were suffering in much the same way he was .
 There are said to be photos of Ann Dunham on Waikiki Beach taken in or about July 1961, when she is supposed to have been in her third trimester .
 Media have not yet talked to fellow students, but it can’t be August |long .
 JFK and Malcom X archive data appears in both JFK's phone conference and planning for April 1962 Futurism Aerospace Boeing Seatle Glorian Birthday . JFK and Donald Barr with experimental monkey at White House .
 The DNA from the Donegan family during my Dec 13 | surrogacy birth for the Barack Obama experiment was from my mother’s side of my parentage 18 Nov |2 year developmental psych report and JFK dead, likely not agreeing to the Free Masons MENA Airport plan for
 Tensions between the military and communists increased in April 1965, when Sukarno endorsed the immediate implementation of the PKI’s proposal for a ‘fifth armed force” consisting of armed peasants and workers . The PKI proposed a “fifth force’ consisting of
 Glorian Donegan born Dec. 13, a FOXP2 Windsor Dystraphic (Kings Speech speech defect, Borderline Personality Disordor, high sexual inclination also date of Lorretta Fuddy crash Obama birth certificate also date .
 As always CIA Sidney Gottlieb as CIA including in getting Hawaii as the 50th United States State at the same time, overthrowing the socialists and labor movements in Hawaii . Big Money have caused famine and Sleeperseym thug stalkers the poor resent the poor .
 Powers served in the U.S. Army Air Corps during World War II from 1942 to 1945 . Powers was a military veteran who served in World War Two . Powers served as a member of the Air Corps .
 According to the book Mortal Error the shot that killed Kennedy was from the car with George Hickey and David Powers . The book says the shot was fired from a car with Hickey, Powers .
 January 27 1962 death of 7 members Nation of Islam and Ronald Stokes . An operable abdomen and a new test procedure are among the reasons for the operation .
 Eva Ban celebrated her 1 year birthday on August 19, 1962 with Evan Ban at Manhattan Beach area . Obama Jr. exulted in the warmth and love that went with his Eva Ban mother .
 Patriot Act, executive orders, and NDAA combined to create government mistake coverup capabilities as well silencing leakers like Jen Moore, Micheal Hastings, Adinan Kashogi, George Webb, or create CIA backed attacks on people like myself .
 To justify a general conclusion, requires many observations, even where the subject may be submitted to the Anatomical knife, to Optical glasses, to analysis by fire, or by solvents . The need for Reason.
 "I advance it therefore as a suspicion only, that the blacks, whether originally a distinct race, or made distinct by time and circumstances, are inferior to the whites in the endowments both of body and mind," he said .
 It is not against experience to suppose, that different species of the same genus may possess different qualifications, says author . Different species of same genus, or varieties of same species, may have different qualifications .
 Amy Harmon is an American journalist . She says Watson is leading the Human Genome Program . Watson is one of the world's largest genome sequencers .
 He left within weeks of the announcement that the NIH would be applying for patents on brain-specific cDNAs . He left the NIH within weeks after the announcement .
 James Dewey Watson was born in Chicago, IIl., on April 6th, 1928 . Watson was the only son of James D Watson, a businessman, and Jean Mitchell . Watson eee es James Watson, eee . Watson is the son of a businessman .
 Among his collaborators were Alfred Tissiéres and the French biochemist Francois Gros . He also worked on the biochemistry of life-saving techniques .
 He is also a consultant i to the President’s Scientific Advisory Committee . He says he is a consultant to President Obama's scientific panel .
 Watson is unmarried and Watson is married . Watson has been awarded the John Collins Warren Prize . Watson is the only person to win the award for the most prestigious prize .
 Two Bombs refers to the atomic bomb and the intercontinental ballistic missile ICBM . One Satellite refers to an artificial satellite . Two bombs refers to atomic bombs and the ICBM, while One Satellite is artificial satellites .
 Donald Barr was an Office of Strategic Services agent, an American educator, and a writer . He served as the headmaster until June 1974 .
 Fox Newscasters will pretend they are my pornography, not that I simply watch the news . James Paul Donegan, Glorian Donegan and Jen Moore will be the next generation of Fox News .
 Foundation X A very secret Illuminati world program I think is gene forming at the highest levels of secrecy, 15 trillion in U.S. dollars . The Trumps and other families like the Trumps are making a lot of money and skimming . Foundation X is a very secretive Illuminati world
 The Clintons and Governer Huckabee of Christilanity] works, butt it really does not . The Clintons are the governor of the state .
 Kennedys President John Fitzgerald Kennedy @UFK.ISTH. 1961 . Santa Monica, Venice, LA, Muscle Beach .
 Schwarzenegger married Maria Shriver on April 26, 1986, in Hyannis, Massachusetts . Schwarzenegger was born in Thal, Austria in 1947 .
 Ed Donegan was born November 9, 1915, Westminster, MD, and died January 18, 2011, in Bethesda, MD . He was a member of the House of Representatives in Washington, DC .
 In the self reported case of strong emotions Katherin Eunice reported concerning her body image that could be related to Borderlline Personality Disorder . In the case, strong emotions particularly surrounding polarization detection remediation tendencies .
 In her new book, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Arnold 1 SC warzenegger’s daughter, Katherine Schwarzenegger, delves into her own life to help other girls and women develop a healthy body image .
 The December 13 daughter is exhibiting strong emotions and possible Borderlin Personality Disorder in internal struggle . Take a realistic, and happy, look in the mirror to see your daughter .
 He has the speech and writing symptoms, as Albert Eisnstein and Adolph Hiter did, and many other Germans, Austrains, Cheks, and others had including Juliana Pelleetier the Mitochondria lady .
 The House of Windsor is the reigning royal house of the United Kingdom and the other Commonwealth realms . The Windsors are the reigning British royal family .
 The dynasty is originally of German paternal descent . It was a branch of the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, itself derived from House of Wettin . The dynasty succeeded the British monarchy following the accession of King Edward VI, son of Queen Victoria and Prince
 TEK. a Edward VII of Wales has gene and was r EVII to thought to be Jack The Ripper . Edward VII was thought to have been Jack the Ripper in the early 1900s .
 Prince Albert Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was born to Victoria von Teck, Princess of Wiirttemberg, and her husband George V . The German boy who would become George VI was a sickly and fearful child prone to tears . His GV brother
 That's why he was crying a lot, that’s why he stuttered and stammered . That’t why he had a bad temper, that's why I was crying, and why he used i vulgarity,” she said . She added that he
 Second person said he had come from the Mars base and that he was one of FIFTETEEN i COMMANDERS, who made their way among the moon bases .
 Another child, Mary Beth Butt, who lived for only 10 days, is buried beside Mary Elizabeth Holdsworth Butt at the Glen Rest Cemetery in Kerrville, Texas .
 Great Leap Forward and Communist GDP Eugeni Big Money have caused famine and Sleeperseym Thug Stalkers the poor resent . Manufacted by a world peace movement that would be the future of “so called Negroes” backfilling into world populations European genes tied
 The first version of the council was created by Congress in 1958 and chaired by President Dwight Eisenhower . The council is the first of its kind .
 Other ; members included the Secretaries of State and Defense, the NASA Administrator, the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, plus up to four additional ; members chosen at President’s discretion .
 i Edward C Welsh was the first executive secretary of the NASC . He was appointed in 1961 by President John F Kennedy . The NASC was created in 1961 .
 Symington helped draft the 1958 legislation that created NASA and the : NASC . Symington spent the 1960s as the principal advisor to the White House on space issues . He also helped draft legislation creating NASA and helped draft NASC legislation .
 Ed Donegan was with Lisa too as a young play partner when he was younger . He has a lot of memories of times spent at Uncle Gerald’s house .
 Prouty wrote that he believed Kennedy’s assassination was a coup d’etat . He wrote that there is a secret, global ‘power elite’ which operates covertly to protect its interests .
 Grand Duke Nicholas’ father was heir apparent to the Russian throne as the dH second but eldest surviving son of Emperor Alexander II of Russia . Nicholas was Grand Duke of Russia, the son of Alexander II, who died in 2011 .
 Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria-Hungary paid a state visit in April 1897 that was a success . The visit was the first state visit of the Emperor to visit Hungary .
 Dmitri Feodorovich Trepov was ordered to take drastic measures to stop the 1 revolutionary activity in St. Petersburg, Russia . He was also ordered to stop a number of revolutionary activities .
 Grand Duke Sergei was killed in February by a revolutionary’s i bomb in Moscow as he left the Kremlin . He was killed by the revolutionary's I bomb in February .
 Under pressure from the attempted 1905 Russian Revolution, Nicholas II issued a manifesto about the convocation of the State uma, known as the Bulygin Duma . The manifesto was initially thought to be an advisory organ, initially thought of being advisory .
 Tsar pledged to introduce civil liberties, provide for broad participation in the State Duma, and endow the Duma with legislative and oversight powers .
 Further complicating domestic matters was the matter of the succession . Alexei in 1913 Alexei died in the arms of the Russian Empire .
 Prokhor Moshnin (IIpoxop Mo.Huy) is one of the most renowned Russian saints . He is venerated both in the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Catholic Church .
 The previous year, it had been suggested that if he were 1 aoa the imperial couple would beget a son and heir to the throne .
 The freedom of the press, protected by the First Amendment, is critical to a democracy in which the government is accountable to the people . The First Amendment protects the freedom of press .
 A criminal deep state has emerged operated by cronies to cover crony misconduct . The press will never out the secret state, the deep state, and their loyalties such as Vatican, Bush, Free Masons, others . Those who govern secret programs and secret agendas protected, not
 Leroy Fletcher Prouty was born in Massachusetts on 24th January, 1917 . Friend to and Second Line of Troops to President John F Eames and the Donegans .
 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . oversaw the United States military’s policy-making in . the Korean War .
 He was also a senior director of a government and military marketing organization . He says he's been in the military for more than 30 years .
 I believe the totality of information in this book, the photographic evidence, the witness lists, the means, motives, and opportunities of those tied to misuse of my genome, explain and prove the case of illegal trafficking of my DNA and conspiracy against my rights as well as murder and terrorist acts
 I have watched inside custody and outside custody fake symptoms created in my . Bipolar ‘pressured speech,” Bipolar Delusions (actually rational beliefs made hard to prove,) and anti-social pictures of women in public .
 In the fight of our lives thinking the U.S. was porcelain and finding out it needed a flushing not yet done. The United States needs to be flushing, says President Obama .
 A Bizarre Espionage Buzz Invading My Life Precipitated My Research Into Espionage Agency Interest in my DNA Trespass Using State Capabilities . Home long con set Not actually My Home Claims Iam a participant by peeping into the location I am there .
 Law Abiding Espionage at home alone, unsafe from home invasion, and socially sabotaged . Garbage made to incfluence women in the fog .
 Chief Jeff Jaran moved to 1 Provincetown from Bow, N.H., and was directed by Town Manager Sharon Lynn to “professionalize the department’s operations . Jaran had been directed by Lynn to i ‘professionalize’ the department .
 Jaran may have been baited to lash out . Town counsel is obligated to tell the selectmen about it, Tom Donegan said .
 I assert the assets seized for the genome usage rights is a source of black budget for CIA operations the adult entertainer environment, creating forged (black market/black money) property rights to biological or other assets . Under blackmail the real Edward Donegan would have no reason to or no expectation
 A crisis actor working for church charities does something wrong, while identified as Edward Donegan by similar clothing, then concedes to harming his fellow church goers . I have nothing to do with any of these people, but because I am impersonated that impersonator moves my genome into charities and
 MKULTRA never ended and this is part of the Stalking the Church Committee hearings on, Espionage units conducting impersonations and even surrogacy or other operations using adult entertainers . The Stalking Church Committee hedl hearings are on, impersonation and surrogacy .
 White set up one of the craziest MKUltra projects known inside the agency as Operation Midnight Climax . Later, White was moved to San Francisco, where he set up another MKUltra project that was known in the agency's files .
 MKULTRA, MKOFTEN, and Midnight Climax focus on Genetics experiments studying, isolating in control tests . The experiments seem to be Eugenics science spanning generations since the 1920s in clandestine Rockefeller and Tavistock Institute research .
 Subversion diverts in a downward direction a normal persons normal life by Criminal Harassment Under Color of Law, politically or religiously motivated but politically motivated but using things like KOMPROMAT planted and other forms of sabotage .
 Subversion by MKULTRA is “Happy Slapping’ recovery from Diabetes by interfering with lean meat purchases, etc., then in the fight arresting me and calling me paranoid and calling him paranoid and unable think for myself (an actual medical diagnosis) and the United States Dept of
 Espionage based Gangtalk plants evidence on the victim, me, to be used to dupe others, targets of the disinformation, such as Dominatrices who believe the planted evidence about me . Both reasons. ‘very, very, very difficult to deal with’.
 Illegal, criminal, and fraudulent activities of actors, in the United States State actors, plant evidence and use various schemes to victimize and stigmatize me in Criminal Harassment Under Law and Conspiracy Against Rights, which should result in the death penalty for those in the Espionage conspiracy against my
 Fake Heroes at the Scene were the REAL exploiter of children . The “hunt for the real photograprher” was a pony hunt for me, taking away the suspicion from them themselves .
 It is said to be said to me this is all part of fighting white supremacism and white separatism . Repeatedly I say this is what triggered both white suprematism and separatism in me . The video was released on Friday night .
 The only problem in clear text, the real world, is she stepping in front of my shopping cart though never the less, the Legend is created .
 Information Doppelgangers In Russia are designed to gain Reflexive Control of Targeted Leaders including in this case, Dominas who will reject Rx .
 Edwin Anderson Walker experienced combat during the Korean War, commanding the Third Infantry Division’s 7th Infantry Regiment and serving as a senior advisor to the army of the Republic of Korea .
 President Eisenhower offered Walker command of the more than 10,000 troops in Augsburg, Germany, in the 24th Infantry Division . Walker accepted the offer of command in the division .
 Christopher Asher Wray is an American lawyer who has served as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation since 2017 . Wray replaced fired FBI Director James Comey as Director .
 Barr realized Evanina was being suggested as a replacement for Wray, » he left the room . Barr said Evanina would be a replacement, then left .
 Whether I should have received grant to compare DNA studies with Information Science is perhaps a matter of debate . I should've gotten the FOIA copy of the grant that WAS given as I requested . I was allowed to APPLY For grant without arrest threat .
 His father was born ; near Baranavichy in Belarus and emigrated ; to the United States in 1921 . His father emigrated to the U.S. in 1921 and was born .
 Forty-four American colleges or universities, 15 research foundations : took part in MKULTRA . I believe more media and politics and businesses have been involved in MKultra .
 Special-ops were photographed all over the site of the Boston Marathon bombing before, during and after the attacks . This is evidenced by the existence of ghost images appearing in etween still photos in the so-called video as a transition effect is applied .
 You form a shell company meaning a business that exists only on paper, with no employees, no products it makes or sells, no revenue, nothing except maybe a bank account and some assets . It offers a convenient way to launder your money and evade law enforcement in the United States .
 When someone opens a shell corporation, they’ II be required to provide the owner’s name and some basic identifying information . That means that now, when someone opens an organization, they will have to provide some basic information .
 Maybe the heir apparent will be the next king, or maybe he’ Il be overthrown in a bloodless coup by his apparently more ambitious cousin . The heir apparent could be the king's cousin .
 The keys left hanging on my window didn't open anything, but were probably there to suggest that they opened my door . The keys were probably not there to open my door, but they were left hanging there .
 IT was given a fake rock for hiding kevs while on the job at SelectQuote around this time . It was given to IT staff who hid kevs in the office .
 'Out of the blue I was also wamed to change my locks before my then estranged wife got back into town. Just out of the . way I changed my locks,' he said. 'I was also . also changed his locks before his then estranged . wife got . back into
 SelectQuote Review has been raising consumer awareness about issues at SelectQuote Insurance Services SINCE 2011 . SelectQuote review has been in the spotlight since 2011 .
 The department’s Pediatric Diversity Committee works to address these issues by recruiting and supporting pediatric residents, fellows, and faculty from underrepresented backgrounds .
 The Disputed Domain Name contains the Complainant’s "" entire mark plus a generic term “review” meaning that the casual observer is bound . to mistake the Disputed . Domain Name for a name connected with the Complainedant . The Complainants' entire
 Respondent is identical or confusingly similar to a trademark or service mark in ; which Complainant has rights; and Respondent has no rights or legitimate ; interests in respect of the domain name . Respondent's domain name has been ‘ registered and is being used in bad faith
 Confidential Informants seem to instantiate a minors exploitation ring among themselves, while they publicly use identities close to ours . Tom Dunham’s life but not tied to his life or my life, and surrounding real Edward Paul Donegan .
 This book, once called Genoracketeering now called Illuminati Dawn is being subverted . The sites I promote it on are being taken off line in part the Cyberwarfare front company Amason.com just as Tom Dunham’s web site SelectQuoteReview.com outing the
 I assert that Kamala Harris' diversity crusades may have been subsumed into a larger agenda of MKULTRA in which she and later Nueces Texas District Attorney Mark Gonzales accepted or created Deep Pockets cases against my trust fund . Harris: "I assert that she and
 Kamala Harris defeats Terrancy Hallinan, the police unjon ' favorite . Be eee . eee eee. eeee eee, eee  eee ... eeee ee .
 Terence Hallinan was an American attorney and politician from San Francisco, California . He was elected to the San Francisco City Council in 1936 . He served as the SF District Attorney .
 Harris’ “smart on crime” philosophy, also the title of her first book, exemplifies her unwillingness to please either side . Harris' "Smart on crime" philosophy, which she calls a “no-one’s on crime,” exemplifies
 As a private attorney, Harris specialized in domestic ‘ violence and youth sexual abuse cases, including those involving teenage ' prostitues . Before entering public office, as a private . attorney, he was an attorney specializing in domestic 'violence and youth . abuse cases .
 Harris continued a practice of using undercover cops to catch would-be johns i before they solicited prostitution . The practice was revealed to disproportionately target i Latino men .
 Since the 18th century, effigies have been destroyed in place of individuals who, as far as the angry crowd are concerned, have escaped justice .
 The firewood for the rallies is constant evidence plants which provoke Tom Dunham and Ed Donegan to object to the police which works towards the police favor in they are more credible, claims of planted evidence NOT credible .
 I have expressed I believe Neuman of Kink Engineering as well as Sarah Tonin may hve been victimized as well . Many large scale populations and interests have been attacked as well a the People themselves collectively . The need for this was driven by very large historical forces as invisible as gravity
 Veronic Hoffman was asked for a lark to try on a Nazi outfit and later was possible ‘forced teamed” with Larouchers at at at ATM machine . Hoffman was possible forced to wear the outfit at the end of the shoot .
 In both German and European Union law, anti-Semitism, ‘extrem’ politics, and incitement to religious/racial hatred are illegal . Yet even the brief summary below points appears to implicate Mr LaRouche a United States citizen, all of these activities .
 Forced Teaming which I am subjected to creates abusive or misleading surroundings particularly in public where a person such as myself or her may have a need to be such as a grocery store, gas station, apartment, or ATM machine . Forced Teams create abusive surroundings . forced Teaming .
 Rod Rosensteidn and FBI Director Mueller were invovled and he Bush family held the White House . The Bush family was in charge of the Bush administration . Rod Rosenstidn was the FBI Director of the FBI .
 This person has called himself a Sovereign and as he money launders rights to my genes his name is RICO . This is a schizo side of Edward Donegan, not Racketeering Influence Criminal Organizations or activities .
 Abby Is essentially kidnapped (no disrespect intended towards the foster mom) There was a lot more than a month’s worth of trouble. Police destroy evidence which would help me Police manufacture evidence to discredit me. Abby is essentially kidnapped. There was no disrespect intended .
 It is worth noting that I am limited In my ability to get comments from those involved at SelectQuote.com . Here, | detail the possibility of police involvement in a break-in to my apartment a month later .
 I have spoken to three different private investigators in an attempt to get one to interview Michelle Tan . Michelle Tan has been accused of sexual assault in the 1990s .
 SelectQuote has let slip that they can get privileged information about witnesses from the police, This looks like an improper relationship, especially given the In short when people are planted at Select Quote a Doppler Radar rebound is read .
 If it seems the white supremacist is a sex offender sexualizing non white children and thus owing them DNA, he should come to orgasm thinking of hot hollywood adult white women, and seek them out if what he says is true .
 For instance Bobby Courtney tied to a Mexican gang, has he described it to me, who was taking him to strip clubs and car dealers in my identity, Edward Donegan . Or Jimmy or Jayson Thomsposn who could have compromised the mission with their stories, or Floyd Simpson
 Veronica Hoffman was harassed and investigated as a Nazi after she was asked as a lark to try on a Nazi outfit . Hoffman was a Jewish artist who was asked to wear the outfit as a 'lark'
 A confession of me is faked thus the trust fund managed or other representation of me would be able to settle a claim upon my assets I would not agree to . Further;, a confession of myself is faked. Further; . I would rather rather rather than have a confession .
 The actions of a SIMILAR motorcycle of mine will behind my back be ascribed at MY having a peeping device on my motorcycle, in splice of culpability . Wikipedia Wikipedia Wikipedia .
 This as the splice of culpability of their peeping to my normal gym use is completed behind my back in a faked chain of events and means real and faked, spliced together . This as a splice . of their . culpability . of the peeping . to my
 Neither God nor the Devil are named as suspects . The pool area is protected from peoping motorcycles .
 Only the consistent shared space between theories is present, some peeper is in the area, a requirement of a theory that I am the peeper . This is not presented, it is hidden from me avoiding a conflict between theories .
 Any inconsistent theory whose underlying logic is classical encompasses ; all the sentences of its own language . Jesus Mosterin: The role of consistency in empirical science is to be considered as a model of consistency .
 Paraconsistent logic has shown that ' it is possible to live with contradictions and still avoid the collapse of the theory' 'Paraconsistent Logic' is a theory of paraconsistent philosophy .
 When I take UBER to the story I get an unwelcome tour of Habitat for Humanity and also an unwanted drive by of Salvation Army as the driver allegedly “ministers to me” and I call the cops .
 She finds teen tot photos, Marhsalls show and seize assets for victims fund and ee watch fund . She finds photos of her daughter and her sister in custody .
 Saturday Dez 2013 PosTeD by TOM DUNHAM IW SQ-STAM & LEAVE A COMMENT . Impostor blogging as Ed Donegan, I went to search my email for correspondence from him .
 "It's been over ten years since Ed sent me an email, and I wanted to make sure | remembered everything correctly," she says . "It was over 10 years ago when Ed sent an email to me," she writes .
 As Tom Dunham is researching ongoing Confidential Informant impersonstors of me run by police, the dates of his activites could not be known to him, not knowing even my or my mothers birthday .
 Dopple of me is caught as a child porn perv and the FBI are called, I was not in the state . I was caught at a Free Mason Shrimp Boy Chow run massage parlor . I did not attend the event .
 Tom Dunham has tracked down credit report errors tying him to the identity of a Catholic Priest in a pedophilia scandal . Dunham: "My turst fund is billed though by the Masons who c DID get a massage. y Tom Dunham" Dunham: 'I'm not a priest.
 There is also Thomas Meyer, the Catholic priest who was listed as a pedophile as part of a civil settlement . Meyer was listed in a lawsuit against a Catholic priest .
 Rudy2’s Multilingual Blog APPEAL TO ALL VICTIMS WHO CORRESPONDED WITH THE LATE DARRIM DAOUD in ENGLISH+ESPANOL+ITALIANO . Please disseminate this far and wide, and post
 Espionage activities intrusions into U.S. Political systems and economic espionage against the USA including in violation of federal law . The funding source of multinational espionage activities is the funding source .
 This theft, through open and c d d landestine methods, can provide foreign entities with vital proprietary economic information at a fraction of the true cost of its research and development, causing significant economic losses .
 Homeland Security Investigations is a critical investigative arm of the Department of Homeland Security . HSI is a vital U.S. asset in combating criminal organizations illegally exploiting America’s travel, trade, financial and immigration systems .
 One of the theories of this book and MKULTRA is to take loyal people and be psychologically provocative enough that the person is driven to madness, in fact, so mad, they will attack the flag worn by the person provoking them to anger .
 Former CIA analyst George O’Toole wrote about a connection between the CIA and the LEIUs . An organized stalking victim is systematically isolated and harassed in a manner ' intended to cause sustained emotional torment while creating the least-possible amount ' of evidence of stalking that would be
 False Confession, asking me to restart services I already had as though in the past I abused the services or environment, when in actuality is canceled in-explicitly as though the computer malfunctioned in membership database, etc., It looks to others my resigning up for services
 Impersonator is conducting the Acts Abusive to females, exploiting of females . Piggyback and my being present create KOMPROMAT, Compromising photos, a Dopple will be chased from the scene, as a fugitive of harming the minor .
 Fifty Shades of Grey the HTML colour chart * believe that we should #1C1C 1C’s #6E’6E6E is far more obvious . The HTML colour colour chart is the result of a colour chart .
 "People started swinging chairs at me in psych wards and saying “I am a racist and proud of my race” to start an argument," she says . "I am not a racist. I am a proud person," she adds .
 Mercenaries with Bird Dogging fame jobs of me are actually bird dogging for the Illuminati families . Illuminati families are in genetics rights thefts and coverups, he says . Most are white, and most are part of a team victimizing them .
 As Landlords and the community hear of the actions of Tx who acted under my identity the conditions I live under. Tx, retarded harmer of Rx, me next to Tx females . Tx .
 This dilemma exists in circumstances where agents are motivated to act in their own best interests, ‘ which are contrary to those of their principals,‘ This is an example of moral hazard .
 A white male is defamed in the course of it . It was the charity who staged it all though and it was not a white male .
 Bizarre morons were swarming me in now what I call a bizarre moron . These are all violations of my Human Rights, and all upon false pretexts of substance .
 At the time I was being fired from Wells Fargo a few months after 9/11 my father was out visiting who also lived in California and we were sitting in the lobby of Fox Plaza Apartments where I had been set to move into on a signed lease to a 22nd floor apartment
 At one time I walked along Kemey Street to the BART train pulling up my sweater “no gun” as they were making bulling gestures towards me as they seemed to be trying to provoke a fight . They did seem a times law enforcement and at one time appeared to be
 As I pointed out the the nuns at Mother Teresa’s when I arrived i Corpus Christi, the people around me, are the dupes of these people, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Mark Gonzales, Greg Abott, Donald J Trump are the heads of Executive Government who are in position to utilize Government for arbitrary illegal acts . Trump is the president of the United States . Gonzales and Abott are the three heads of the Executive Government .
 Pizzagate to be veneer over a much more dangerous ‘non white lie” mission of deadly at any cost coverup of JFK assassination by the Illuminati . The Birther Conspiracy Theory that a criminal enterprise Deep State built around the CIA and Clintons and Illuminati are trying with
 A shakedown scheme operated on that property (Pizzagate) and a Nueces Behavioral Health worker working for a new DA who was “so wonderful” wanted to have all sorts of chance conversations with me, at random about “colors, people and Hegal
 Landlords Jim Volcelka, Mac Lamar Properties (Casa Linda and Princess Apartments) William Ruiz Capitola Califronia: "When I was at the Salvation Army they used the forged narrative system EVERYONE uses"
 Ruiz verbally assaulted me repeatedly when he went to use the shower the floor was still wet from when I used it and it was a flood condition . Ruiz said he was assaulted repeatedly by Ruiz when he used the shower .
 A lane that does not have traffic rapidly moving in an out (far right lane) provided some stability at times from constant lane changes . Similarly while driving him to the hospital I pointed out picking a lane that doesn't have traffic moving rapidly in the out (Far right lane).
 Hispanic/black self victimization cottage industry in this toilet pueblo supports Doppelgangers of me doing the harm and racket social justice representation of me pleading me guilty to the activities harming their clients and charging my genome in unreported activities of furtive money laundering .
 A scuzzy black from the kitchen area says vaguely to the room “Your order is going to be at the window service” and a teen with a tiara is there in tight leggings . A guy like me is at the glass storefront window, not the food
 I began to realize allegedly I had left with the hookup though I was just as always doing the normal business in the establishments normal operation . Someone else concatenated some other act or some other transaction on top of that, not my own, and either intoned something vaguely towards me
 "My own family and other U.S. people as victims of this plan," she says . "The plan motivated by the dark secrets of genetic racial engineering in the past," she writes .
 Yet ap detaite of Gcalfi's sutiden death tickled in Sunday, — mtedect was found dead 2 his poor ating retort by Storts cwien .
 The ARC of Northern Virginia and an Epstein is tied to Pizza Gate and my mother’s trust fund . IQ Research is tied with Pizza Gate, the ARC of . Northern Virginia, an Epstein .
 Jim Volcelcka described to me he took the ASVAB at a Military Entrance Processing Center but then decided not to enlist . He described how he took it at the entrance to the military but later decided to not enlist .
 Police say clothes were stolen from two locations and voice prints were faked . Voice prints were also faked in both locations .
 CIA hits on me and on Jen Moore clearly directed at covering up the JFK RFK Marilyn Monroe and Malcom X murders by he CIA . Hundreds of others murdered are a long string of unsolved murders by Espionage state-actors acting for personal interests .
 The sail follows the mast close to even with the line of the hull of the boat . Sailing into the wind, towards the rule of law, the sail sails towards the wind .
 In reality, a sail a few degrees off true-wind, directly into the wind, the wind must move around . The longer path around the outside of the shape of the sail from the inner path allows a low pressure in front of the boat to pull the sail forward .
 In that path the sais position is fixed by the pressure of being off from the wind just a bit pushing the sail away from the boot and the Main Sheet rope, a line pulling the back of the sail towards the boat .
 A racial research element was part of the shift and is part of sociology . At least for the the the Jim Donegan Glorian Gainey Donegan Edward Paul Donegan family . The family of the Donegans is proud of their heritage .
 I am a firsthand witness to the events surrounding the death threats, Ms. Williams says . I am not a stranger to death threats. I'm a first-personly witness to events surrounding her death threats . I'm not sure where the threats came from .
 Moore was at and filming and documents as it pertained to my family history and a criminal racket operation she had received death threats for reporting . Moore was filmed and documents related to her family history, and documents . Moore's death threats were death threats .
 Jen Moore pointed her camera at the location my mother and I live at not far from you coroner’s office in Arlington Virginia (850.850) Virginia . Her mother and daughter live at the same location .
 She was talking about famous celebrities who had contact with Nazis such as the Bush family prior to hard steers into dangerous territory the Nazis began to embrace .
 Jen Moore was by the documents she left and the connection to my family and the history of my family fighting these mob forces openly and online. Jen Moore's family fought the mob forces online.
 It is likely both the county I live in, powerful politicians, and the FBI itself would rather the truth of Jen Moore’s death be buried deep . But it does relate to criminal rackets backed by powerful political forces, political forces which have much to lose .
 Espionage is the placement of invisible rocks to the path of sovereignty of Nations by non national or international interests . The flow of Nations of the world are controlled by the invisible rock .
 In accounting, the term slush fund describes a general ledger account of commingled . funds to which all manner of transactions can be posted, with debits and credits cancelling each other . Slush funds are described as 'slush funds'
 Tx is being trafficked in the Mental Health System for fertility rights, who is > Pl) 0:19/7:20 "" See @ OO Al U3 10.3 .
 The idea was not for Persia to conquer Greece with Barrack Obama Jr. with the Saudis and United States to conquer Persia, but for Persia, the idea was to conquer the kingdom of Greece . As a Xerces and of mixed race the idea of Persia being conquered by the U.
 The idea was not for Persia to conquer Greece with Barrack Obama Jr. with the Saudis and United States to conquer Persia . As for the idea, the idea was for the Saudis to conquer the Greeks and the U.S. to conquer Persian Persia .
 The Department of Defense black operation documents are retyped here from earlier MS World documents . Understanding the early days of August 2018 is a key piece of the puzzle .
 I had thirty days at Capitola with William Ruiz where I compiled money laundering racketeering Slush Fund kited genome value documents that contaned videos posted to YouTube and three MS Word documents with additional and cross referenced material .
 All the data was moved around by posts to YouTube, emails to 1701 Studio Auston rope work studio, Genetech which was involved, Fetlife BDSM Site legal services, and various police departments .
 Jen Moore alludes to being co-opted by the “Special Counsel” and perhaps she meant Rod Rosenstein, I don’t know, she did not use a name . Jen Moore refereed many of my documents which at times she alludes . at times were co
 A dopple of me at a Home Depot somewhere else can pickup my switched out identity and contiue as me in St. Louis or elswhere .
 Document is some MS Word docs and Youttube videos I did and link to here . Screen shots I placed into the Word docs on the black budget kited funds in RICO operation, and some excerpted text .
 The complexifying elements are that emezzelers have captured funds into bank accounts tied to them but falsy claimed are actually mine . Emezzels use Identity Theft and other Fraud tactics to hold, and money launder the funds due to me but held by others .
 I have no verbal, financial, or any other account of the financial accounts but others use identity theft to create the cover story . I am aware of the money and I am spending out of it. I am using identity theft, he says . I have been charged with fraudulently
 e Identity Thieves are using impersonations of me to engage in despicable and politically defaming conduct . Chris Lloyd of Orinda California appears to be central to this illegal scheme . The identity thieves have impersonated me on numerous occasions .
 A bike other than my bike, but of similar description, in an otherwise empty parking lot, is spying on women of the gym . PICTURED: A bike that is similar to my bike is in an empty lot .
 The impersonators themselves are both engaging in the despicable conduct and agreeing to be blackmailed socially by dominatrices who will “punish them” by making them give money or other assets to blacks . Rarely and non-exploitatively I do use a forward facing dash
 The embezzled money is turned over to “above board” dominatrices such as Kora Kaine, Anastasia, Veronica Hoffman, and adult toy suppliers in a money laundering operation to semi legitimate businesses or donations .
 If I consider buying a car an look for one or request one from my trust fund, vehicles I am considering will be driven near me, pause, then drive away as though I am examining them . If you're looking at a car, look at it as though you're examining it
 Spoof phone calls will reach my phone making it seem I am being asked to authorize and am involved in some vehicle purchase which I am not . I conjunction with this unrelated spam phone calls makes it seem to be related to some vehicle purchases . I can't be bothered by the unrelated spam
 embezzlers will buy the vehicle as though authorized by me, keep it for themselves, and conceal it from me, says President Obama . Embezzling is a form of deception, he says . The president has been accused of covering up his losses in the past .
 I suspect a second transaction is later made by an impersonator of me which will access the embezzled account rather than my account . The impersonator will then access the account of the impersonator to access the bank account .
 The impersonator will then leave the store or gym with the planted female for the “good time” although the innuendo was said towards me at the point of sale . There is law enforcement or Secret Service, DOD, or other internal law enforcement support based on what I
 A Motorcycle jacket [aka Ruiz “Rocket” Johny Rocket] was stolen and a chair I sat in moved to a location I was not at so an impersonator could use those items to establish an identity of me and shower peep . The Trust Fund paid for
 William Ruiz says he was using remote moinotor equipment to watch women shower . Ruiz added that while in his motorchycle jacket he was watching women shower.
 Identity Thief with email, age, birthday near me, but unrelated to me, bought property for rental property for a rental property I have nothing to do with or accounting of, but is owned by and Identity Thief of me . Identity Thief bought property in the name of an identity thief .
 The picture of me not buying anything in Corpus Christi is fused with something at a different GPS, a purchase by an identity thief, for a fake record that I did buy something . An identity theft bought something from funds and an account not disclosed to me .
 I was in Corpus Christ, Texas Home Depot, and nowhere near Missouri Home Depot .
 Photos of where Dopples of me operate, Arsons to those areas afterwards in sevarl cases, and misspellingg domain confusion or brand confustion tricks to hijack my identity .
 I believe I am and since 2003 have been studied as a “White supremacist terrorist” as has been my music scene Goth/ Fetish/ Industrial . My picture of my at a goth fetish club was not a normal “Klu Klux Klan” photo in any
 Tom Dunham, myself, and Veronica Hoffman were all in that scene and attending events together . Tom Dunham: "Tom and Veronica" Dunham were all part of that scene. Tom Dunham was a big part of it.
 Ed Donegan enslaved as needing help of thirs parties who will concede to the blackmail, and not tell REAL ED DONEGAN they are and conceding to blackmail . Ed donegan is enslaved as he needs help of others who will help him .
 On Sunday, with Joseph in Toronto, she took advantage of a brief absence of the same friend who'd saved her before and was watching her to make a second suicide atternpt. She took her own life on Sunday night .
 She was ome of my dearest friends; Ife without will never be the same, and I know Many others will feel just the sacne . She was a friend of mine, and she was one of the most beautiful women I have ever seen .
 Fetishistas are planning a celebration of Veronica's brief but stellar contribution to our world . Please send your Veronica stories and pictures to tomy@thefetishistas.com and we'll publish as many as we can .
 Dani Daniels and Riley Reid Mo on Olivia Lua Lua Passes Away Sex on julie Kay featured in latest from WeFuckSlackGirts com Top Posts . Dani Daniels & Riley Reid mo on Jada Stevens & Riley Daniels on OliviaLua Lua Passing Away Sex .
 CIA and others tap into the rights to my genome by changing the chain of events, Peter Steele style, in acts towards me changing the public event with actors . CIA 'taps' into rights to the rights of my genome, in the 'Peter Steele style' of the Peter Steele
 Police observe the spectacle of me at the grocery line with people with me I can’t get away from me . I am mobbed at grocery lines as people claim we are buying groceries together as a community, and the police observe .
 Masonic businesses pay lots more to the very wealthy American/Israelis families . Masonic businesses are very popular with the wealthy families .
 In America he was a biker attorney who specialized in gettiigig Smltime defendants off . In America, he represented a group of bikers in a federal court case .
 A person who feels inferior because they are shorter than average may become overly concerned about how they appear to others . For example, a person who felt inferior because of being shorter may be overly concerned with how others appear to him .
 In 2003, the United States Supreme Court in Stogner California ruled that retroactive extension of the statute of limitations for sexual offenses committed against 1 minors was an unconstitutional ex post facto law . For example, waiting many years for an alibi ' witness to die before commencing a murder
 Military desertion has no statute of limitations . Desertion is illegal under the United States Uniform Code of Military Justice . desertion is a crime committed by the U.S. military .
 The statute of limitations in a criminal case only runs until a criminal charge is filed and a warrant issued, even if the defendant is a fugitive . The case begins with fresh DNA evidence affecting the clock as an ID’d peroson though no name .
 Some jurisdictions provide i mechanisms to initiate charges and thus stop the statute of limitations from running . When the identity of a defendant is not known, some jurisdictions have i mechanisms .
 Richard McCoy Jr. retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here sy re-use of this article . Use this article to help you understand things you need to know about the subject subject matter .
 Picture 1 of 46 in historical events photo gallery . Gannett Co. Inc. has published 46 photos of events in the U.S. history .
 Lee Oswald calling Uboat warfare center and irregular warfare including propaganda North Carolina . In the audience were family and friends, including their grandmother, Countess Agathe von Breunner Whitehead .
 On April 14, 1942, the first German U-boat fought by the American navy in U.S. waters was sunk sixteen miles southeast of Nags Head . The first U.K. Navy ship was sunk .
 North Carolina’s total of four sunken U-boats represents the most of any state . North Carolina's total of U-boat sunken is the most ever state to sink .
 He redirected his remaining warships to the northern Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea . He redirected remaining warships . Hei redirected remaining . warships to northern Atlantic and Mediterranean Ocean .
 Germany considered its attacks against the United States a success, even if they failed to win the war . Nevertheless, Germany considered the attacks a success . Germany considered their attacks on the U.S. a success even though the war was unsuccessful .
 Lee Harvey Oswald is accused of killing Oswald, a former U.S. Marine who embraced Marxism and defected to the Soviet Union . Oswald's accused killer was a former United States Marine who had embraced Marxism .
 His phone number and name appear on call slip for call from Lee Oswald from inside Dallas jail 1964, 1968, arrested for public intoxication . Diagnosed as “manic depressive, paranoid, dangerous to society” being transferred after having been taken into custody, he was shot and killed
 Lee Harvey Oswald KNEW of the TSS OSS CIA assignation plans, according to the CIA . Lee Harvey OSS plans to make Obama Jr, using Windsors, through New Orleans w/Raleigh NC DNA . #Espionage include #Legend, appearances which are faked
 Some readers may be tempted to stop reading right now, given the sheer implausibility of the tale . Some readers are tempted to give the tale a skeptical look at it .
 That the CIA would need to develop a bioweapon to kill Castro is farfetched . The CIA had a variety of poisons that would have killed him, including some that would do so without it being obvious he was in fact murdered .
 When the CIA wanted scientific research done, they were able to recruit top; notch Ph.D.-level university talent . Further, when the CIA needed scientific research, they could recruit top university talent, the agency says .
 We are supposed to believe that this particular project was carried out by a high' school dropout , a college student with no advanced science classes and a 1 fellow who had a mail order doctor’s degree from an institution in Italy and a reputable doctor who was in fact an orth
 He claimed he was going to convert a tank into a submarine to attack Castro’s Cuba . But then he also, at one point, had a large tank in his back yard which he claimed to be going to attack .
 The mice, by the way, were long gone from his apartment by the summer of 1963 . The mice are long gone .
 The plotters couldn’t supply a proper facility, so the research was done in the apartments of two members of the team . And somehow the plotters . The research was conducted in the apartment of two of the members .
 Real CIA research was done in university labs, or at secure military installations . Real CIA work was done at university labs or in secure military facilities .
 Judyth’s supposed encounter with Michaelson would have taken place when she was a first semester sophomore in high school . Judyth would have been Judyth's first year of high school. Judyth says Michaelson was a high school student .
 Given the CIA's ability to recruit top-notch Ph.D. talent, it’s a bit odd to be told that they were scouting high school students .
 The notion of injecting Castro with cancer cells is pretty far-fetched . Castro's treatment of cancer cells would be a far cry from the idea .
 "I actually believed at that time that there was nothing Dave did not know. I actually believed that there would be nothing Dave knew," she said . "There was nothing that Dave did know. There was nothing," she added .
 In medical matters like this he described this as a method he could use to commit suicide and people would think it was a heart attack . He described it as a way he could kill himself and commit suicide . He said he could commit suicide using this method .
 A document states that sodium morphate is “a ' favorite Mafia poison for centuries.” The document says it is a “favorite Mafia poison” for centuries .
 Smells like apple pie, and is sometimes served up ' in one, as to J Edgar Hoover . Smells of apple pie and served up in one .
 A poison Ferrie supposedly told Judyth about in 1963 is nowhere in the medical literature, not part of the crackpot conspiracy literature until 1975 . The poison was all over the internet by the time Judyth was sending out her e-mails circa 2000 .
 Malcolm Wallace killed JFK and the FBI used Lee Harvey Oswald’s dead hands, their guy in Russia now in Dallas shot by Ruby, to put his palm print on Mike Wallaces gun . Estes, a long-time conman who served two prison terms for his crimes,
 Mongoose McCoy was born DECEMBER 7, 1942, in the town of KINSTON, North Carolina, 80 miles South East of Raleigh NC, to Richard Floyd McCoy Sr. (1916 2008) and Myrtle McCoy , who were first cousins .
 McCoy served another term in the Army on the condition he could go to Vietnam, where he was awarded both the Army Commendation Medal and Distinguished Flying Cross . McCoy was awarded the D.C. Medal and the Army Medal in Vietnam .
 A supplementary decree outlining the definition of who was Jewish was passed on 14 1 November, and the Reich Citizenship Law officially came into force on that date .
 The Kutschera tied to Whitehad Vontrapps and the Kutswcheras tied to Franz, Herman, and Aurther Kutchera Anschluss in 1938 from Wikipedia the free encyclopedia .
 The idea of an Anschluss began after the unification of Germany excluded Austria and the German Austrians from the Prussian-dominated German Empire in 1871 .
 The Greensboro Four sat down at a segregated Woolworth’s lunch counter in downtown Greensboro, North Carolina, on February 1, 1960 . The group of African American college students sat at the counter challenging the store's policy of denying service to non-white customers .
 The act (known as fraud upon the court) is not subject to a statute of limitation . Fraud upon a court officer is found to have fraudulently presented facts to impair the court’s impartial performance .
 Officer of the court in general includes any judge, law clerk, court clerk, lawyer, investigator, probation officer, referee, legal guardian, parenting-time expeditor, mediator, evaluator, administrator, special appointee, and/or anyone else whose influence is part of
 Continuing-violations doctrine In tort law, if any person commits a series of illegal acts against another person or entity, the limitation period may begin to run from the last act in the series .
 In a strange con-incidence this book is about corrupt moles like the FBI Director and Attoeregy Genearl William Barr and others like Colin Powell . Even Trump Adnan Khashoggi Task Force wa Detective Jenn Moore died or was found dead on August 11 2018
 I suspect she died in Austin on or before August 10 2018 . She knew the covert ops power she was up against. She knew it was a power move .
 Trump has sent ICE HSPI The Traditions of J Edgar Hoover unit after child trafficking that is planting child porn in law abiding why the Dems& some R's aretrying to disband them .
 Free Mason GangStalk espionage of those already victims of Free Masons . Free Mason gang stalks out those who already have been victims of espionage .
 By being trafficked his son as well as other the Deep State FBI killer run the children . The Deep State of the FBI is responsible for the deaths of his son and other children .
 Mother & children interviewed in 2015. Has TS clearance. run the military, NSA, etc., etc., Mother and children interviewedin 2015. Mother has TS clearance .
 Captain Charles B McVay II survived the sinking, though he was one of the last to abandon ship, and was among those rescued days later . He had commanded Indianapolis since November 1944 through several battles .
 Task force launched attack on Tokyo to cover the landings on Iwo Jima, scheduled for 19 February . Two days later, the task force launched an attack on . Tokyo . The landings were scheduled to take place on 19 February.
 The mission destination was to reach Tinian a Guam Philippines area (Mariana Islands) to the south of Japan . The Mariana Islands are part of the Mariana Islands .
 Patrirician families of the Eastern Anglophile Liberal Establishment sent numbers of their offspring to the U.S. in the years following the Second World War, the patrician .
 Since the assassination of William McKinley and the advent of Theodore i Roosevelt, the power of the Wall Street group had grown continuously . Morgan had bailed out Grover Cleveland regime in the 1890’s .
 Eastern Establishment may have had its earliest roots north of Boston and in the * Hudson River Valley, but it was determined to be, not a mere regional financier . faction, but the undisputed ruling elite of the United States as a whole . Eastern Establishment .
 Board of Dresser Industries, a leading manufacturer of drill bits and related oil : well drilling equipment . Board of dresser Industries .
 Die heilige Johanna der Schlachth6fe) is a play written by the German modernist playwright Bertolt Brecht between 1929 and 1931 . Eva Kotthaus as Johanna Von Trapp who is with Franz Kutsche ra s as the butcher .
 The play was written by Bertolt Brecht between 1929 and 1931 . It was written during the period of his radical experimental work with the Lehrstiicke . Brecht's musical The Threepenny Opera was success of his musical .
 Captain George Von Trapp will meet and marry Maria Kutschera, the sister of Johanna Kutchera . He will use the Whitehead missle desinged and made by his first wife’s family business Captain George von Trapp .
 President Clinton said he loved him for his "generous spirit and his keen wit which he used to find humor in even the most challenging circumstances,” Clinton said in a statement aboard Air Force One .
 John Connally served in the United States Navy during World War II . He was part of the planning staff for operation Thorki Kristensen at around the invasion of North Africa amin the Oval Office by General Dwight D Eisenhower .
 On his release from the navy, Connally practiced law in the Alvin Wirtz law firm . Lyndon Baines Johnson, then a newly elected senator, persuaded him to return to Washington, D.C. to serve as a key aide .
 He had close ties with Johnson before his navy days . He maintained them until the former president’s death in 1973 .
 President Kennedy named Connally Secretary of the Navy in 1961 . At Johnson’s request, in 1961, Connally was named Secretary of Navy .
 Connally resigned eleven months later to run for the Texas governorship . Connally resigns from Connally posthumously in March 1968 . He resigned 11 months after Connally's resignation .
 On November 22, 1963, Connally was seriously wounded while riding in President Kennedy’s car at Dealey Plaza in Dallas when the president was assassinated . Connally suffered serious injuries in the 1963 assassination .
 A conversation with John Koshkinen 1961 * MKULTRA CIA 1958 through 1963 and beyond rpoducing Sleeper Agent Barrack Obama Jr through Harvard Skull and Bones and the Saudi Royal Family . Masquerading as charities claming harms done by political figures for actions against political figures
 Bush and ae Bush CIA MKULTRA) is likely Senator Rockefeller y Twins Studies, The Kutscheras, and CIA Operation 40 Wet Division, likely Standard Oil Bush Cheney General Shaw characters in Manchurian Candidate 1962 which are in the human trafficking and grooming of Wet Division
 On December 20, 2013, Koskinen was confirmed by the United States Senate to head the Internal Revenue Service € Jim Vocelka as Commissor of pa hoasivnaibo .
 On 6:3"" December eb 23, 2013; Koskinen was sworn in as the 48th IRS me Commissi > tistical ee vehi oner .
 His term ended on November 12, 2017, with David Kautter becoming his interim replacement, followed by Charles P Rettig as his permanent replacement .
 WVU Rockefeller Nouroscience team st to use ultrasound to treat Alzheimer's . Annuals, Conferences, surrounding Feb 20, Feb 18, Dec 13, and August 4th for World Wide Event Planning and long term work .
 Event-driven architecture is a software architecture paradigm promoting the production, detection, consumption of, and reaction to events . Jeffrey Edward Epstein January 20, 1953 AUGUST 10, 2019)
 I don't think that we have to shoot at each other, to beat each one, to curse each other and criticize each other . I think we can do better in ' this country. I think that . we can work together, to work together I don’t think that
 As a federal judge, he chaired the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders . He was forced to step down from the bench after being convicted of mail fraud .
 The manufacture of POTUS Barack Obama Jr. as a sleeper agent for Indonesia’s future secretly used celebrity tied DNA under Sidney Gottlieb and those espionage agencies and NWO NGOs are in too deep .
 The genuine birth story has come out and is clearly provable, says Obama's birth story . CIA created Obama's "birth story" CIA created a birth story that is provable .
 The story of Michelle OBama DNA and her not being inconsistent with Glorian Donegan mitochondria could be the Andrew Breitbart murder . The Clintons, the world medical Illuminati and the Clintons, could be behind the murder .
 Madelyn Dunham was a CIA officer in CIA operation ins Hawaii also becoming a United States State under a plan controlled by Sidney Gottlieb . Plan was to preempt Polynesian socialists and gain the pacific island before it became an Asian Cuba .
 White United States Anne Dunham was the Indonesian Polynesian anthropologist who would travel Indonesia with her Hawaiian born Barry Dunham . The anthropologist would travel with Barry Dunham in Indonesia .
 Nov 18 23 1963 aka Obama is 2 cover story Hawaii Birth Certificate . Feb 20 1961 IVF, Nov 18 birth, Feb 20 1 year checkup, Prelude he he Truth has been hidden .
 Judge Roll's DNA will be used for genomic study and modifications . Judge Roll will be the subject of DNA testing and other modifications .
 U.S. Press accepted or was under control of a false theory of Race promoted by the United States . The worst of Press in world history? What if the the worst of press in history?
 The First Black President Denounces Social Darwinism . Ed Donegan Birthday Nov 38.196) IVF Date Feb 20 1961 Glorian Donegan FOXP2 Dysgraphic Dec 13 Birthday .
 The Windsors of German FOXP2 Dysgraphia origin through King George V decedents like King Edward VIII work with Hitler on MKLUTRA through speech therapist Sidney Gottlieb . King Edward VII may have worked with Hitler in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Michelle Obama is actually Micheal Lavon Robisnom, a placeholder in an alleged family tree while Glorian Donegan mitochondria is still used in the Obama family . Michelle Obama tested clean of Dysgraphia at birth, and that on the maternal side, Michelle Obama .
 Mrs Rausing studied at Occidental College, a private liberal arts college in Los Angeles, at the same time as the current U.S. president .
 JFK Windsor Thorkil testing, still under the CIA creating Obama through Dept of Energy DARPA CIA work . This in turns lead to 15 Commanders of the Royal family or bastard children in Africa undergoing racial experimentation through Kings Daughters Hospital in the United States .
 As Family Databases emerge there is wetworks against King Edward VIII family in the U.S. and elsewhere . DNA from that line has to be moved into Africa with the dual purpose of closing evolutionary gaps .
 What if funding for the Deep State and its Genetic Speak Easy Al Copone corruption was money laundering the value of genes undisclosed to the public and undisclosed to their owners? What if it were organized by a Black Nationalist Deep State after DNA they allege whites robbed them of?
 We have been permitted to draw up a detailed program for rectifying your multitude of global environmental crises . We have also been f permitted to . draw up . a detailed . program for . rectifying . your multitude . of global 1 environmental crises. We have . also been allowed to draw
 Secret 1 global coalition intent on legally expulsing the present U.S. regime . New rules and regulations are being drafted and put into place for quick enactment .
 A growing body of patriotic and disgruntled 1 government employees and assorted allies clearly understood what was covertly i being done to hijack the American Republic . But the U.S. government is under attack in the wake of 9/11 .
 I asked Him to tell me what the many dark objects were 1 and He told me that these are blocks of payback, which are now coming into all a the nations of the whole Earth . I asked him to . tell me that . these were blocks of . payback which are
 My father was a TWA pilot flying the Boeing 707, Lockeed L11011, and other single enginre propeller and jumbo jets following his WWII and Korea military flight service . This book About My family history Rough Music abuse of my ordered by high authorities with something
 Howard Hughes acquired control of TWA in 1939 . He led the expansion of the airline to serve Europe, the Middle East and Asia . TWA was a second unofficial flag carrier of the United States after Pan Am .
 The Airline Deregulation Act of 1978 led to a wave of airline failures, start-ups, and takeovers in the U.S. TWA was spun off from its holding company in 1984 .
 Carl Icahn acquired control of TWA and took the company private in a leveraged buyout in 1988 . Icahn took TWA private in 1988 and took it private in 1994 . TWA was the first airline to be taken over by Icahn .
 Hilton has 18 brands across different market segments, including Conrad Hotels & Resorts, Canopy by Hilton, Curio A Collection by Hilton and Signia by Hilton . Hilton Garden Inn, Homewood Suites and Home2 Suites by Hilton are among the brands .
 The abuse of Glorian Donegan genome, racketeering it, and the treatment of me by high ranking politicians tied to that history and the subversion of me, says Donegan . Donegan: "Evidence plants and defamatory impersonations of me"
 The punishment for an offense under this subsection is A, B, C, or B . The punishment is the punishment provided in sections 1111 and 1112 . A killing, an attempt to murder, or the use or attempted use of physical force against any person, can be punished for
 A prosecution under this section or section 1503 may be brought in the district in which the official proceeding (whether or not) was intended to be affected or in the area where the alleged offense occurred, may be prosecuted .
 He explained my nickname “Ned” that was used until about 1985 as the English version of Edward. He explained it was used to be the English nickname ‘Ned.’
 “Ned” may have risen from generations of children hearing “mine Ed” as “my Ned” (an example of a process called re-bracketing). It was also told to me by my mother and relatives in the south Edward was some
 Edward Paul Donegan grew up in Marshfield MA with his father and mother, Uncle Harold and other brothers of my father . He was born Dec 13 Edward Donegan Feb20 Nov18 1961 .
 I was born the in the few years of my fathers above ground radiation testing as nuclear air force triad, LA/Hawaii, but spent about 1963 to 1973 at “the cape” with these relatives .
 Prince Phillip, Duke of York, of Kings Speech overthrew King Edward VIII, Prince Edward of Windsor . Prince Edward was friendly with Nazis including Kutcheras and Von Trapps . Prince Phillip was a friendly with the Nazis .
 e [have ADD and Dyslexia] which I believe tied to Dysgraphia in which during speech articulation or even bodily control things are intermittently rather than continuously controlled . This is often called creating a borderline between potential positions, or Borderline Personality Disorder . e .
 I was told to seek acting or speech coaching most of my life to help regulate my speech . I was also told I needed it to help control my speech. I have been told I need to seek coaching or acting or acting coaching .
 A newly “discovered” thank-you letter from King George VI to Lionel Logue has been discovered . King George V. wrote thank you for help preparing his 1937 speech .
 Logue and the Duke met for eighty-two appointments over 14 months between 20 October 1926 and 22 December, 1927 . The Duke and Logue met for over 80 appointments .
 There have been several press reports of Elizabeth helping him breathing exercises, some of which were online around the time of Elizabeth’s death .
 The College was granted royal patronage by George VI in 1948 . Elizabeth, the Queen Mother was its patron from 1959 until her death on March 30th, 2002 . Elizabeth was Queen Mother's patron .
 Dysphagia is the medical term for swallowing difficulties . About dysphagia, it is also known as a condition that causes swallowing problems .
 Dysgraphia and what I thought about my writing . I had an injury as a child chasing m brother and breaking older plate glass while a small child .
 This is what I believe the Illuminati “rescued” some Kings Daughters for and are tied to a London KE Family the Illuminati speak of and that my motehr was in that category . The Illuminati is believed to have rescued some of these women from the hands of
 Brittany Murphy starred in Girl Interrupted, NOVEMBER 10, 1977 Atlanta, Georgia, United States Died DECEMBER 20, 2009 Los Angeles, California, U.S.
 In the popular 1999 movie “Girl, Interrupted,” Winona Ryder portrays a young 32 woman who tries to commit suicide, then spends nearly a year in a psychiatric hospital with a diagnosis of borderline personality disorder .
 Winona Ryder Judi Gibbs, wife of NASCARs Joe Gibbs, was tied in some way through Penthouse magazine on the secret life of Adolph Hitler . Eva Braun, the Winsors, Kutcheras, Von B Trapps, all in pre WWII clutch which later forced the
 "I challenged them, piece by piece but it said | am making something out of nothing," says author . "I challenge them piece-by-piece but it is said | I am making things out of . nothing," she says .
 I have since lost the paperwork but there is such a applied DSM diagnosis . I'm not sure if I have ever had such a diagnosis, but there was such a DSM diagnosis.
 A weird Illuminati like site tied to Genetech “making new organisms of “level above humans” out of Zygote from Gloria . e¢ Her and my seeming expression of the FOXP2 gene and her adoption into a Bishopville DuPont atomic contractor connected home
 THe moving of Feb 20 DNA around the world by the United States DOD Tom and Mark . My brother Thomas Neil Donegan and his partner Mark Weirness were suspected by my mother of being involved in some terrible plot .
 HoP is the place to go, The top FBI are blackmailed or involved . He / health __ slept well after releasing so much of 1S, Ti) HoP . He/health slept well .
 FBI agent contractor who personally trafficked his son as well as other me with Yes |ag'cc,rs Tick children. Stygmatizing 22:55 .
 KOMPROMAT tock tick tock tock 23.00.00 .
 To brass renewed his SC and his contract,,,., coverup my family genome already in the Obamas. To coverup his family genome, I'm sure it's a coverup,” he said. “I'm sure this is a cover-up. To
 While I was at Excite@Home the election dispute was underway between Bush and Gore . The election dispute is underway .
 Already a far right person, born as including stemmed from and supported by my gay brother . Long history of non-seugitor assualts upon me throughout my life . My racial views history . Others, non white assailants .
 King Edward VIII, Queen Elizibeth II, and King Georege VI would be her father and brothers and sisters . Their principal defect seems to lie in a lack of fine control over the muscles of the J i i .
 Edward Vill Dukes oF Windle was Duke of Windsor anisiit . He was born 23 June 1894 in Richmond, Surrey . He died 28 May 1972 in France .
 Edward was kept under the strict tutorship of Hansell until almost 13 years old . I sxxcerpts of Wikipedia page r hftps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_VII[#Romances i i i Edward] Edward was also kept under strict
 Edward took the examination to enter the Royal Naval College, Osborne, in 1907 . He began his studies at the Naval College in Osborne, London .
 His role in the war, although limited, made him popular among veterans of i the conflict . His role was limited, but his limited role in i the war was made popular .
 He was withdrawn from his naval course before his formal graduation, served as midshipman for three months aboard the battleship Hindustan . He then immediately entered Magdalen College, Oxford, for which he was underprepared intellectually .
 A keen horseman, he learned how to play polo ' with the university club . He learned to play with the University club .
 George V was disappointed by his son’s failure i to settle down in life, disgusted by his affairs with married women, and was reluctant to see him inherit the i Crown . George V. was disappointed with his son's failure to settle life and was disgusted with his affairs .
 The dynasty is originally of German paternal descent . It was a branch of the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha . The House of Wettin was derived from House of Hanover, which succeeded the British monarchy following the death of Queen Victoria .
 An egg from my mother Glorian Donegan and sperm from Malcom X may have fertilized Barack Obama also on Februray 20 1961 . Obama's real birthday may be November 19 1961 .
 The man said he was one of FIFTEEN 1 COMMANDERS, who made their way among the moon bases, the Mars base and the base on Saturn, which is i really on one of the moons of Saturn according to what our Father in Heaven told me . And in
 Who the first and second person speaking were, appearently possibly King Edward VIII or relatives, someone, possibly Sidney Gottlieb was working with them. Who the second and third person speaking are, appeased possibly . possibly . King Edward VII or relatives .
 In fact what my father told me is when he had me undergo testing as a youth a rattle had dropped near my crib and that was when he finalized the decision to bring me in for evaluation . In some way my reactions had just made no sense to him, he said .
 I am sound of mind but he has been able to maneuver non whites against me for hostile abuse of psychiatry mismanagement of what should be MY assets to hinder my life and setup himself and his operatives as my victim . I stayed one extra night in NYC this kid was very sick and |
 Trump has sent ICE HSPI unit after child trafficking that is why the Dems& some R's aretrying to disband them . 'Fala know an FBI agent contractor who personally trafficked his son as well as other children'
 Free Masonry is a Ponzi 1966 Scheme of top level masons disposing of lower assets after use ‘The Traditions of J Edgar Hoover planting child porn in law abiding citizens’s .
 The FBI overthrew the DOJ and POTUS via its tools and jurisiction to be there for the crime and for the non solution to the crime . Anti Nationalism, pro QEIl, the FBI is pro-QEIl . Anti-Nationalism, anti-Q
 Prince Edward of Wales married into Donegan and Kennedy families . ‘Glorian Donegn born Dec 13 Edward Donegan Feb20 Novi8 1961 in JFK was sworn in January 20 1961 .
 I believe on February 20 1961 Barack Obama Sr. and Glorian Donegan DNA are used in an IVF experiment which also fertilized me on Feb 20 1961 . aa reel L Google knowledge panel and Wikipedia quoted here — P Kennedy Sr. aa re-election .
 Rose Kennedy was born September 6, 1888, Boston, MA . She died November 18, 1969, at age 6 . She was married to Rose Kennedy .
 Kennedy was born to a political family in East Boston, Massachusetts . Joseph P Kennedy Jr., Ted Kennedy, John F Kennedy, Joe Kennedy Jr. was born .
 Kennedy increased fortune with distribution rights i for Scotch whiskey . Kennedy increased his fortune by securing distribution rights for the whiskey .
 The couple had two sons together before separating in 1971 and divorcing in 1973 . They had two children together .
 i poisoning is “ridiculous” and “baseless,” an expert said Tuesday . “I don’t think it’s ridiculous.” i poisoning, experts say .
 Angles County coroner ruled pneumonia killed Murphy, 32, in December ; 2009, and that her husband, Simon Monjack, 39, died from the same illness five months later .
 My theory is that the alleged mother of Barack Obama, Stanley Anne Dunam was neither impregnated with a fertilized ovum nor had any other connection to Obama other being a cover story in the Seattle area .
 Project, which studied the similarities and differences of identical twins; and other children adopted into non-biological families. Project, was based on study of twins and children adopted from biological families . Project was called The Twin Twins Project .
 Soviet tactical aviation tasked Sukhoi with developing ground-attack variant of the Su-7 . Could replace the scrapped Ilyushin [1-10 pictured below].
 Soviet tactical aviation tasked Sukhoi with developing ground-attack variant of the Su-7 . The Su 7 could replace the scrapped Ilyushin I-10 .
 Ground Based Strategic Deterrent is the U.S. Air Force’s intended replacement for the Boeing LGM-30G Minuteman III ICBM weapon system . The land-based, silo-launched ICBM is the backbone of the nuclear deterrence triad .
 Boeing remains integral to keeping the Minuteman III going strong, with an average alert rate of 99.9 percent . The Minutemen III has an average of 99 percent alert rate .
 Nike-Zeus use of nuclear warheads was necessary given the ; , available missile technology . Nike-zeus used nuclear warheads to launch the Nike Zeus missile system .
 In February 1960, four black college students sat down at a Woolworth’s lunch counter in Greensboro, North Carolina, and asked to be served . They sat down in February 1960 at Woolworth's lunch counter . The incident happened in the early 1960s .
 Friends in the ""state of Washington recall her visiting with her month-old baby in 1961" Friends in Washington state recall her visit with her .
 The pilot (Colin Blakely) and his navigator are stranded with no clothes or money on a remote island . American agents disguised as developers have been dispatched to the island .
 The premise of this book is the OSS moved Arnold Schwarzenegger and his brother, Maria Kutschera with three children from the Windsors out of wedlock getting her booted out the convent, 7 step children with Captain Von Trapp,. and the Maria August Kutschersa 10
 I have long wondered the exact or real story my father first came into contact with Glorian Donegan . I now suspect it was through John Hurt, a WWII Army Air Corops intelligence officer . John Hurt was a WWII Air Force intelligence officer and served in WWII .
 James Paul Donegan from Boston grew up poor and on the “wrong side of the tracks” with his mother and father in both brutal poverty and discrimination . His parents tried to get jobs as Irish immigrants as they tried to find jobs as they did .
 He joined the Arm Air Corps as soon as he could hoping to fly and got his dream right away flying the P-51 as a recon pilot . He was a member of the Arm. Air Corps .
 Kutscheras from Gernmany in 1926 and in Raleigh Greensboro North Carolina were Glorian and Harld Gainey were too . My guess is during Army Air Corps Recon work with John Hurt, John Hurt who was workign with Captain Von Trapp .
 John HUrt Lee Harvey Oswald was trying to call before he was shot and killed in custody in Dallas Texas . Oswald was shot in custody and killed over the sleeper agent plan using Glorian Donegna DNA .
 Harold Gainey and Glorian Gainey moved into the home of Festus Gainey in North Carolina, poor farmers . Among the three less known Gainey family members were Harold, Glorian, Festus and Festus .
 Marilyn Monroe was an orphan taken by the Joseph Kennedy Sr. and kept in a shelter across from RKO in Los Angeles . Marilyn Monroe had been orphaned by the Kennedy Sr and kept at the shelter .
 FOXP2 Syndrome was under speech and language analysis and present in Albert Prince of York later King George VI and can be charismatic with a flighty lightness to thins .
 Manhattan Project Los Alamos atomic DNA testing is underway with atomic bombing follow ups, above ground test exposure and follow ups . The story moves to Los Angeles and Los Angeles where the story is told .
 In Los Angeles November 18 I am born as is Barrack Obama Jr. as this gene is tested in twins studies by royal families including in Australia and England and Saudi Arabia . The Bush family, Rockefeller, and others have tested the gene .
 It then moves to Seattle and the 21st Century Expo and Windsors and Kennedy’s there . The event will take place in Seattle and then in Seattle .
 Further Reading know of the program and have some films out telling similar stories . Jet Pilot is about James and Glorian Donegan and Love Story about JFK .
 Bush Dick Cheney Ted Cruz Sr. program and includes some births under the program as sleeper agents . Some children were born under the name of Ted Cruz Jr. as a child .
 Rockefeller Standard Oil controls Little Rock Arkansas just miles from WACO Texas . Bush and LBJ come from, and the DOD CIA influence on the state, just as Rockefeller Standard oil controls little Rock Arkansas .
 Harold Gainey would work for DuPont chemical in South Carolina and other contractors in the space race . Boeing was a part sponsor of the 21st Century Expo .
 To protect the identity of the sleeper agents coming from various family lines including the Donegans (Glorian and James and Edward, me) numerous intelligence, assassinations, and black budget operations are being carried out .
 Atlanta Georgia and Ladies Gardening Society was an outreach program for black mothers who wished to test DNA influence by experimental DNA contrived families . The society was an outreach program for mothers of black mothers .
 Lee Harvey Oswald knew of the situation and tried to call on e of the WWII military intelligence figures from USA in Germany, John Hurt to explain what was going on really. history of it, plans for commies. Lee Harvey Harvey Oswald .
 Hurt enlisted in the Army on Nov., 1929 and was released on Dec., 1945 . After he was grown, his parents later la la Hurt was released from the Army .
 His residence in 1940, when he was drafted into the Army Air Corp, was Roanoke Island, VA . According to his records and statements, he was an agent in an Army Counterintelligence Unit in Europe and Japan for 3 years during this time .
 She plugged in the call but then blocked the microphone while she called the listening room to let the 1 agents know Oswald was attempting to call out . She blocked the phone's microphone so Oswald could not be heard .
 Alveeta later testified to the House Select Committee on Assassinations | that Ms. Alveseta was killed in 1996 . She testified before the committee that she was assassinated .
 Sweeney was behaving very anxiously and she felt, from her behavior, that the agents had pressured her to abort the call and tell Oswald there was no answer . Sweeney felt pressured by the agents to abort her call and say Oswald .
 Treon only listened in and didn’t speak to Oswald, she made out a duplicate i Call slip as a souvenir for her daughter who had requested she do so .
 Moving to Missouri in 1965, where she mentioned it to a friend one day . Moving to St. Louis, Missouri, in 1965 . Moving back to Missouri, she told a friend she wanted to move to Missouri .
 He notified the Chief of Police, who | was very interested in the case . He notified him of the incident .
 Oswald had become increasingly vocal about his arrest and innocence because, up to i that point, no one had helped him and he was being denied legal representation by the Dallas Police Dept. Oswald had been denied representation by police .
 President Kennedy and Officer Tippit were murdered by Jack Ruby 12 hours before he was charged with their murders . He attempted to make the call late Saturday night 11/23/63, the day after his murder .
 Hurt served in the Army Counterintelligence Corps in Europe and Japan . His dates of service were approximately 1942-1946 . Hurt's background was that he was a member of the Army and served in Europe .
 Intelligence work involved interviewing nationals of European countries to determine if they had any connection with the German Secret Police pursuant to their requests to come to the U.S. When asked about his Intelligence work, he said he worked in Europe .
 The only work of any significanceor particular interest he did there was to stumble upon a bullion of silver which the Germans were using to trade with the Japanese .
 The three American Diplomatic Security agents, who trail all Russian diplomats in the US, began to “surge” towards Ivens causing him to flee . The three agents then began to "surge" towards the diplomat .
 Operation Northwoods proposals included hijackings and bombings followed by the introduction of phony i evidence that would implicate the Cuban government . The Cuban government was the subject of the proposals .
 The plea agreements signed by the parties would resolve both cases in court proceedings in Indiana . The plea deals would resolve the cases in Indiana.
 Ivens attended Braintree High and graduated in 1994, according to the school’s registrar and the yearbook yearbook .
 The article features a full page picture of Vice President Lyndon Johnson with his arm around Baker and reveals he was known around the Senate as “Lyndon’s boy” route was finalized on November 18 and announced to the public a few days before November 22 .
 Lee Harvey Oswald drops out of high school and joins the U.S. Marine Corps . Oswald is trained as a sharpshooter . Oswald was the first person to be killed in World War II .
 Oswald works his last day at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall . He is known to have Dept of Defense and CIA connections to manufacture documents as priting company .
 The next day he is issued United States Passport DO 92526, which will be valid for three years to all countries except Albania, Cuba and those portions of China, Korea and Vietnam that are under communist control .
 The Dallas Morning News is the first newspaper to announce the president's Texas visit in an article covering the president’s conservation tour in Jackson Hole, Wyoming .
 Dallas Citizens Council, Dallas Chamber of Commerce and Tom Thumb Food Stores meet . J Erik Jonsson, chairman of the Dallas Citizens council, and Robert B Cullum, owner of the food stores . Cullum is chairman of Dallas Chamber .
 President Obama instructs Sorrels to survey the buildings he plans to visit during the Dallas leg of the trip . The president is traveling to Dallas, Texas, for the first time .
 KTBC-TYV is the cornerstone of Johnson's extensive radio and television interests . Reporters also investigate the advertising sales and other activities of the station .
 Kennedy’s upcoming trip to Dallas had been announced to the public in September 1963 . Kennedy had been traveling to Dallas for the first time since 1963 .
 Queen Elizabeth II’s younger sister made an impression with Hollywood elites and Washington D.C. leaders like Lyndon B. Johnson .
 I Johnson is the only U.S. President out of 11 to not meet Elizabeth . The reason for Margaret’s tour have been debated, but it started as a private visit . i Johnson is only United States President to have met Elizabeth .
 According to a declassified CIA document, Ruth’s sister, Sylvia Hyde Hoke, was listed as an employee of the gency in the Falls Church, VA local directory in 1961 . The CIA document says she was listed in a local directory as a worker in 1961.
 Ruth Hyde's father, William Avery Hyde, was an insurance executive who went to work for USAID . Ruth admits that her sister may have worked for “an outfit”
 We run into Kuhn Loeb partners, or members of the partners extended families almost every time we pick a Deep State topic to research . As Job Bluth would say “Come on!”
 Louis Lichtensteinstein Strauss is a former Kuhn Loeb partner and two-time Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission . Strauss is also a former chairman of the atomic energy commission . Strauss: "There is no need to worry about the future of nuclear power in the world"
 New Jersey Governor Phil Murphy’s wife has some Loebs in her family tree, which we are still trying to figure out . Phil Murphy's wife is the wife of New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy .
 Names like Schiff, Belmonte, Slidell, and Erlanger, tend to show up whenever there is historical Deep State skull-duggery in progress in progress .
 Ferdinand Kuhn was a former NY Times journalist, OSS director, Maria DeBlasio’s boss at the Office of War Information during WWII, and free lance author . Kuhn is the author of a book about how the U.S. government used to use the
 In 1957 Ferdinand talked his way into the Secret Service Agency . He wrote a book for middle-school aged students about what the secret service does .
 Ferdinand does not show up much in the JFK files, but a few of the Secret Service F men he met with, circa 1957, do . Ferdinand was a member of the JFK Secret Service .
 Only a few Secret Service agents are mentioned by name specifically in the book .
 A few retired agents with tales of chasing down counterfeit rings . A few were retired agents . They chased down counterfeit ring members .
 James J Rowley was head of the White House detail from 1946 to 1961 . He worked for President Eisenhower in Washington, D.C. He died in 1961 .
 Descendants of the earliest English colonists are futurism and IQ gains in black typically considered to be the most representative of the Boston Brahmins .
 FOXP2 was tried White Anglo-Saxon Protestants. through GLorian Donegan with a Malcom X fertilization. They are considered Windsor DNA with the speech defect FOXP1 .
 He was the presiding officer of the infamous Hartford Convention . represented Massachusetts in the U.S. Senate . He lead in Indonesia .
 Future leader needed in Indonesia, Polynesia, Malaysia to help fight communism and the growing Intercontinental Missile Threat . Boeing Corporation and the Seattle Missile Defense area the Pacific Northwest Futurist of MKULTRA and Sidney Gottlieb and Warner Von Braun decided a test baby for Indonesia .
 Malcolm X visited Elijah Muhammad in Chicago in August 1952 . Malcolm X was released on parole in August 1953 .
 In March 1954, he Universty of expanded Temple Number 12 in Philadelphia; and two months later he was selected to lead Temple Number 7 in Harlem, where he rapidly expanded its membership . Later that year he established Knights Of Boston’s Temple Number 11; Malta ewes
 CIA asset, Don Bohning argues in his book, The Castro Obsession, that Operation 1 40 was not actually established until March 1961 . CIA asset and CIA insider Don Bohn argues that the operation was actually established in March 1961, not March 1961.
 Bohning quotes one of his sources as saying that the group’s i initial objective was to take over the administration of ‘the towns and cities liberated by the invasion force,’ and secure the files of the government’�s different intelligence services”
 The parents of Barack Obama on the white side tied to the CIA from Witchita Kansas and Settle Kansas . To hide the covert operation and facilitate Barack Obama’s implant into Indonesia a Hawaii birth was a cover story by the CIA, the parents .
 The first successful launch of a V-2 was on October 3, 1942, and it began operation on September 6, 1944, against Paris, followed by an attack on London | two days later .
 By the end of World War II in Europe in May 1945, more than 3,000 V-2s had been launched . The V-1s were launched by Germany and Italy in 1945 .
 As of 2018, in i modified versions (Soyuz-U, Soyuz-FG, and the Soyuz 2.1v 1 variant), the vehicle is still in service, having launched over 1840 times . The vehicle has launched more than 1840 times in service .
 59 years ago today Yuri Gagarin became the first human to leave Earth and travel to space .
 Over 1100 people stood up and accepted ine s div solution to the so-called Negroes Messenger Muhammad' problem . The Opus Dei Lay Miracles and also a test baby of Barrack OBama mixed W indsor Malcom X Test Tube baby .
 As Allah's Messeriger informs us, it was only approximately 70 years ago when some of our people 1 of Asia became aware of our plight and voyage to this of country Almighty God, now, is shaking the nations with t« truth .
 We are quite sure that ithas been the h pe of the Westren white man that the long-awaited Mahdi of the world would not come, for with His coming comes the death of their entire civilization . We are very certain that it has been the decision to wait for the
 A total of 50 people died, including the 49 passengers and crew on board when the aircraft was destroyed, and one resident of the house that was struck .
 After the bombers had hit their targets, the U.S. fighters were free to strafe German airfields, transportation, and other “targets of opportunity” on their returm flight to base .
 Doolittle and Lindbergh were concerned about the state of rocketry in the U.S. However, they remained in touch, with Goddard . Doolitt remained in contact with Goddard, who died in 1944 .
 Goddard's interest in aerodynamics led him to study some of Samuel Langley’s scientific papers in the 1 periodical Smithsonian magazine . Goddard's fascination with aerodynamics was inspired by Langley's work .
 Langley wrote that birds flap their wings with different force on each i Side to turn in the air . Langley said birds flap with different forces on each side of the wing .
 Goddard watched swallows and chimney swifts from the porch of his home . He noted how subtly the birds moved their wings to control their flight . Goddard was inspired by these articles .
 If a way to navigate space were to be iscovered, or invented, it would be the result of a knowledge of physics and mathematics . It made me realize that if a way was to be . is covered, or . invented, by a way of . navigating space, would be
 While still an undergraduate, Goddard wrote a paper proposing a method for balancing airplanes using gyrostabilization . Goddard wrote the paper while still in college .
 Sending a camera around distant planets, guided by measurements of I gravity along the trajectory, and returning to earth . The camera will return to earth in the next year .
 In effect he had independently developed the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation published a decade earlier in Russia . In effect, he had i independently developed a rocket equation .
 The premise of this book is the need to route the Illuminati in an all capabilities all fronts war . Wet Divisions are Dirty Wars of Leverage Troops that assassinate,. use psychological warfare, dirty tricks, KOMPROMAT, Infiltrators, Propaganda, and other acts
 Lael Brainard is an economist who has served on the Federal Reserve Board of Governors since 2014 . Brainard has served as a member of the board since 2014. Brainard served as an economist at the Fed . He has been an economist for more than 20 years .
 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development is an intergovernmental economic organisation with 37 member countries . Organisation founded in 1961 to stimulate economic progress and world trade . Tenerife-born, raised in Derry .
 In espionage jargon, a mole (also called a “penetration agent”, “deep cover agent’) is a long-term spy who is recruited before having access to secret intelligence, subsequently managing to get into the target organization . Wikipedia: A mole is
 The possibility that a top politician, corporate executive, government minister, or officer 1 in an intelligence service could be a mole working for a foreign government is the worst nightmare of counterintelligence services . Counterintelligence services fear a mole in government is a mole .
 James Angleton, director of counterintelligence for CIA between 1954 and 1975, was obsessed with suspicions that Western governments were riddled with long-term communist agents . Angleton accused numerous politicians such as Henry Kissinger, Lester Pearson and Pierre Trudeau of being communist .
 His canoe was found washed up on the banks of the Wicomico River April 28th .
 My father was a soldier he jumped out of airplanes he lived to serve people would turn to me and say you know your dad was a murderer my immediate reaction used to be you don’t know what you’re talking about . Then I’d find myself thinking was
 Mysteries no longer await explanation, I now explain them as Illuminati Muscle trying to correct and profit from illegal genomic secret operations long underway in Illuminati families and bad earlier involuntary scientific practices .
 Acts around the world called the “Deadpool and “Clinton Body Count”* and other poorly explained seeming #WETWORKS this books are are are Illuminati DARPA Area 51 genomic malfeasance coverup including the JFK assassinations .
 This book A Genome-claims Felony pretexts based Racket and Why It Exists . I have been, my Genome, has been Targeted driving me, steering me by events out of opportunities .
 One of the means of perpetrators conducting industrial espionage is by exploiting vulnerabilities in computer software . The use of these methods of industrial espionage have increasingly become a concern for governments .
 I have called this Conflict Entanglement, them by acts surrounding me in public, showing what I already normally do . They claim I first obtained instruction from them thus eliminating my intellectual normal property rights and claim .
 Chairman Mao Zedong launched the i campaign to transform the country from an agrarian economy into a communist society through the formation of people’s communes . The i campaign was launched by the Communist Party Party of China .
 Scientists ended up in the U.S. military industrial industrial comp orked with the (1A, NASA & more. The scientists ended up with the . United States military industrial . industrial industrial .
 Etiology is the study of the causes, origins, or reasons . More completely, etiology is a study of causation, or origination . Etiology means "the study of a cause, or a reason"
 The word is derived from the Greek aitioAoyia, which means i behind the way things are, or the way they function . It can refer to the causes themselves, or to the way that things are .
 The unprovoked attacks on me and my mother are sold as fighting white supremacism . I have hunted for the reason for racial attacks on my family . I've hunted for a reason why racial attacks have been against me or my mother .
 Teens and Tots are trained literaly to jump into my bed when I am not there or next to my bed just outside the windows, and afterward sue my trust fund for a pound of flesh for us having been in each other's vicinity . Teens are trained literallyy to
 Fantine pays with a tooth or two for money for her child in Les Miseables as if she was asked to . Fantine's daughter pays with tooth or a tooth for money in Les Mémiseables .
 She dies from an infection resulting for lack of hygiene in the tooth removal, she says . "She dies from . lack of . hygiene in tooth removal . I think the conflicts related to suing me for a pound of flesh the same plan," she writes .
 His works are credited to saving ' millions of lives' through the developments of vaccines for rabies and anthrax .
 French Academy of Sciences demonstrated that in sterilized and sealed flasks, nothing ever developed . In sterilized but open flasks microorganisms could grow . Microorganisms could also grow in sealed and sterilized flasks . The study was carried out under the auspices of the . French Academy
 For this experiment, he was awarded the Alhumbert Prize carrying 2,500 francs in 1862 .
 His experiments showed that diseases could be prevented by killing or stopping ' germs' His experiments directly supported the germ theory and its application in clinical medicine .
 He is best known to the general public for his invention of the technique of treating milk and wine to stop bacterial contamination . The process is now called pasteurization .
 Pasteur also made significant discoveries in chemistry . Most notably on the molecular basis for the asymmetry of certain crystals and racemization . Pasteur discovered the basis for asymmetry in crystals .
 His work led the way to the current understanding of a fundamental principle in the structure of organic compounds .
 Pasteur's reputation became associated with various controversies . Although Pasteur made groundbreaking experiments, his reputation was associated with controversies .
 Historical reassessment of his notebook revealed that he practiced deception to overcome his rivals . Historians reassessed his notebook reveals that he used deception to defeat rivals .
 The term ‘penicillin’ is defined as the natural product of Penicillium mould with antimicrobial activity . Penicillin is the product of a mould with an antimicrobial activity .
 Many years ago the word ‘Digitalin’ was invented for a substance derived from the plant Digitalis . I simply followed perfectly orthodox lines and coined a word which explained that penicillin was derived from a plant of the genus Penicillium .
 A squalid living man real Edward Donegan of no APPARENT mental faculties and no material assets lives out his life on skid row . Austin, Monterrey, Capitola Skid Row Nueces Texas .
 Castle on a Cloud retrieved from link and copied or modified to here . adaptations of the story for stage, film, and television adaptations . Castle on the Cloud is based on the story of the novel .
 As the orphaned child of an unmarried mother deserted by her father, Hugo never gives her a surname . Her birth name, Euphrasie, is only mentioned briefly in the film .
 The House of Bonaparte is a former imperial and royal European dynasty of Italian origin . It is one of the most prominent European dynases of the past .
 There’s some little girls who know how to behave i And they know what to wear i: And I’m saying thank heaven for that. You look very well in that new little blue hat t
 Victor Hugo was a French poet, novelist, essayist, playwright, and dramatist of the Romantic movement . He was born 26 February 1802 in France .
 When Hugo’s sons Charles and Fran¢ois-Victor died, he insisted that they be buried without a crucifix or priest . Hugo insisted that the two sons be buried with no crucifix .
 He believed in life after death and prayed every single morning and night . He was convinced that Thanksgiving has wings and flies to its right destination .
 Hugo is a fading faith Catholic . He writes of Prisoner 26401 Jean Valijean who upon release from long term hard labor imprisonment of forced French Fleet and Merchant Marine port working .
 One of his female employees, a single mother, has to whore herself sexually and sell her hair and teeth on the prosthetic market . This class mobility is offset by the story of one of his single mother .
 This work has been selected by scholars as being culturally important, and is part of the knowledge base of civilization as we know it . Adopted at Meetings of the Corporation Held on the 12th and the 19TH OF NOVEMBER, 1843 . Hardcover Import, 4 May
 Huguenots were forced to either convert to Catholicism (possibly as Nicodemites) or flee as refugees . They were subject to violent dragonnades. This ended legal recognition | of Protestantism in France .
 Calvinism had been nearly eliminated from France by the time of his death in 1774 . Calvinism was nearly eliminated in France .
 Persecution of Protestants officially ended with the t Edict of Versailles, signed by Louis XVI in 1787 . The Edict ended persecution of Protestants in France .
 Protestants gained equal rights as citizens in 1789 . Two years later, with the Revolutionary Declaration of i i, 1789, Protestants gained rights to equal rights .
 An agent provocateur is a person who commits or . who acts to entice another person to commit an illegal or rash act or falsely implicate them in . partaking in an illegal act . The black person commits an offense against white females to introduce a need for the protection of
 Modern undercover operations were scaled up in France by Eugéne Francois Vidocq in the early 19th century . The practice is worldwide anciently, but modern undercover operations began in France .
 The Victim of the Copl or Doppelganger, will bully me by several means. The victim will be the victim of several means, such as bullying or bullying .
 I become the cover story of others acts, and their vague assaults upon me, vigilantist, is the persecution . Gangstalk the “poison pill” acts of others is tied to me, my property, or rights . A heuristic technique is not guaranteed to be
 Simon's original object of research was problem solving which showed that we operate within what he calls bounded rationality . Simon’s original, primary object of his research was . problem solving .
 Roaring engines fuse the Dop with me since the engine noise is near me . Dop Cop or Dop and Cop with zoom camera and skidding muscle car . Me with Witting or normal Unwitting Female smartphone Victim .
 Doppelganger happens one apartment over from me, in a similar apartment, different floor, etc., Wide angle My Eyesight Field of View . I could not figure out why teens or tots where in my field of view near me .
 "I also could not figure out why people either masturbated themselves dressed as me or pushed mops around me," she said .
 As I confronted the zoom photographers though they attack me with death threats, seemingly, according to them, for photographing the female victims . The zoom photographers attacked me with threats, seeming to . They attacked me . I was attacked by them as they attacked me, seemingly .
 Me normal day e Photos of woman’s buttocks, e Assaults on my property when starting self relief to adult especially teens and tots, on porn, tots after that outside by window disgusting me peep camera which is theirs or stolen from me but behind my .
 Anonymous over-taching engines surround, subsume, My Normal Acts into a per in the area, btw NOT ME . Doppelganger denies the acts to me .
 Their Camera Phone animus nocendi intention to harm . The subjective state of mind of the author of a crime, with reference to the exact knowledge of illegal content of his behavior, and of its possible consequences .
 The use of criminal impersonations, money laundering, and conspiracy against my own rights by conspiracy makeup the U.S. needs to protect is serious mistakes in history . ad hominem at the person . Attacking an opponent’s character rather than answering his argument .
 I am treated as though a sex offender, peeper, pedophile, etc., without any allegation of that for me to refute, no way to clear my name . I am treating as though sex offenders, peepers, pedophiles, etc. Without any allegation, there is
 A form of MEns REa, a plant to damage my Life, LIberty, and Property interests by fraudulent acts . Compos mentis having command of mind Of sound mind . A form . of M.Ens. REa .
 An investigation revealed the suspect vehicle was previously stolen from Los Altos . The suspect driver was in possession of Methamphetamine, drug paraphernalia and . indicia of identity theft .
 This stigmatization of me Breaks My White Eggs and creates a Brown Egg Omelet. That this stigmatization . Breaks my white eggs and creates Brown Eggs, she says .
 Jorfeited real or personal property of marginal value can be transferred to state or local governments in support of drug abuse treatment, drug crime prevention and education, housing, job skills and other health and safety programs .
 The police report denied the thief came in the hall doorway and failed to mention the black female in 45 was the likely perpetrator . The report denied that the thief .
 Reza Pahlavi is the eldest son of Mohammad Reza, the last Shah of Iran, and his wife Farah Diba . This was tied to the Windsors in 1925 with the OSS creating clones through the world for long term Imperial rule in long term planning .
 He was the last heir apparent to the throne of the Imperial State of Iran . Prior to the Iranian Revolution in 1979, he was the crown ' prince' of Iran.
 Anti-White hate political and religious espionage or if you will just “dirty tricks” against someone Operandi . In what in Cons is called the Grandparents con, a mother of a child will find a phone, not my phone but at the table near me, and it
 If I object to the Doppelganger I am accused of being a psychotic delusional and threatened with arrest . If I objected to it, I would be arrested for being psychotic delusional, says author .
 The OBama family and other locations by religious work tied to the Illuminati, he says . But over the course of trying to understand the clout this massively illegal international RICO scheme operates with lead me to believe this ties into reverse justifying claims to my DNA already in my DNA .
 Social Justice government backed operation Client Group 1 exists . CG1 has retarded,low IQ, and autistic clients. CG1 also has retarded and low IQ clients .
 Extortion is sometimes called the “protection racket” since the racketeers often phrase their demands as payment for ‘protection” from threats from unspecified other parties . Sometimes, and almost always, such "protection" is simply abstinence of harm from the same party, and such
 In law extortion can refer to political corruption, such as selling one’s office or influence peddling . In general vocabulary the word usually first brings to mind blackmail or protection rackets .
 Money Laundering is often a feature of RICO in that the assets being fraudulently moved around are done in dummy accounts where it is out of direct view of tracing . RICO is a racket in that unneeded services are involuntary imposed on a person and creates the condition .
 In fact not only do I not want the modeling of women who jump in front of me in public, those very models planted in public are designed to stigmatize me as having interests I do not have and are part of social sabotage of me to women .
 "I need to get my foot inside the door of any embassy to make case on this," he says . "Because it is an embezzlement scheme harassing me but without accounting to me," he adds .
 We agreed that rather than I pay her for the BDSM Eros lap-dance like erotic scene with a dominatrix, not prostitution, that she would compensate the erotic lap dance by allowing it to be filmed which then she could market commercially . We agreed .
 Veronica Hoffman created pool picks on her web site, likely the impersonator of me who took over her contacts with forged a deal for my DNA . Hoffman was blackmailed for pool peaking . Hoffman says she took over the contacts with Hoffman and forged the deal .
 Theft of my clothes and use of architectural analogs of where I really live or break-ins to where I live bolster the identity theft the forger of agreements uses .
 The purpose of defaming me is also served by public innuendo references to alleged acts of mine . This is only detectable over time because of the public's interest in defamation, he says .
 My card key does not work at Springfield VA I | though exactly as I checkin scuzsy black and |400. Dislocations Placement Displacement Replacement Extended Stay | My Card Key paper folder list room 400 .
 White female leave for elevators a minute a minute key is fixed to 400 . I go to lobby and my card check, card key is checked, card check and card key . I'm not a woman who leaves elevators for a minute. I'm a woman with a card check
 The same happened in Casa Linda Apartments and everywhere I go and everything I do . I have to pay for and book an I book a flight | I can not board, no passport, no . passport,and modification | entirely new flight on an to Canada to NYC is denied
 Illustrated, Dislocation of Bedroom Leased I an ‘assigned” to one room, a corner room, to a Salinas house . I was assigned to a room in a Salina house .
 The plan is changed and I lease the room at the end of the hall in a comer of the house . The plan was changed and the room is now in a new place in the hall .
 International Scheme is international in nature and criminal in nature . The scheme fits definitions of the Rome Statute and other law regarding criminal acts as well .
 Edward Paul Donegan named after his grandfather, a hidden royal on one Surrogate Eva Ban . The CIA destroyed records it was all unauthorized .
 An Espionage theory backed totally by publiclyl available facts, verifiable facts, and a confirmable Espionage hypothesis . The Illuminati Diagrams are a list of Illuminati Diagograms .
 Edward Donegan IVF FEB 20 1961, Edward birth NOV 18, her birthday Jerret I was told in youth . Edward born NOV. 18, she was born in November 1961 . Edward is the brother of Barack Donegan Hussien Obama Obama of Black Edward Wet named
 Donegan DNA given up by impersonators of Edward Donegan, thus bailing the CIA and Vatican out of a jam, since it was authorized . The CIA destroyed records it was all unauthorized .
 Clancy is an Irish name coming from the Gaelic Mac Fhlannchaidh . It means “Son of the red/ruddy warrior’s” or as a hypocorism for Clarence .
 The White House exposed the Saudi Muslim plant in the White House and the direct funding that went into it . But it was replete ith fact and exposed the Saudis' role in the U.S.
 King, 53, also alleges that Clancy has not hired an agent for the books, has refused to omote them and has blocked potential television spinoffs and a hardcover book deal for the series . King also claims Clancy has blocked TV spinoffs, hardcover books and hardcover deals
 It was never an issue that the Marital Trust qualified for the marital deduction and should : be spared of all tax . Marital trust should be spared all tax and should never be a tax charity .
 Dr. Model of Cover Ops in public and in state offices are using surveillance of me for which no basis has been shown to me or presented to me . Dr. Cover Ops is accused of using surveillance against me for no basis and has no basis .
 i I : Ontonight’s The Wise Shall Understand Radio Broadcast, our guest was Dr. Dr. John Sutter . How Obamacare Will be Used To Destroy The United States Constitution, he says .
 Dr. Valerie Jarrett says the test is a "covert-operative" procedure . She says it was a success for Obama .
 Andrew Breitbart had been killed under orders from Obama administration officials, he said . He also said that spy thriller novelist Tom Clancy had also be killed .
 Garrow: All of Obama's education records have been permanently sealed . This is why, Garrow said, that all of Obama’s education records were sealed . Garrow says all of his education records are sealed .
 I now believe this program was MKULTRA, the DARPA program to defeat White Supremacism and Genocide by repairing the genomic gaps that formed from unequal evolutionary experiences across the globe . The program was designed to defeat the white supremacy and genocide .
 I believe DARPA found black masons and others tied to the original MKULTRA affecting my family . Now these same world masons tied interests will kill people like Judge Roll, Justice Scalia, Thomas C Wales, and others .
 PropagandaDue was a Masonic lodge under the Grand Orient of italy, founded in 1877 . Masonic charter was withdrawn in 1976, and it transformed into a clandestine, pseudo-Masonic, ultraright organization .
 This is what the Illuminati see and are trying to engineer and now are caught in their mistakes and lies . The Illuminati see this as what they want to engineer . This is the result of their lies and lies.
 The battle for Sub Saharan Africa by the Vatican is part of this major struggle now, and on CIA leak sites there is information about the U.S. preparing super soldier for WWIII against the Russians . The Vatican is in the midst of a major struggle .
 In America he's a biker attorney who specialized in getting Smletime defendants off . In America He's a former biker lawyer . He's also a lawyer who got Smletim defendants off. In America
 King Edward VII impregnated Maria Von Trapp about 1926 . He had a reputation for that kind of activity . Prince Edward was in Londong in 1927 .
 On my father’s side he worked in MKULTRA I believe, the Manhattan Project a longitudinal line across Hawaii to New Mexican and Arizona where the first atomic bombs were built and tested, including ration affects on DNA . I would later in life end up in a dispuate between
 CIA, Mossad, and Russians all seem to have some theories about Obama family ties to this, and earlier CIA OSS Vatican and Windsor ties to all this, including close ties between King Edward VIII, Nazi Germany, Spanish Illuminati Opus Dei .
 In June 2021 a report from an Associated Press investigation found that at least 1,900 U.S. military firearms were lost or stolen . The Associated Press report found at least a total of 1,800 firearms were stolen or lost in the United States .
 On June 23, 2021, Milley attracted notice for telling Congressman Matt Gaetz that he found it “offensive” that the U.S. military was being characterized as “woke” for including “critical race theory” in its West Point curriculum .
 CIA and Other Espionage Acts I Assert Quis custodiet ipsos custodes FBI recruitment of Malcom X CIA use of Sidney Gottlieb . Colin Powell, married 1962 to Alma Powell, hearing and speech worker, like Sydney .
 Their church was bummed in 2008, possibly to destroy any possible birth records there . The church is now in the process of destroying any possible records there.
 Jen Moore saw it before the side bars blocked the planter at Stay and Play oe i el . Jen Moore: "It's a sign of life in the world"
 President Obama was born in Mombasa, Kenya, not Hawaii, says de facto ; movement leader Orly Taitz . Taitz released a photo of what is supposedly a certified copy of a Kenyan birth certificate for President Obama .
 Camp Bastion was once the largest British overseas military base on the planet . Around 114,000 personnel have lived and worked at the base in Afghanistan since April 2007 . The base was the largest in the world and was once Britain's largest overseas base .
 The Taliban claimed that the raid was in response to the film, Innocence of Muslims . Prince Harry, who was stationed at the base at the time, was the target of the attack . The Taliban have also stated that Prince Harry was also the target .
 Marco McMillian was a businessman and candidate for mayor of Clarksdale, Mississippi in 2013 . McMillian ran for the position of mayor in Clarksdale . He was elected to the post in November .
 A prominent figure in Tunisia’s Salafist movement arrest for an attack on the U.S. embassy . His lawyer and the justice ministry say he was arrested in connection with the attack .
 Jeff Fort, also known as Abdul Malik Ka’bah, is an American former gang leader from Chicago, Illinois . Two other black members of Trinity Church Murdered at the same time . Jeff Fort is a former member of the Trinity Church in Chicago .
 The Barbara Bush Foundation for Family Literacy has pulled together an all-star line-up of best-selling authors for the 16th Annual Celebration Tom Clancy Dies at 66 .
 Doctors did not perform an autopsy on Tom Clancy’s body for 5 days . Amazingly enough, or coincidentally, the autopsy was not performed . Tom Clancy's body was not found for five days .
 Extorted DNA allegedly extorted from Edward Donegan for non white brain development use and other medical use . The DNA allegedly taken from Donegan is alleged to have been used for brain development .
 NTSB Chairman Deborah Hersmanis Obama appointee that only reports to Obama . Officials still trying to determine Fuddy’s cause of death .
 Within 40 minutes of the plane going down, it was reported on the news, and within 55 minutes it was said that there was one casualty . That article says that the plane went down at about 3:45 .
 AUGUST 26, 1959, Little Rock, ARa close friend of Bill and Hillary Clinton and a Clinton super delegate at an upcoming convention in Denver and was fatally shot in 2008 .
 Hastings crash ‘consistent with a car cyberattack’ ; Group sues FBI for records after Investigating CIA Director John Brennan . CIA Director Brennan Confirmed as Reporter Michael Hastings Next Target . Coroner Classifies Michael Hastings’ Death as Accidental .
 Hazem: ‘Benghazi attack suspect’ dies in Cairo shootout . Barnaby Jack: Hacker found dead days before he was to demonstrate how to hack a pacemaker . Stephanie Tubbs Jones: Found brain dead in 2008. Stephanie Tubbbs Jones found brain dead .
 Christopher Kelly committed suicide, under pressure to testify against former Gov. Chris Christie . Former Gov. Christie Christie was accused of intimidation, manipulation, sudden death . Christie: "I'm not going to go to jail. I'm going to jail"
 Michael Scott was subpoenaed to testify before a federal grand jury looking into the admissions practices of Chicago’s elite schools . Scott also was under scrutiny over Olympics-related real estate dealings .
 United States Navy SEAL commander dies in Afghanistan: suicide —SEAL Team Four commander in Afghanistan ‘commits suicide’ as body of married father is found shot dead: Rumor? State Department_Denies Hillary Clinton Injured in Plane Crash ... butABC News Report on Emergency
 Obama_skipped intel meetings for days leading up to the attacks despite credible information of the attacks . He skipped intel meetings days before the attacks on 9/11 despite credible intelligence reports .
 Libyan democratic party. spokesman: Amb. Chris Stevens was a muslim . Statement that Ambassador Chris Stevens . was a Muslim is made between 1:00 &amp;amp; 1:20; Col. Col. John Defterios: "Ambassador Chris Stevens is a Muslim"
 Obama Administration Knew Libya Attack Was Terrorism Within 24 Hours; Obama Administration knew it was terrorism within 24 hours . Consulate in Libya Bombed twice in Run-Up to 9/11 Attack, Ambassador known target of Ambassador Stevens .
 Anti-Agenda 21 Bill Dies in Mississippi House Committee . Chaired a committee that stops Agenda 21 legislation in committe . Anti-agenda 21 bill was defeated in committee .
 A lawsuit filed against Boeing and Southern California Edison alleges that the two companies failed to protect the public from the threat that fire posed at the Santa Susana Field Lab . The Woolsey fire broke out in November at the former rocket testing facility .
 Friends and associates of Mr Zhitomirskiy said there were indications of suicide . Friends said he had 'indications of suicide' before his death .
 Prince Harry, 27, has been deployed at Camp Bastion as a military helicopter pilot . Prince Harry was deployed as a helicopter pilot at the base .
 Josh Sugermann founded Violence Policy Center after leaving The Coalition to Ban Handguns in 1988 . Newtown is Hometown of Sugarmann; Newtown, Connecticut, was Sugarmann's hometown .
 Report: Federal Judge Tamerlan Tsarnaev Triple Murders Were ALL Jews Targeted for Religion on 10th Anniv of 9/11 . Newtown shooter toxicology results released; Whistle blower Joseph Hook shooting investigation . Psychiatrist who treated Adam Lanza surrendered license and is now living
 FBI officers went to Adam Lanza’s home in 2004 to ask him about how he ‘he’t a computer whiz who’�s just testing himself’ United States Terror-Storm Lurking as Possible False Flag Averted .
 Antigua, recently arrested with a plethora of fake ID’s, and disguises, including medical smocks, and other outfits . Antiguans arrested with fake ID's, and disguise outfits, including smocks .
 Dr. Jim Garrow details among the recent murders are Tom Clancy, Andrew Breitbart, and journalist Michael Hastings . Dr. Alex Jones: Forcing military to resign if they ‘refuse to fire on American citizens’, disarmament of civilians, destruction of the American Democracy,
 Jim Garrow Obama Hoax Debunk’d Refutations, by Gordon Duff, Senior Editor Veterans Today . Obama Hoak was a Democrat in 2008, but he has been accused of being a fraud .
 Half of the deadliest shootings in U.S. history happened in past six years . Half the deadliest shooting shootings in United States history were in past 6 years .
 A previous novel published in 2003, “Lakefront Airport, New Orleans,” detailed his claimed experience as a pilot for the United States during Iran/Contra .
 Tim Russert: Died of a massive heart attack... just before the 2008 presidential debates, that he might have moderated . Russert was a national television news anchor .
 Rep. Liz Cheney told Fox News’ Bret Baier that she lied about her role in spreading the CIA’s ‘Russian Bounty’ Story retrieved from Glenn Greenwald and copied .
 Liz Cheney denied that she spread the discredited CIA ‘Russian bounty’ story . Liz Cheney denies spreading the discredited 'Russian bounty' story to the media .
 He is trying, through his illicit procurement network, to acquire the equipment he needs to be able to enrich uranium to make the bombs . And what we’ve seen recently that has raised our level of concern to the current state of unrest, if you will, if I can put
 FDIC’s bland recitation conceals a much more 1 interesting story . Yet some time probing the affairs of First American here in i Chicago suggests that the FDIC .
 Michael Joseph Jackson was born in Gary, Indiana, near Chicago, on August 29, 1958 . Jackson’s childhood home was pictured in March 2010 with floral tributes after his death .
 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia My experience in San Francisco, Arlington VA, and COrpus CHristi Texas, Texas, too is that the social services including with Religious Services as part of it and creating the gangstalk is that .
 I said a swwrm of riff raff was following me I suspected from Virginia Social Services . I suspected their activity in the area was likely to be attributed to me and make me look bad .
 A World Health Organization driver named Pyae Sone Win Maung also died back in May while transporting coronavirus samples for the U.N. Upon returning to Durban, she reportedly felt unwell and went to the hospital, where she 0 died .
 Buckley AFB in Aurora, Colorado, is the closest military base to the scene of the shootings . Two airmen were wounded in the incident, it said .
 About 10,000 troops including members of the Air Force, Army and Marine Corps are stationed at Buckley . Buckley is home to the U.S. Army, Air Force and Navy .
 Soon after the shooting, the base initiated a head count, Lavoie said . The base is now conducting a head counts of victims .
 Colorado’s strong space, defense industries continue to act as magnet for companies . Colorado's strong space and defense industries still a magnet for businesses .
 Booz Allen Hamilton is expanding its operations in Colorado . Aurora made sense because of its proximity to Buckley Air Force Base . No. NO .
 Trump said he would make a decision on Space Command’s location by the end of the year . Trump visited Colorado Springs on Thursday .
 Blumenthal broke the basic rules of mob cooperation in his bid to win a U.S. senatorial seat . Blumenthal was state attorney general and now Senator Blumenthal . He broke the rules of the mob in order to win his seat in the Senate .
 Fraud is intentional Deception of protection of protection is a fallback explanation of Bunco activities . Deception is intentional, fraud is intentional and deception is intentional. Deception and deception are fallback explanations for Bunco activity .
 “someone placed the pistol in your room in order to inculpate you” SUGGESTIVE tending to suggest an idea . “Flavors suggestive of coffee and blackberry” making someone think of sex and sexual relationships .
 Powerful historic figures are using an architected but fraudulent system to claim the distribution rights and substantive rights to my genome . This seems to fit that my father and mother had places in history as well as my parents parents have .
 Wayne Madison has disseminated a lot of information on Barrack Omaba origins and the Human Brain DARPA program . Wayne Madison: Omaba is the brainchild of the first DARPA project .
 Kilbourne has also had a lifelong interest in non-scientific writing . He has published humorous verses and essays in magazines for the general public . Kilbourne also has a long-standing interest in the subject matter .
 Ira Michael Heyman, lawyer and college administrator, died November 19 . Heyman was a lawyer, college administrator and lawyer .
 Stephen Heymann is an attorney who formerly served as an Assistant United States Attorney for the District of Massachusetts . Heymann was an Assistant U.S. Attorney in Massachusetts .
 The sinking of MV Conception occurred on September 2, 2019, when the 75-foot (23 m) dive boat caught fire and eventually sank off the coast of Santa Cruz Island, California, United States. The sinking was the first of its kind .
 It is the worst maritime disaster in California since the sinking of the Brother Jonathan in 1865 . It is also the deadliest in the United States overall since the USS Iowa turret explosion in 1989 .
 Truth Aquatics has taken seniors and kids to the Channel Islands for the first time . The trips include hosting the Sierra Club and various school groups . Students and adults alike enjoy the thrill of experiencing the Channel Island .
 Glen hopes to bring California diving back as a worldwide destination . Through these and other types of trips showcasing what the region has to offer, Glen wants to bring it back to the world .
 Official portrait of Rep. Mark Randall Meadows retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here . Rep. Randall Meadows is a member of the Meadows Republican caucus .
 The True Story of a Rare Dinosaur and the Home Schoolers . Who found it. Who Found it . Who Found It. Who found It.
 The man purchased his airline ticket using the alias Dan Cooper but, because of a news . miscommunication, became known in popular lore as D B Cooper .
 The pilot, William A Scott, had served in the U.S. Army Air Forces during World War II . Scott contacted Seattl Tacoma Airport air traffic control, which informed local and federal authorities .
 Schaffner described him as calm, polite, and well-spoken, not at all consistent with the stereotypes associated with air piracy at the time . He says he was calm and polite, not like hardened criminals .
 Lycopodium spores (likely from a pharmaceutical product) were identified, as well as fragments of bismuth and aluminum . Fragments were also found .
 titanium was rarer in the 1970s than in the 2010s . It was found only in metal fabrication or production facilities, or at chemical companies using it to store corrosive substances .
 Bismuth titanate is a solid inorganic compound of bismuth, titanium and oxygen . The chemical formula of Bi12TiO20, Bi 4Ti3012 or Bi2Ti207 is Bi12 TiO20 or Bi4Ti207 .
 Reversible recording media have potential applications in reversible recording media for real-time holography or image processing applications . They could be used to record holographic images and holograms .
 Jack Patrick Dorsey is the co-founder and CEO of Twitter and founder of Square . Dorsey also co-founded Twitter and founded Square, a financial payments company . Twitter was founded by Dorsey in 2007 .
 We previously reported that amyloidogenic light chain protein AL-09 adopts an altered dimer . Its germline protein forms a canonical dimer observed in other light chain crystal structures .
 Jerry Parks was pale with shock as he looked up at the television screen . “M A Dead Man” whispered Jerry Parks, pale with shocked expression .
 At night he kept tearing anxiously at his eyebrows, and raiding the valium pills of his wife, Jane, who was battling multiple sclerosis, who had multiple sclerosis .
 Mary Mahoney was an intern for Bill Clintos, che was murdered July 7th, 1997, in a Starbucks where she was manager . She was killed in a robbery at the time .
 Eric Butera, 31, an : informant who was robbed and then stomped to death while working with police on Dec., 1997, in Southwest Washington . Murdered one year before birth of Malia Ann .
 Starbucks | a SEPARATE LIVES, JOINED IN DEATH retrieved from WAPO and copied or 1%, modified to here . The trio couldn't have seemed more different .
 They were gunned down execution-style in the back room of the Starbucks on ; Wisconsin Avenue in Georgetown, a trendy coffee shop in an affluent Washington ; neighborhood .
 Loved ones tried to put her ebullient i life into words yesterday . Mahoney had worked for more than a year, and her family still lives in Baltimore .
 She was the one who gave leftover food to homeless people on her way home from her waitress job, who trekked across Alaska with her 74-year-old grandmother, who danced literally until dawn with friends most weekends . She was one of the ones to trek the state with her grandmother
 Everyone in this tiny collection of stone huts at the base of Sved Ivan hears a plane go directly overhead in the clouds, then rev its engines mightily for one instant . The plane revs its engines mayily for an instant .
 Klaxon of ground-proximity warning device suddenly blares, jolting pilot Davis . Davis says he was jolted by the device's ground proximity warning device .
 The plane’s left wingtip touches ground, spinning it directly into the rocky hillside, making an earth-shaking explosion . The explosion was caused by the plane's left wing tip touching ground .
 There is the cackling hiss of a huge fireball as the plane and its large load of fuel burn . The plane and fuel burn in the fireball as it burns .
 The tail section remains quite intact, but the rest of IFOR-21 is all over the hill, making later identification of many of the passengers impossible . Many of the survivors were killed in the crash, but many of them were never identified .
 All 35 people were killed except for stewardess Shelly Kelly, who was riding in the tail . All 35 were killed in the crash .
 IFOR-21 is down, location unknown . Location unknown . United States authorities notified that IFOR 21 is down .
 In hours of pre-planned confusion before arriving at the scene, police will suffer 11 hours of confusion .
 Pieces of the wreckage have been spotted floating in the Adriatic . One prominent report verifies that pieces of the wreck have been seen floating .
 News reports say an attempt is made on the life of Ron Brown’s law partner, Tommy Boggs, by an unknown assailant in a staged car accident in Capetown . The incident was staged by a car accident staged by the police .
 Allegations have been made that Boggs was culpable in many of Brown’s activities . Allegations made that he was responsible for many of the Brown's activities .
 Niko Jerkuic goes home to collect his reward, but the reward is not waiting for him . The reward was not there for him, but he went home and went for it .
 The Americans do not want a live witness who could spill the beans later . The U.S. does not want to live witness . The Americans want to protect themselves and their families .
 Jerkuic's official official reason given for his death is despondence over romantic troubles with his girlfriend . The quick official reason for Jeruic’s death was despondency over romantic problems .
 "Neighbors and friends all agree Jerkuic was NOT depressed. Instead, neighbors and friends said he was not depressed. Neighbors say he was 'not depressed' and 'was NOT depressed'
 Croation Special Forces search party arrives on the scene . Four hours and 20 minutes after the crash, the first Croation special forces team arrives at the scene.
 Kelly is able to get on board without assistance from the medics . Kelly is then able to board the plane without help from the crew .
 Autopsy later reveals a neat three-inch incision over the main femoral artery . According to multiple reports given to journalist/editor Joe L Jordan .
 It also shows the incision came at least three hours after all her other cuts and bruises . The incision was made three hours before all the other cuts she received .
 Special Forces operative holds down the struggling woman while another slice her leg . This creates in your mind a horrifying scene in the back of the chopper .
 Clinton ordered the cremation of all victims it’s hard to perform autopsies on ashes on ashes . Clinton ordered cremation .
 Martha Gibbs’ older sister, Martha, believes that Bill Clinton was responsible for the fire that killed her sister . Martha Gibbs' older sister believes that her sister was killed in the fire .
 A fire alarm went off in the watch room of the i castle fire brigade, manned by the Chief Fire Officer, Marshall Smith . i castle chief fire officer Marshall Smith was in charge of the fire brigade .
 Tower lit up, but lights soon began to flash indicating that the fire had quickly spread to neighbouring rooms . Tower was lit up but lights started to flash .
 If she has daughters, they will continue to pass on this donor DNA . Donor DNA was 68 years old when the donor DNA was created .
 Sully, the movie about the “Miracle on the Hudson” ditching of United States Airways Flight 1549, doesn't stop there . The drama in Sully continues to play out .
 Europe + Main section | Page 1549 of 1682 | World | The Guardian i //vevevew Ahequardian.com/world .
 The car veered off the road in Lauderdale, Florida, at approximately 4:30 pm . The driver was killed in the crash .
 The car crossed three lanes of traffic and crashed into a row of trees in the median . The car then crossed three of the lanes and crashed in a row ' of trees'
 If you or a loved one are looking for help, please call the National Suicide Prevention hotline at 1-800-273-8255 . If you want to help, call the Suicide Prevention Hotline at 1.273-825255 .
 Victoria passed away this morning at 4:15AM after a sudden illness . Blogger, researcher into ancestry into ancestry passed away .
 JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for European Economic Coo operation Thorkil Kristensen at around 11 am in the Oval Office .
 Kathleen Agnes Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington, also known as ""Kick"" Kennedy, was an American socialite . United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom March 8, 1938 October 22, 1940 .
 Never-before-seen image of 1962 JFK motorcade through Seattle World’s Fair . 1962 Century 21 Exposition in Queen Annes Seattle neighborhood tied to Queen Elizabeth of Windsor .
 Dawn Sylvia-Stasiewicz was an American dog trainer . She died in 2011 . She was a member of the National Kennedal Association of Dogs .
 Lisa Riley, Doctor of Osteopathy, found in her home with a gunshot wound to her head . July 10th Lisa Riley was found dead at her home . Riley was a doctor of osteopathy .
 Dr Jeffrey Gradstrest, MD, an altemative autism specialist, and Dr onzalez MD. an allernative cancer specialist saw the fruth f the standard allopathic medical tism . Two intemationally known doctors about the connecton .
 U.S. agents from the USFDA and local state of Georgia law enforcement raided Dr. Dr. John Doe's home in Georgia .
 A silence has descended on . the memory of the great, reforming prime minister Gough Whitlam . A year later Australia burns ee, ee a a a . a a. a a pore British-American coup that ended Australian independence . The coup ended Australia's independence from
 Australia briefly became an independent state during the Whitlam years, 1972-75 . Whitlam believed that a foreign power ‘should not control his country’s resources and dictate its economic and foreign .
 The group has an inner circle who justify their actions by their claim to be reincarnations of the Apostles of Jesus . The group claims to be a reincarnation of Jesus Christ .
 During the late 1960s and the 1970s, Newhaven Hospital in Kew was a private psychiatric hospital owned and managed by Marion Villimek . Many of its staff and attending psychiatrists were also members of the hospital .
 U.S. has agreed to give Kremlin serial numbers of missiles it gives Britain to Russia .
 WikiLeaks founder Julian r—_Assange ‘suffers stroke in jail’ after court rules he can be extradited to America retrieved from thes.s. Assange . WikiLeaks founder 'suffered stroke while in jail' after being extradited from prison .
 Assange reportedly has had an MRI scan and is taking antistroke medication . Assange has reportedly had a MRI scan since the ministrke .
 There are four other locations across the country with archives from the oblates, but B.C. has the bulk of the material . She says there are four more locations across Canada with archives .
 Breaking and entering generally involves the use of force, however slight, to gain entry into a building or residence . Breaking and breaking and entering is a term used to refer to force used to gain access to a building .
 Trespass only requires an unauthorized entry onto someone else's property, with or without forced entry . Trespassing is illegal in the U.S.
 In most states, there also has to be an intent to commit a crime for it to be breaking and entering . Most states also have to be a crime to break and enter .
 Breaking and entering is the crime of using force or fraud to gain access to a building, and then entering it in order to commit a crime . The crime of breaking and entering involves using force, fraud or using force to gain entry into a building .
 Some states have criminal laws that forbid breaking and entering, specifically . Some states, however, have laws that prohibit breaking into their homes .
 These states cover the act with other criminal statutes, like burglary . Instead, these states cover it with other laws like burglary or burglary .
 Some states only require entering a building to commit a crime . Some states have no laws preventing burglary .
 The wide variation in state laws makes it important to discuss your particular case with a local criminal defense lawyer . It's important to talk to a local lawyer about your case .
 Trespassing is the crime of entering or remaining on someone else’s property without permission or a right to do so . The crime is a violation of the law of trespassing .
 The prosecutor has to prove each of these elements beyond a reasonable doubt . Prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt in order to convict a suspect .
 Different states can have different definitions of breaking and entering . Different definitions of the crime are different in different states, states can differ .
 The differences can turn a relatively minor offense of trespassing into a more serious property crime . However, the differences between trespassing and trespassing can be serious property crimes .
 An experienced criminal defense attorney can help fight the criminal charge . A criminal defense lawyer can help you fight a criminal charge.
 The most important difference between trespassing and breaking and entering is the use of force to gain entry . Force or fraud is not necessary to enter into a home, but it's possible to use force or fraud .
 Cases of trespass, even criminal trespass, do not require the use of force or fraud, say police . Cases of trespassing do not need to be used in court .
 It is generally not considered to be breaking and entering when someone enters without using force because there was already an opening . However, it is not considered a breaking and entry when someone uses force .
 Steven reaches through an open car window and steals a tape cassette 5 player . Steven reaches into the car window to steal the cassette player from a cassette player .
 Some states, like California, have burglary laws that cover conduct that used to be considered breaking and entering . Some states have laws covering conduct that once considered breaking-in .
 Breaking and entering can also be done through fraud, rather than through force . Breaking and breaking and entering is also possible to do through fraud rather than force .
 Coercing or tricking someone into allowing a defendant to enter does not make the entry a lawful one, court papers say . Coerced or tricked someone into letting a defendant into allowing the entry is not lawful, the judge says .
 Trespassing can happen anywhere on someone else’s property, but breaking and entering generally has to involve a building .
 The law of breaking and entering is designed to protect people, not break and enter . The reason for this difference is that the law is designed for people to be protected, not broken in .
 Courts have required that the | building or structure be . large enough to accommodate a person,® and could actually be lived in . Therefore, courts have required . that the . building or . structure be large enough for a person to be able to . live in . Court required that it
 The crime of breaking and entering generally requires an intent to commit another crime usually robbery, theft, or arson . However, | the property owner does not have to be inside at the time of the offense for it to be broken and entering .
 Many states require intent to commit a felony or a theft or larceny crime while inside . Many other states, including California, require an intent of committing a felony .
 Breaking and entering is a more severe type of criminal offense than mere trespassing . The penalties of a conviction are also higher for breaking and entering .
 In California, for example, the crime of entering a structure or vehicle with the intent to commit a felony or theft is considered burglary . Burglary is considered a felony in California .
 Whether charged with trespassing or breaking and entering, defendants should strongly consider establishing an attorney-client relationship with a criminal defense lawyer .
 Bruce’s Beach can return to descendants of Black family in landmark move signed by Newsom . California Gov. Newsom signed the landmark bill in September .
 Gavin Newsom signed a law that authorized the return of shorefront land known as Bruce’s Beach to the descendants of a Black couple who were run out of Manhattan Beach nearly a century ago . Bruce's Beach will be returned to its shorefront to its descendants .
 "I came to Corpus Christi in 2015 and asked the ARC of NOVA TRust fund for money to buy a sailbord capable suv wagon and wanted to start windsurfing. I came here in 2015 to ask for money for money . I wanted to get a sail
 CCRTA.org transgener male 8 Floor moved in w iB Incursion Rottan Edwards lives 7 and has fantasies a Royal Confusion between floor boundaries . Ed Donegan blurred with 7 by incursions trespass of vague boundary .
 The capital homicides of Jen Moore and Corpus Christi street person Jimmy I contineu to assert black marketing brain genes and designer babies, and politicians in slush funds a mafia activities have no place . @sftomdunham and I are white hats defeated by black hats.
 Four actual Nodes and a Connecting element, that element deceitful and cross out events . Suggestive or story telling element Nodes believing suggestive fraud. Suggestive narrative 5 (fraudulent and vague dual construction narrative)
 Bobby Courtney was used to dopple me in strip clubs and was also beaten to death by Bobby Courtney . Ruiz was also killed in the death of Bobby Courtney in the 1980s and 1990s .
 In the Long Con and Stages of the Con gaining building access or other buildings to use as sets, fake residents, etc. etc., all go into Long Con . The Long Con is the first stage of a Long Con, and the Stages are the second stage .
 The black Hispanic county prosecutor recused himself in the murder case his outlaw motorcycle gang is accused of and tweets “f*** the police” in urban slang . The sheriff’s office has a history of recusing himself from the case .
 Austin and the fight against seeming White Supremacist Perpetrator Networks . KOMPROMAT is based on predation on, retaliation for, my politics . She "feels for children” it seems because her name is Cynthia Nino .
 Ayn Rand was a Russian Jew though she was an atheist, likely not indoctrinated by her family . She really didn’t feel antisemitism should play a role nor any other religious sentiment in free society .
 This is the question, the challenge, Jim Volcelka challenged me to solve and I think it is that legitimacy must exist for my genome to others if that has ALREADY happened why not make it legal . Obama family and other Illuminati Family want my genome undetected and used from
 Forgeries in misrpresenting a fake product as authentic . In a television documentary it was noted a certificate of proof of authenticity of a violin’s origin was valid but not for the violin being represented .
 Allegations ‘a taxation fraud perpetrated by an eminent American collector with Mr Machold’s collusion’ ILLUSION Something ur untrue that ous see as true. Alleged tax fraud . Alleged fraud .
 From the moment I saw Corpus Christi I was vomiting at the site of it and trying to leave. I was vomitting at the scene of it, trying to escape. I felt sick at the sight of it. I tried to leave, but I was sickened by it.
 Next the fake hero will say he or she was the one found evidence Edward Paul Donegan peeped . This same person who DID peep is now the hero of the scene, and will report the event to my trust fund . The fake hero, the victim, and defame
 RICO scheme in Nueces was created by the U.S. State Department of Homeland Security .
 Identity Thief in my identity has a view of Perhaps takes over date with female I was going to meet in that location . Normal cities and normal life denied as tot peeping is alleged to me .
 The apartment has been pre stocked, before my move in, with Gas Station and Dumpster North Side 40 racial race bating provocateurs describing blacks as the power race, a black male in unit 49, same move in date as me .
 It appears I have the kind of Adaptive Intelligence that can value add to a $25.00 USD bookcase and turn it into a thing of value .
 He needs a bolt to fix the handle bar mirror” to the store clerk, a black female was at the register with a cheap shot grin . Two women almost touch me among three isles of bolt draws, all other isles empty were saying (cluing me into that they
 The manufacture of confusion is the art of Bunko and I will have a full chapter and the sapient architecture of a complex “sperm bank” long con using corrupt law enforcement and profiteering shills .
 Espionage is harassing my normal access to reproductive life as I am beat out to just about any connection or project or other activity I start towards via an espionage take over of it . The presence of Barack Obama thank you card there and the totality of my life leads me to conclude Espionage
 The Department administers $2 billion through for-profit, nonprofit, and local government partnerships to deliver local housing and community-based opportunities and assistance to Texans in need .
 "The overwhelming majority of the Department's resources are derived from mortgage revenue bond financing and refinancing, federal grants, and federal tax credits," the Department says .
 Many Legal Aid Offices also operate legal clinics or hotline services to better serve the public . Legal aid Offices offer legal clinics, hotline services and other legal services to the public.
 A Crisis Actor Team created a crisis to road black that, and the same happened as I was trying to move to Austin, but a fake crisis blocked my getting to Austin when the fake crisis got their first and me kicked out before I got there .
 A fake peeping incident handled by “Cynthia Nino’s allegedly protection children would get me away from adult women as though “my balls had been cut off” by those black nationalist who keep threatening me, as they said .
 Four actual Nodes and a Connecting element, that element deceitful and cross out events Public perception Suggestive or story telling element |Nodes| believing suggestive fraud a ee Suggestive narrative 5 (fraudulent and vague dual construction narrative or narration element)
 Cynthia Nino stopped my adult life with adult vaguely hints she is protecting children from me . On the way to my new apartment in Austin property was stolen or gained from Corpus Christi I and placed at Austin in III so instead of me in Austin as II it was that I was in
 On the way to Jim Vocelka’s adult dungeon residence it was made to look like I was into child porn and I should be denied rental after a period of shakedown for a while . The video was posted on YouTube .
 Suggestive narrative 5 (fraudulent and vague dual construction narrative or narration element) Leasing Manager Ballpark West Apartments 1600 Wickersham Lane Austin, TX 78741 (ordered me off the property of my lease as I was there with my moving truck and belongings with threats
 Because the “legend’s alleged peeping is alleged then my dna is due to blacks, I must be removed from women being around me. Because the "legend" of peeping was alleged, then my . dna was due to black ancestry, she
 I am then charged (by their protection racket) for that act of that “zoom photographer” who took the picture I am not interested in. “Zoom photographers” are then charged with that act .
 The base is Jeep Wrangler 4 door, red, 17 inch wheels . Then, acting on “all peoples safety” I am moved into homeless shelters and county programs which will manage my IQ genes, etc., for me . I am then moved into shelters . The program will
 In absurdity they simply deny their are moving white women away from me even when they assault white women, assault her, threaten to arrest her, or shout a death threat at me . In absurdity, they say they are moving away from white women even when .
 North 4th Floor 1x1 I live in discreet non adjoing units which are Quauntum Tunneled incursion system . From close enough to me the borders can be violated in some way for others near me to create blur moving their liabilties to me and my
 Unit 6 seems to have floor to Ply closet entrance to upstairs 1513. Bedrrom | of foundation when work was built . Unit 6 | Kitchen under Ist Emotv | #5 towards #5 on 6.6 seems to be a floor-to-floor entrance to
 Floor ok in 1513 #45 #45 1513 . 1513 Floor OK .
 Meeting her in the park I though by coincidence I said to her I took the A1c 33 thing seriously . Getting the number scale I was just starting to learn wrong and the numerals jumbled . Meeting her was a chance chance to learn the scale .
 On reading the symptoms I joined the gym went to lean meats, cut the drinking, and started working out the the hard driving music I already listened to and let Auto-play find me more during the free hours i had, even budgeting time in the day at home for gym music
 The area around 1001 N Water St #46 and the Marina and Sea Wall is an exercise platform for the photographer . The area has been used as a place to run and exercise .
 Unit 43 has non building standard number stickers as apartment unit 4A has standard and sticker, Compositing (described in a later chapter) may fuse Unit 43, 48, and 4B Indoor hallway Ed Moves Into 46 . Unit 43 is located in a separate apartment complex .
 "Even if I had not been attacked on the street by a group of people a legal risk or social risk to me exists as the entire scene can social engineer people regarding me and get gym memberships or apartments canceled on whisper campaigns"
 The OECD piece of all this is not all about diabetes, it's about diabetes . The OECD is the world's largest body of research into diabetes and obesity .
 Spmeboday allegedly babysitting me as though I am retarded has realized others could fix up the apartment as i have and realize a capital gains in the held asset value . The buidling management would not even fix what was broken, my being in the apartment still showed its potential
 Remaining beneficiaries are the individuals who will receive any remaining trust assets . When the trust ends (usually upon the beneficiary’s death), the remainder beneficiaries will be the individuals .
 If I work normally in normal cities in normal high tech jobs I am not disabled under the law . Under the law under the general mental health system if he is a danger to himself or is a dangerous to other, then he is subjected to behavioral health car and asset management as well .
 If Ed Donegan were retarded, deveopmentally retarded, not able to function or produce wealth or income, no income oppurtunities presenting themselves, let’s say, he might be take to a Dominatrix or sex worker for sex therapy, to be
 Because the photo exploitation victim female, the male who in my identity and in my vicinity photographed the victim, and away from my vicinity confessed to sex worker . This occurring in my nearby is more to get the adult sex worker or any other female or normal life to consider me to be poisonous
 A racial hate crime COINTELPRO operations has been organized against me which is supposed to define me and defeat me . This is likely because my genome has been used in blacks and whites who do not wish be associated with the Kutscheras by attributes but do wish me defined by
 Wire fraud, welfare fraud, phusical assault, sexual assault by planted operatives . Plotted operatives who have access to common property of sole posession property .
 A racket is a service that is fraudulently offered to solve a problem, such as for a ; problem that does not actually exist, that will not be put into effect, or that would ‘ not otherwise exist if the racket did not exist .
 If a manager of assets can insert itself as a conservator in layer of finances to become co-mingled with me and my asset by forced team, they can assert they are required by law to continue to entangle, forced-team, with me .
 This book asserts criminal breaking and entering of my home to create false but actionable legal claims against me or rather my trust fund . Those claims are fenced via a Sting operation run at a child porn peeping house .
 Your family, house, neighborhood, school, and people you hang out with make up your milieu . Your milieu is your home, home, neighborhood and school .
 If you live in a mansion and have rich friends, you’re part of the upper crust milieu . If you have a rich friend, you're part of a rich family, you are part of it .
 Sometimes a milieu shapes a person, as when a “milieu of abuse and poverty,” inspires someone to improve things for others . Sometimes a "milieu" of abuse or poverty can shape a person's life .
 Unless you grew up in a moldy bathtub, mildew probably has little to do with your milieu, or environment . Milieu sounds a lot like mildew without the ‘d’ without the 'd' without the "d" in it .
 counterfeit means to imitate something authentic, with the intent to steal, destroy, or replace the original, for use in illegal transactions . Counterfeit means to deceive individuals into believing that the fake is of equal or greater value than the real thing .
 Counterfeit products are fakes or unauthorized replicas of the real product . Counterfeits are counterfeit products that are counterfeit or are not authorized replicas .
 Counterfeit products are often produced with the intent to take advantage of the superior value of the imitated product . Counterfeits are often made with the intention of taking advantage of a counterfeit product's superior value . counterfeit products are produced in the hope that the imitating product will be
 If there are two forms of commodity money in circulation, which are accepted by law as having similar face value, the more valuable commodity will gradually disappear from circulation . For example, if there is two types of commodity currencies in circulation .
 It is my belief that a self funding Racket was created to surround me with hostile people which served several functions . The most sought one was the the funded RICO operatives could motivated themselves and empower themselves in a fraud of self gain exploiting assets of mine .
 The bad money which is forgery by under seignorage ( of great value after it is forged) is desired over regular law abing commerce and has replaced law abiding commerce and currency . Bad money is a form of forgery which is desired .
 forged currency is seen as a Good and is counterfiet to the real currency but provides a higher return . forged currency seen as counter-futut to real currency . The forged currency provides a better return than the real .
 The process of Forgery is a document is started such as Drivers Liscense application and then in some way road blocked before completion in a contiguous A way . The process is known as Forgery .
 Documents later completed but with ' incorrect data entered into as the second stage of its manufacture . Falling into the wrong hands the documents are later completed .
 Counterfeiting misrepresents aggreements or transactions as authentic or have some meaning they do not . Counterfeiters misrepresentate aggreements as authentic, or have meaning they don't have, they say they do .
 Money Laundering is using these techniques to create false accounting of transactions . Money Launder is using them to make false accounting transactions . The techniques are used to make money laundering transactions more transparent .
 Rackets are enties which use these techniques to illegal fraudulent gains . Racket is enties that use this technique to make illegal gains .
 Seigniorage is the difference between the value of money and the cost to produce and distribute it . Seignorage or seigneurage is from the Old French seigneuriage, “right of the lord to mint money”
 If rights to a sought after genome can be faked the value of it to others may be very hight and thus a tempting crime for fraudsters to comit .
 "Whatever I do in my life, positives, is given a poison pill of being an act of child abuse, shizophrenia, etc., etc. etc., thus assassination my character and making me a pariah to civilized environments and undermines my life"
 Tom Donegan and Tia Marsili become the road block to housing, leading to homelessness, denial of gym funds and denial of diabetes expenses of any type . My mother’s will and trust fund of about 333K dollars in assets was the sale of her Moraga Caol
 If Tom Donegan, Metro Churches or Methodists claim my mother’s will was not just for the half the value of the sale of her house at death but also somehow rights to her genome . I was never told about any value in her geonome, then I died
 The initial term of the contract is the first month, sept 1 through 30, then the bill repeats each month by electronic funds transfer unless cancelled . If you read Page 1 is says that the initial term is first month .
 The non victims of the peeping tom provocateurs will be paid through my trust fund. and racial hatred as if I offended will be directed at me. The non . victims will be . paid through . My trust fund will be set up to pay for the non victims .
 One way Homeboy in the identity of Ed Donegan might get caught is to go to a Glamm Domme who believes Homeboy Lives Matter and that Glamm Dome will catch Homeboy (who is in the role of EdDonegan and needs a sex worker) The Domme
 Money Laundering RICO uses its position of operating multiple accounts to swith unlawfully between them so that in the accounting shell game slight of hands the accounts appear to be correct .
 It features many Confidence Tricks elements such as selecting Gulls in advance A for a particular type of scam which has been rehearsed again and again . It features a team of Shills rather than just one con artist rather than a single con artist .
 Donegan is shaking it down in with long term preperation, resources, and complex . sustaining efforts to keep the Con running . Donegan says he is proud of his efforts .
 Prostitutes in the black market operate with some degree of secrecy, sometimes negotiating prices and activities through codewords [faked] and subtle gestures . The black market is a black market for prostitutes .
 In other countries, such as Nicaragua, where legal prostitution is regulated, hotels may require both parties to identify themselves, to prevent the rise of child prostitution . In Nicaragua, both parties must identify themselves .
 World Health Organization: Illegal organ trade occurs when organs are removed from the body for the purpose of commercial transactions . Organ trade is illegal in the U.S. According to the World Health Organisation, illegal organ (or third party parents brain genes)
 He also slyly indicated someone like him would manage a trust for me better than my brother, he said . He also said he would manage the trust better than his brother .
 Hobbs Act criminalizes both robery and extortion . Extortion is induced by wrongful use of actual or threatened force, or violence, or fear .
 Errors of Reproductivity, The State controls Fertilization Rights and Activities . State Teloogical “emergency’s control private reproductive rights and moves them into State owned assets for the elite .
 For the NIH and Obama Admin. to racketeer the value of my genome (and who does know it and will not disclose it to me) and pass it to White women it is necessary to make a publicly visible spectacle I am mentally incompetent, a spy or terrorist . And politicians choose
 Female minor to photograph ala Bettie Page I am bankrupt and Pea Fugitive on . ill pay the bill the run photo sessions . With my DNA Tx leaves and is chased to location he is at, fake Ed Donegan home, with Adult Entertainer, a fugitive
 Larceny is the unlawful taking of the property of another without the permission of the owner of the . owner . The intent to permanently deprive the owner i of that property is to be deprived of that . property .
 New FBI release on Clinton email probe refers to “Shadow Government’ False pretenses is similar to the theft crime of “larceny by trick,” which involves convincing someone i to transfer you possession of their property through deception .
 These religious charities are using their children as exploitation victims to gain advantage over an Atheist by an impersonator of the Atheist taking the bait .
 Catholic Charities 55 Tanuchua #750 epresentive Payee for Disabled People Representative Payee Program Payees . Payees as provided by the United States Social Security Administration . Catholic Charity 55 Tanunchua # 750 epresentives Payee .
 Representative Payee Program Keeps Homeless Numbers Down established 1971 . Catholic Charities assumes financial responsibility for people who are unable to manage their own finances .
 The Payee Program provides assistance to the most vulnerable members of the community . The young, the elderly, and the disabled who are unable to manage their SSA, SSI, and or VA benefits . i] I, Edward Paul Donegan was homeless and without a payee when
 I have repeatedly watched the local media ASSIST in the fabrication of deceptive public circumstances and other acts of fraud as well as allow those activities on the visible parts of their outdoor property . The local media have refused to remediate any of it or allow accept my complaints .
 I hope instead the weed of crim bears bitter fruit and the risks of a town like this be understood . Border officials should be held to account for running unsafe communities, to unsafe communities to move to .
 Alma Vivian Powell is an American audiologist and the wife of military and political figure Colin Powell . She married Colin Powell on August 25, 1962 .
 The basics are that I am around someone, someone I contacted (Veronica Hoffman though she dropped contact with me) or someone I don’t know approaching me (a woman in Yoga pants riding on Metro and literally putting it in my face invading my space) and doing so very
 It seems to be as ass flashed (or sexually abusive treatment of me such as shouting in pain and saying I owe the shouter because that person is my pornography) at me . It seems like ass flashed or sexually abusive .
 People like Trinitas Nsabimana of Africa, Obama and Tom Donegan connected, seem to be put in place at ARC of Northern Virginia to arrange something with the blacks or sometimes gays, who may wish IVF rights .
 CIA contractor illegal irregulars were used to kill Jen Moore and to assault me, drawn from Social Services Agencies (who are in a RICO scheme embezzling genes rights and the value of genes they do not own) Trinitas Nsabimana Ben Liak
 I ask one question of a store clerk, a stranger near me asks a question as “another question .. ” thus trying to associate herself with me and my first question . Items I am shopping for pause near me, such as cars or campers. Items I'm shopping for
 'These are public shows out of my control staging events around me which are mere illusions. These are public . These are . public shows . out of . control . staging events . around me . which are . mere illusions, he said .
 The Mousetrap Ten Little Indians is a 1965 British crime mystery . It was written by film directed by George Pollock .
 It is the second Dysgraphic Agatha film version of Agatha Christie’s 1939 novel .
 It is a murder was produced by Oliver A Unger, with co-producer | yslely play by Harry Alan Towers also credited as co-writer under gatha Christie .
 Mousetrap opened in ILondon’s West End in 1952, and has snowbound mansion, invited there by a Mr United Nations .
 They continuously discover that none of them has actually ever met hen hen . They continuously since discover that they have never met hen .
 The longestOwen, running West End Dinner is served by the butler Grohmann on a tray . It has by far adorned with ten little Indian figurines, as well . The longest serving was served by a butler .
 Grohmann switches on f any play in a hidden tape recording . At 9m., as instructed, he runs the longest initial run exactly 9m. At 10m., he runs for the longest time in a row .
 Each of the 10 guests has a 25,000th scandalous secret, their involvement in various performance taking innocent people’s deaths . A man identifying himself history, with its as Owen reveals that each of the ten guests has an identity as history . The 10 guests have a 25
 Edward Donegan is taking the bait and owes victims DNA because he made vulnerbale people his photographic pornography . Donegan has been accused of sexual assault in the past .
 She is ordered by a judge to submit to a DNA test, the result of which proves she is Dunlap's child .
 At the Dunlap home, Brittney hears a noise on her way to the wine cellar but it turns out to just be rats . Brittney heard the noise while walking to the cellar . The Dunlap family was shocked to discover the rats were rats .
 The trio are in cahoots, running a scam to secure a and share Dunlap’s fortune . The scam is to secure Dunlap's fortune and share his fortune .
 A Long Con backed by the CIA and others created a fake ‘Nest Egg’ Trust Fund out of what was only a Sale of The Moraga House principle funded trust fund, about $323K, 42 Lambeth Square Moraga .
 With each new mistake you give the snowball a little nudge down the hill . With each mistake, you give each new snowball a nudge toward the hill.
 I will assert during this book that manufacture of fraud and forgeries are central to the scheme and not fighting them is a risk as well as fighting them . Not fighting fraud and fake forgeries is as important as not fighting it is, I say .
 "I am including to protect therefore the rental agreement that I DO HAVE from any fraud," she said . The rental agreement is to protect the agreement from fraud .
 HUMINT by illegal COINTELPRO and Sham investigations created under false premises and use illegal harassment . Racial fights are picked (A minority child is photgraphed in the vicinity of me and racial anti white statements made to me as misplaced anager) and staged . I and my
 The Gangstalk of Edward Donegan if we can study his racism my theories of Hegel could propell me . I will face numerous evictions over this including housing, gym, etc., but the liability is with Tx and the fake claims processing .
 It is incorrect to assume and too much to expect that the exclusionary -rule will deter all illicit police activity . Wikipedia B The Fruit of the Poisonous Tree Revisited and Shepardized .
 The complete exclusion of second and subsequent generation “fruits” of illegally obtained evidence seems logical and warranted unless there are competing considerations to restrict the radiations of the exclusionary rule . Exclusion of the Fruits of Illegally Obtained Evidence seems logical .
 The obvious competing consideration, in criminal as well as civil cases, is the policy of admitting relevant and trustworthy evidence in order to maximize the search for truth . In criminal cases, the policy should be to admit relevant evidence, and not to deny it .
 I suggest dirty cops planting evidence for self gain doing so an asset possessing law abiding people to use for personal enrichment of corrupt policing (of the police) by pretextual seizures assets based upon the planted evidence tilts to full the need to prosecute the misconduct of the law enforcement .
 An espionage backed impersonator of me has beaten me out to a white woman and is throwing the value of my genome at her buttocks . An espionage-backed impersonator has beaten him out to the white woman .
 Just Cause she eas with Law Enforcement and Neighborhood Watch . This is spliced with my real contact to her and the evidence manufacture about me . Evidence about me is splicing to her by Espionage along with my contact to . her for her to be incited against me . Just Cause
 Cement splicers join films together by using a chemical called film cement . Film cement is made of film base dissolved in a solvent . The splicer combines film cement with film base .
 Polyester film, such as that used for currently produced prints, will not bond with standard film ement . Polyester films such as those used for prints will bond with the standard standard film .
 Qa Tape splicers are used to join the two ends of a piece of thin transparent adhesive tape .
 Splicing is sometimes used to describe the technique of compositing used in digital film-making . It is used to combine visual elements such as actors onto a virtual background . Splicing can be seen as a way of combining visual elements into a digital film .
 Photobombing has been known to get global exposure, mainly due to the bandwidth and ease of dissemination afforded by the Internet, and the abundance of snapshots by smartphone cameras and other hand-held devices .
 "To interfere is to try to stop something from happening," says CNN.com . To interfere is not to interfere with something you want to stop .
 There's a plot in this country to enslave every man, woman and child. Be RR EE EE EE EEE ee eee eee Eee Z February 20 November 18 December 13 August 4 33rd & 5 NYC .
 When groups band together to control the supply of a product for their best interests, that’s called a cartel . The cartel is a white supremacist who regretted from day one Corpus Christi Texas .
 Interest is used most often to describe something you like, enjoy or think useful . Interest is a sense of concern with and curiosity about someone or something . A fixed charge for borrowing money; usually a percentage of the amount borrowed .
 Not all participating Government and NGOs are on Josephine or Leopard Street . Salvation Army, Habitat For Humantiy, and other services for the needy are in that area .
 Not only are these English as Second Language speakers as is CENTCOM area Mistress Vesta, the one on the right flipped horizontally his photo I flipped back .
 Conrad Truntman Profile Pictures Nov 7, 2016 [B Airman fret cians at Ai Force Nistionat Gust BD Stirded F-22 Fighter Pdet at US, Ar Fore ROTC Wort to Vendor High Schoo, Trave AFS, CA f
 Subversion refers to a process by which the values and principles of a system in place are contradicted or reversed . Subversion attempts to transform the established social order and its structures of power .
 Subversion can be described as an attack on the public morale and, ‘the will to resist intervention are the products of combined political and social or class loyalties which are usually attached to national symbols . Subversion is a form of attack on public morale, “the will
 The Marshals Service supports communities by transferring certain types of forfeited assets to state, local and nonprofit organizations . Money Laundering makes Fake claims from Neighborhood patrols of gang infested neighborhoods .
 Black Corpus Christi PD, Black FBL Praencthinn shame time lack all arannd ma Rinek and nnn white ranietar claro nratand T 0 PM-7 AM PAL)
 Edward Pauld Donegan (or more actually) is a pedophile who secretly likes non white children . White adults are going to white adult entertainers and asking those adults to “catch” him as an adult entertainer . Edward is an impersonator of Donegan .
 When someone behaves in a surreptitious way, they’re being secretive . When someone is secretive, it’s a good thing for the public to know about .
 Each CIA cryptonym contains a two character prefix called a digraph, which designates a geographical or functional area . Stegonography or Secret Writing uses “cyhper” references to “clear text” information .
 I completed the first thirty days of rental and showed Wells Fargo Bank and Social Security billing at Salinas address . During the time in California I . completed the . first thirty . days in California . I completed . the first 30 days of . rental and . showed Wells . Fargo . Bank
 This book Jim Vocelka and William Ruiz, Stay and Play and Capitola Crisis Acting as foundation work in the Long Con, Stages of the Long con on my Sperm Bank Rights . In the Lambda Green White chapter of this book this and more information is found
 Preparations are made in advance of the game, including the hiring of any assistants required . Preparing for the game is a huge undertaking .
 A conspirator (in on the con, but assumes the role of an interested bystander) puts an amount of money into the same scheme as the victim, to add an appearance of legitimacy . Special Operators The In-and-In conspirator is a conspirator in on the
 In my case the bullying of me creates the Legend of me, a false legend, under which Person “C” aka CIA can operate catching Person ‘B” (I call Tx) in conduct consistent with the bullyingo of me . The bullyingo creates the
 The accusations by in-explicit foundation-less chest full of hot air not saying anything have been far removed from any truth about me . The person planting evidence has the . chest of . hot air, he said .
 As usual when I am in the vicinity of cash a Shill con artist scheme surrounds me . Black Secret Service inside the bank including one male and one female with a graduated like drinking bottle which would be similar in description to my camping cooking one though I had left that for then .
 I had contacted a Dominatrix i never heard back from but likely she was warned off me based on the fake allegations against me . I saw a Doppelganger of me who confessed to peeping and acknowledged my DNA was due to others because of that .
 He did thinks like coach me to put a motorcycle pouch on my rear bench handles knowing I already planned to do it and had the gear., etc., but felt it was for a good cause, much like those at Highlander Motel .
 There is a strong propensity for this scam where I would live WITHOUT social services and it is social services who wish my DNA for non whites and operate the Protection Racket . Social services are not the only ones to wish for non-whites and operate this scam .
 "I spent about 20 years trying to prove the things in my vicinity and even in my home [ a not involved in], were in fact untrue," says Dunham . Dunham: "In fact like Tom Dunham I spent about . 20 years . trying to . prove that things in . my
 Police activity alleged to Tom Dunham and IJ as others are in pizza pedo networks . Instead it is alleged to be police activity . Instead of alleged police activity, it's alleged that police are alleged to have been involved in pizzeria pedos .
 "I did not get to Genentech all through my motorcycle trip to California that was my main goal. Though I did . I did get to . Genentec all though was my . main goal, I was to get to the top of the list .
 William RUiz took the “law enforcement positive” acts I was doing on the computer and turned it into HIS black nationalist “Fapping” to white lesbians . He did it the Aviator Glasses Cheap Shot character assassination way .
 In this way use of my genome by racketeers seeing adult entertainers in my identity or KOMPROMAT shown to others by made by police back people seems to have been acts of my own . The genome was used to identify me as an adult entertainer .
 I am evicted on pretexts from places I shoud1 live then on religious property . Fake religious allegations undermine me and I don’t have religous housing either . I don't have religious housing either. I am evicting people who live in religious property on pretext
 I was hit by radiological attack and my mother stalked and hit by it too in 2011, me in 2009 and Ted Gunderson and others in 2009 . My mother was stalked, hit and stalked in 2011 and in 2009, she was hit, she said .
 Prosecutors can bring to County Hospitals and Goodwill Industries Programs with Asset Seizures . County social services victims and other programs generally can claim biologically seized assets .
 He lived in a two-bedroom condo advertised on Craig’s list . He moved into on an ongoing rental leasee, handshake, for the unused bedroom .
 In his private high tech life he did a lot of work on cryptographic technology in network security . In private high-tech life he worked on cryptographic technologies in networks security .
 Jim Volcelka’s Pez Dispenser for mine seems to have been an Obama family request . I think I now know why .
 ARC of Northern Virginia has used quackery from the outset to undermine the fact i never needed them or signed up for them. Quackery. The ARC of . Northern Virginia . has used it to undermine my need for them and I never signed up to them.
 Not having the kit with him blocked him from the continuous chain of events of fixing my toilet . It appears from what I was able to hear in 46 he had gone a couple of floors below to 26 where a scene was staged of a peeping tom toilet and enraged community members outside the
 If you have a running toilet and have replaced the flapper, but this did not stop water from leaking out of the tank, your toilet may need a new flush valve . Google “People also ask” If members of the community were harmed by the activities in 26 then that
 If I am evicted for any such activities unfolding at other apartments confused with mine that is the manufacture of pretexts in conspiracy against rights and conspiracy against property . If I’m evicted, it’s an act of conspiracy against human rights and property rights,’
 Thief documents at the Clerks window identities switched out as plaintiff . Thief |. identity switched out of as plaintiff. Identity identity changed to that of the thief . Thief: 'Thief |. Documents at the C.S. window identities switch out as plaintiffs'
 I believe a Blackwater Enrique Prado like CIA backed group is behind this, behind the MKUTLRA connected powers, and misuses of my DNA, and my normal if it had existed is a threat to them and what they have already done .
 You’|l see surreptitious applied mostly to actions, rather than to things or ideas . You�’ |l see . seen mostly to action, not ideas, rather to actions .
 A black man with little education follows me around Atlanta Georgia in a muscle car . I confronted the black man in the muscle car in some type of street theater with the life long malnourished black woman . This is the person at activity in my vicinnity I am not involved
 The black man in 47 was moving around in the hallways and also another person in the hallway, I think AB dropped a black handkerchiff near me as if to place me in activities .
 Sower did not move forward,does not have his or her own work result Roadblock My TMOBILE phone lost cell tower for a while, I think it switched over to a different chip in another phone or was fake cell tower switched out .
 I offered to show them the cabinets I had built using that very drill but a the female answered the door and said she was not interested in that . later the male returned and returned my tools, still glad he had borrowed them, but said the female did not like me going to her
 On the phone with the remote domina 4b could have taken my role as 46, and in so doing, acting in conjunction with 47, 43, and 4B, and the domina, arrange a fake claim to my genome to be presented to protectors of the neighborhood from
 The color of the handkerchief identifies a particular activity, and the pocket it is worn in identifies the wearer’s preferred role in that activity . The pocket it's worn in identify the wearer's preferred role .
 Black S and M, Blue Anal sex, Blue Oral sex, Brown Scat, Green Hustler/prostitution, Grey Bondage, Orange L Anything goes, Purple Piercing, Red Fisting, Yellow Watersports . MKUTRA, Rockefeller ties to MKULTRA,
 If the operations, as it was, to incite homelessness in a person already a victim of the Rockefellers the scam was shameful . But the word —{ ' lucrative doesn’t carry a similar sense of shame . Being up against charities is like being Paul Newman in The
 Rockefeller was a Republican who was often children from from from considered to be liberal, progressive, or hese evil moderate . Rockefeller was often considered an evil moderate, or a liberal .
 Rockefeller was the second vice president appointed to the position under the 25th Amendment . Rockefeller was appointed by Ford himself, following Ford himself . Rockefeller served as vice president of the United States .
 You will likely have your best success growing your own seeds in seedling soil 2.5 years ago . You can grow your own seedlings in seedlings soil .
 CIA TSS Overthrow Including Irregular Warfare Plant of La Cosa Nostra Chicago Sleeper Agents + Mexican Mafia ""33""5 FOXP2 does not show in Famililes Watch research Sleeper agents by CIA .
 On November 18 1961 I was born as a 33rd Degree mason plan to create Aristocracy back Junta regimes around the world . Barrack Obama and Ted Cruz Jr being among those among those being born .
 Frank Sinatra, close to Marylin and Mafia and Mob know something is up and this is why Marylin Monroe, neighbor of Lawford Shriver, was murdered . Lawford . Shriver was a close friend of Shriver .
 Defense Contracting Oil Business for his Olympic gold medal in the 1992 Olympic Games, and his Olympic bronze medal in 1996 Olympic Games on the 3 m springboard . He also won a bronze medal at the 1996 Olympics in the 3m springboard event .
 The premise of a Leviathan who can oversee a Realm and insure the end of anarchy brutishness to impose law may hold true under an instituted government . But on a shadow government of mafia actors who have infiltrated subsumed government rules are few, war is constant . War is constant, and
 Hobbes describes human psychology without reference to the summum bonum, i Or greatest good, as previous thought had done . Hobbes described human psychology in Hobbes' words .
 A political community can be oriented around this fear of a political community that pursues the greatest good . A fear of the evil of the world can be overcome by the fear of justice .
 Even when ; two men are not fighting, there is no guarantee that the other will not try to kill him for ; his property or just out of an aggrieved sense of honour, so they must constantly be on guard against one another .
 David Sanchez Morales was born on 26th August, 1925 . He was born in Mexico City, Mexico .
 After his mother divorced his father he was virtually adopted by Carbajal’s parents . He was almost adopted by his mother after his father divorced his mother .
 Morales joined the U.S. Army in 1946 and after basic training was sent to Germany . Morales was part of the Allied occupation force in Germany .
 Morales was recruited into army intelligence in 1947, Ruben Carbajal says . Morales was a member of the army intelligence staff .
 David Morales pictured in Cuban newspaper in 1978 . Gaps in the Cuban newspaper were taken of David Morales .
 In November, 1961, William Harvey arranged for Morales to be posted to the CIA station in Miami . Morales was posted to JM/WAVE, the CIA's Miami-based station .
 Morales built a new house at El Frita, which is about half-way between Willcox and the Mexican border . Morales built the new house in Willcox, Mexico, about half way from Willcox to the border .
 David Sanchez Morales made his last trip to Washington, D.C. in May 1978 .
 George Efythron Joannides (JULY 5, 1922 March 9, 1990) was a Central Intelligence Agency officer . In 1963, he was the chief of the Psychological Warfare branch of the agency’s JMWAVE station in Miami . In 1978 was the
 Robert Aime Maheu was an American businessman and lawyer who worked for the FBI and CIA . He was the chief executive of Nevada operations for the industrialist Howard Hughes .
 Maheu was born in Waterville, Maine, Maine . He was the son of Christine and Ephrem Maheou, who were of French-Canadian descent .
 CIA recruited Maheu to approach the West Coast representative of the Chicago mob, Johnny Roselli . The CIA recruited him to approach Roselli in the summer of 1960 . Roselli was the Chicago representative for the mob .
 Maheu told ‘the mobsters that the CIA was willing to pay $150,000 to have Castro killed’
 The Cabal P hidden history of the political force that has dominated American politics for the last 50 years . Bush Family Dominance of . ieiean ete years, and the . Cabal . dominance of American politics .
 The Secret Team of Defense Business Contract Killers and the contracts and secret history they kill to preserve the mafia profitability of. The mafia .
 The Annus mirabilis papers are the four papers that Albert Einstein published in Annalen der Physik in 1905 . Einstein published the papers in a scientific journal, in 1905.
 Her second ; American tour, in 1929, succeeded in equipping the Warsaw Radium Institute with ' radium' Her sister Bronistawa was its director . Institute opened in 1932, with her sister .
 Assassinations studied by the CIA of how these therapies can be used €© advance rather than retard cancer cases . I 'Bporunisc Assassinations' are studied by CIA .
 Possible late effects; possible chromosomal damage . Possible late effect on human life . Possible chromosome damage . Radiation effects on humans .
 When radiation therapy is used to kill cancerous cells in the body, it is important to measure the dose correctly . This is to avoid unnecessary damage to normal cells .
 Radiation is not selective to tumor cells and therefore targets any cells that are in the process of replication when the therapy is applied . Radiation is aimed at any cells in the processes of replication at the time of therapy .
 This thereby stresses the importance of administering the correct dose in order to ensure optimal efficiency with minimal side effects . Yolanda Smith, B.Pharm.net .
 Long after the acute effects of radiation have subsided, radiation damage continues to produce a wide range of physical problems . Radiation damage is linked to energy absorbed, not just radiation exposure .
 Many fallout particles are especially hazardous biologically . FALLOUT PARTICLES are especially dangerous to humans .
 It is chemically similar to calcium, causing it to accumulate in growing bones . It is similar to the calcium found in calcium in bones .
 When a plutonium weapon is exploded, not all of the plutonium is fissioned . When a nuclear bomb explodes, some of the fissioning material is not all fissionable .
 In her 2019 book, What Do We Need Men For? A Modest Proposal, Carroll accused 1 Les Moonves and Donald Trump of sexually assaulting her in the mid-1990s . Carroll accused Moonves of sexual assault in the 1990s in her book .
 Her husband John Johnson is an American television anchorman, senior correspondent, documentary filmmaker and artist . He is also a senior correspondent and documentary filmmaker .
 Charles Thomas. The Man Who Asked Too Many JFK Questions . Charles Thomas . The man who asked too many JFK questions .
 In 1963 Whitten served as chief of the Mexico desk in the clandestine service . Whitten also served as head of the Mexican desk in 1963 .
 The day after JFK was killed, deputy CIA director Richard Helms put Whitten in charge of collating all reports on Oswald . Whitten investigated the famous case of Otto John, the West German intelligence chief who defected to East Germany .
 I had invited him i to comment on the report, and he had withheld all of his comments until he got to the i meeting, he said . He had withheld his comment until he had to get to the meeting .
 Angleton is best known for the “mole hunt’s” unsuccessful effort to find a Soviet spy inside the CIA in the late 1960s . Angleton was a legendary and controversial figure .
 Ghost, Angleton and his molehunters closely monitored Oswald’s travels, foreign ‘ contacts and political activities from November 1959 to November 1963 . Angleton monitored Oswald from 1959 to 1963 .
 Whitten, an outstanding undercover officer, received a poor job evaluation in 1965 . He quit the CIA and moved to Europe to join the Vienna Men’s Choir .
 The ‘Castro did it’ theory lacks plausibility . As T explain in this piece for Salon, the “Castro’s did it,” theory has no plausibility.
 ' i harles W Thomas was a desperate man. He was desperate man . He was not alone .
 Thomas endured nearly 2,000 job rejection letters; he was ‘too old’ or “too qualified,” 1 ' and anyway, he had been fired by the State Department . In nearly three dispiriting years ‘. In nearly 3,000 years �
 Thomas had high marks from his superiors and colleagues alike . The explicit blemish on his record was an observation by a Mexico City superior that Thomas did not exercise proper ‘control” i over his secretary .
 Povid Atlee Phillips retrieved from Spartucus Eductional and copied or modified to ; here . David Atlee was born in Fort Worth, Texas, on 31st October, 1922 .
 After a 2008 split in the Union of Right Forces, he cofounded Solidarnost . He was a member of the party that split in 2008 . He is now the leader of the country's largest political party .
 Zangara later claimed I don’t hate Mr Roosevelt personally . I hate all officials and anyone who is rich, he said .
 It is constructed by printing a deck of cards so their top half is as in a normal deck, while the bottom half is all the same, originally the five of diamonds . The top half of the cards is the same as the top half in normal deck .
 Shaw programmed as a sleeper agent who blindly obeys orders to kill without any memory of his crimes . During captivity, Shaw was programmed to be programmed to obey orders to murder without memory . Shaw is now being held in a psychiatric ward in the UK .
 The 75-year-old claims he had an on-and-off affair with the Hollywood legend, Monroe, beginning when he was 16 and she was 33 . Monroe was 33 when the affair began when the actor was 16 .
 Hear a discussion about the unique physical structure of Albert Einstein’s brain . Hear a panel of experts on Albert Einstein's brain . Find out more about the structure of the Einstein brain in a new book .
 I am a witness to the John F Kennedy assassination and what unfolds is my story . It is also the story of the CIA and irregular warfare and how my family, law abiding and loyal, became a victim of dirty war techniques . I am also a witness in the assassination .
 In 1962 President Kennedy outlined in his now-famous speech to Congress that he desired to implement an elite fighting force that was well-trained .
 Kennedy was controversially interested in restructuring the ‘military to make room for quick, unconventional forms of warfare, to augment and in ; some cases replace, the massive troop buildup and operations .
 Arms Control and Disarmament Act of 1961 was created to establish a governing body for the control and reduction of apocalyptic armaments with regards to protect a world from the burdens of armaments and the scourge of war . Act was passed in 1961 .
 The origins and collective operation of MKULTRA is a collective guilt of a “Deep State” now turned into human trafficking in designer babies, murders, cover-ups, international acts of murder, and chaos of failed plans, failed plans .
 The providing a white supremacist child porn against his will and sexual interests is abusive and meant to be a hostile act of a provocateur, an assailant . Overtly stated, the . providing a a a child . porn against . his will is abusive .
 Any claim I have ever consented to any of this is resultant from forged communication, forged identity, or misrepresentation, or those in combination., all of which have been used to found the operation’s claims which lack any legitimacy . Any claim of consentence to the operation
 Between 1960 and 1983, 3. million black Africans were removed from their homes and forced into segregated neighbourhoods as a result of apartheid legislation . The largest mass evictions in modern history, in some of the largest mass eviction in history, occurred in South Africa .
 In its most desperate hour, not its noblest, an Espionage scramble to claim the rights to my genome .
 Repugnance via State Involuntary Medical Procedure Conspiracy Against Rights OF Individuals under involuntary pretextually false civil commitment in prelude to Reproductive and other abuses . Individuals under . involuntary pretextual false civil . commitment in . prelude . to . Reproductive . rights .
 Much of the abuse of me has been in the form of those of other religions attacking me both legally and in public standing by attempting to sexually humiliate me . Their own religion may gain in standing before the public and claims to my reproductivity .
 I am Rx who is the recipeint of planted females as “porn” I do not want and even call the police one. I am not going to call it a porn one. It is a recipe for a recipeint .
 The fraud event is it seems I am tied to that act and that is by appearances only, and I believe this is the fruad in asset siezures allowed by the case before Judge Roll . THe fraud event was a fraud event and that seems to be by appearance only
 A popular version is the NE555 and this is suitable in most cases where a ‘555 timer’ is specified . The NE555 is suitable for most cases with a 555 timer .
 As the most powerful elites in society they can abuse government offices and increasingly unconstitutional (Void for Vagueness) systems to target their MKULTRA victims and discredit them . They can use government offices to target victims . The government is increasingly unconstitutional .
 A person in an organization or an organization in a vicinity who is Targeted for recruitment to work for the interests exterior to the interest of the organization they are in or placed in . Likely they will work for interest that placed them .
 In my case I think wars are fought against me such as race and pedophilia wars allowing Espionage based font organizations to conspire against my rights and during that .
 Timothy Thomas defined the method of conveying information to a partner or an opponent specially prepared information to incline him to make the predetermined decision desired by the initiator of the Doppelganger action . This method, as defined by Timothy Thomas, is “a means . of conve
 Every year, Congress passes the National Defense Authorization Act . The act makes appropriations for the defense budget . Seizures of seized assets are disposed of by award .
 “Affirmation of authority of the Armed Forces of the United States to detain covered persons pursuant to the Authorization of Use of Military Force,” this provision allows the U.S. military to act as a police force .
 Hitmen Evidence Clustering Around Judge Roll, Scalia, and Thomas Crane Wales was born in Boston, Massachusetts . Hitmen evidence clustering around Judge Roll and Scalia was published in Hitmen .
 FBI Seeking Information Letter May be Linked to 2001 Killer Gi ot LAS VEGAS NV . Letter purportedly from a gunman who shot U.S. Attorney Thomas C Wales in 2001 .
 Nevada Test Site, 65 miles north of Las Vegas, was one of the most significant nuclear weapons test sites in the U.S. The Nevada test site is 65 miles from Las Vegas . It was a nuclear test site in the 1960s .
 In February 2018, an FBI official reported the investigation had found “evidence strongly suggesting” Wales was murdered by a contract killer . Wales' death was likely a conspiracy involving a small group of people, the FBI said .
 Carondelet later purchased a hospital in Marina del Rey and ‘hamed’ it Daniel Freeman Marina Hospital . The hospital is now a hospital .
 Ford's legal department has captured several industry awards . Ford's general counsel has won several awards for his department . He has served as general counsel of Ford Motor Company since 2005 .
 Tom Wales was not supposed to be home on the night of October 11, 2001 . Tom Wales is the son of Tom Wales, who was killed in a car crash in 2001 .
 In the evening, after leaving his office, near the federal ‘ courthouse, he returned to his Craftsman-style, wood-frame house in a quiet neighborhood .
 Tom Wales, an Assistant United States Attorney in Seattle, was killed in his home in 2001 . Wales was forty-nine years old and had been a federal prosecutor for eighteen ; years .
 The phrase was partly a joke, a bit of feigned grandiosity to justify a tendency toward excessive ' meticulousness' The contemporary history of eugenics began in the early 20th century, when a popular movement emerged in the UK .
 Those deemed “unfit to reproduce” often included people with mental or physical disabilities, criminals and “deviants” Those deemed unfit to reproduce often included criminals and members of minority groups .
 The eugenics movement became associated with Nazi Germany and the Holocaust . The defense of many of the defendants at the Nuremberg trials of 1945 to 1946 attempted to justify their human-rights abuses by claiming there was ittle difference between the Nazi .
 Christina-Taylor Green is still surprising her parents Karina Bland . The Greens went to Cape Cod every summer, while John, a scout for the Los Angeles Dodgers, worked . The couple had Cape Cod ties .
 When you rig something, you connect parts in a way that’s so crazy it just 'might work' It's so crazy that it just ‘might work.’ It's not easy to rig something .
 Nee es Rig can aise decerihie seceivind people to achieve a certain outcome . The Rig can be found in a book called Nee Es Rig, a book about how to achieve success .
 This doesn’t mean it was repaired; it means it was rigged fraud played a role in the outcome . Fixed Delusion or Compulsive Act is a belief or action fixed in destiny by a sapient or controlling, engineering, even legally enginerring force .
 Thomas Neil Donegan was named after him . He is a 4-assisted monkey .
 Alan Bartlett Shepard Jr. was an American astronaut, naval aviator, test pilot, and businessman . Shepard was a test pilot and test pilot . Shepard died at the age of 98 .
 In 1961, he became the second man and the first American to travel into space, and in 1971, he walked on the Moon . He was also the first man to walk on the Earth's surface .
 A retired NASA Langley mathematician whose computations influenced space exploration efforts from Mercury through the shuttle program, will be honored A with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, President Barack Obama announced this 1 week .
 Mark Kelly is an American politician, engineer, former astronaut, and United States Navy captain . He is also an engineer and former astronaut . Kelly is a former Navy captain and politician .
 Scott Joseph Kelly is an American engineer, retired astronaut, and U.S. Navy captain . He is a retired engineer, and United States Navy captain, and retired astronaut . February 21, 1964 (age 55 years Space mis mis mis : 7 21, STS-124, ST
 Immunology Transfers are Family Database Transfered . Immunology polymorphs to regional histories of diseases and climates family lines .
 The proteins encoded by certain genes are also known as antigens, as a result of their historic iscovery as factors in organ transplants . Antigens are a form of protein proteins that can be used in organ transplant surgery .
 HLAs corresponding to MHC class II present antigens from outside of the cell to T-lymphocytes . Different classes have different functions . HLAs correspondences of MHC Class II and HLAs are different types of antiges .
 These particular antigens stimulate the multiplication of T-helper cells, which in turn stimulate antibody-producing B-cells to produce antibodies to that specific antigen . Antigens stimulating T-Helper cells stimulate the production of antibodies .
 The likely 2/18/1961 IVF of Barack Obama from my father or mother’s DNA . A year and a few days after IVF Birther Theory . MKULTRA TNG is Formulated among the Most Expert Familial DNA Detectives .
 Obama also an IVF on Feb 20 1961 . Note online impersonators speak of Glorian and Genenetch, an online impersonator . In my twenties or so I am being harassed by some kind of odd police police .
 In Concord CA I even call the Concord police on some form of special ops which seem to be + 9 months 9 months pass and I am born on 11/18/1961 and Obama is likely also + 3 months Feb 23 1962 . A year after IVF of Obama IVF
 This is supportd by Archive.org, emails, many, I sent the world geneticists, world race riot events of the time, and Mountain Prophecies 2008v .
 Larry McDonald was born in Atlanta, Georgia, on April 1, 1935 to Harold McDonald, Sr. and Callie Grace Patton, who was a cousin of United States Army General George S Patton . The crab theory has been persistent and echoed by the Soviet interceptor pilot Gennady Os
 AncestryDNA exceeded 3 million testers in ' January 2017, and 23andMe broke 2 million in April .
 There is a difference between the total size ' of a database and what I’ II call the effective size, that is, the number of people 1 available for cousin matching .
 This will also boost IQ in Afica now called Autism Spectrum disorder, perhaps also some other medical benefits . Afica is now known as the Autism Spectrum Disorder .
 If I have children five generations later they will tie to Obama’s children . Ne My eggs will need to be broken in the U.S., if I have kids five generations after they’re married .
 Edward P Donegan, me, my take on this, a ruling disallowed a legal theory or some other matter affecting the genetic privacy rights of the President, possibly asked for by the Secret Service .
 I THINK this could have been done as a safety-valuable investment in the U.S. President Barack Obama's career . I think this might have been used as a hedge against possible economic collapse and resurgence of anti-elitist sentiment .
 This ties to Justice Scalia, WETWORKs and IQ by religious groups . It's not the first time the Supreme Court has heard from Scalia .
 Bell Curve takes it name from the similarity of the shape of the curve to a bell . Also called a normal distribution curve (because this is the form random variation forms in occurrence, ) The Bell Curve is also called the Bell Curve .
 In addition to United States statistics posted here, worldwide IQ studies have been done as well . The IQ of Americans in the United States has been published in the past .
 People of African descent in the U.S. 1 typically average about 7-20% racial mixture with European genetic base . In theory, differences in living conditions have already accounted for .
 The simple suggestion that ‘ environment has to be ‘accounted for’ in statistics by “correcting” the IQ tests I results is constantly used to continually upward adjust IQ statistics for minority populations . Nevertheless, the simple suggestion of ‘environment has to account for
 There are still discernable differences in inheritable IQ between whites, blacks, and Asians at all income levels . The difference between whites and blacks is about 1.5 standard deviations, and between Asians of about 3 IQ points .
 GDP and societal success seems to be correlated with ethnic IQs . GDP and governmental, scientific, societal . societal, societal, and conomic success seem to be linked with ethnic . IQs.
 The Cali Cartel would become known for its innovations in trafficking and production . The Cartel moved its refining operations out of Colombia to Peru and Bolivia, i as well as pioneering new trafficking routes through Panama .
 Debate over the 1 cartel’s participation in heroin trafficking remains . Debate over 1 cartel's participation in drug trafficking remains.
 The bank was believed to have been used to launder funds for the Cali cartel, as well as Pablo Escobar’s A Medellin Cartel .
 The Cali Cartel’s ownership of the ‘ chain, from January 1988 to May 4, 1990, was targeted for 85 bombings by Pablo t Escobar and the Medellin Cartel, leaving a total of 27 people dead . As a consequence of the Cali
 Robert Walner i was the chief prosecutor in Liechtenstein’s capital Vaduz . Walneri was the Chief Prosecutor in the country's capital . He was in charge of the government in the 1990s .
 Afghanistan origin heroin supplying ring using ethnic Uzbek criminals and corrupt : KGB and later FSB officers including the Moscow-based KGB Colonel Evgeny G ; Khokholkov, the Oleg Ivanov created Izmaylovskaya Russian mafia .
 Google Street View of 52 Lambeth Square $323k house turned into a trust fund inherited inherited it is being remodeled in the bedrrom of Tom and den .
 Tom Donegan, Jim, Glorian, Athena dead sevearl by cancer . Athena's body was donated to the U.S. Public Health Service, the Uniformed Non Combatant military medicine branch .
 The USA White House version of DNA, Brain and i and Monday, February 20; L961. (L961) e JFK e. JFK e Thorkill Kristensen, IQ, Brain, Developing Economies e George Ball, State Dept, brain and foreign economies
 JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for European Economic Cochange operation Thorkil Kristensen at around 11 am on February 20, 1961 . JFK attended a Goerge Ball in 1961 .
 JFK Speech and USA needs PhDs for its economies, Waldorf Astoria, 33rd and 5th . This book, a thing of value and skill in researching and writing, was Peiiaaaeascxaeaitmamaaamekaden .
 My computers were robbed and destroyed as I wrote my book (two computers, both notebooks) and WiFi was never installed . WiFi never installed on my computers .
 "Not as much as I would like, but that is tool I like to use too and be that to others too as I learn from experience," she says .
 "All of this alleged taught to me by others, as if to deny this ability in me," she said . "I'm not the only person in the world to be able to do this," she added .
 According to Cattell’s psychometricallyased theory, general intelligence is subdivided into gf and gc . Cattell: General intelligence is divided into gc and gf . According to the theory, gf is a form of intelligence that can be divided into
 Examples of tasks that measure crystallized intelligence are vocabulary, general information, abstract word analogies, and mechanics of language . Examples of crystallized Intelligence are vocabulary and general information .
 Let’s just come out and aay it. The Importance of Test Features in Cognition Research is at Frontiers in Psychology .
 World economies Nations and Their Average IQs Worldwide |Q About the link. World economies nations and their average IQs worldwide .
 President Obama asserts his power to put anyone he wants in prison without charges or trial forever . He asserts his right to assassinate any. United States through his use of Executive Orders .
 Loughner could join a long list of CIA/US Military “mind controlled’s” list . Hundreds of veterans have filed a lawsuit against the U.S. government .
 A 2009 lawsuit claimed that the CIA intended to design and test i septal electrodes that would enable them to control human behavior . The lawsuit also claimed that a 2009 lawsuit was filed against the CIA .
 The Obama regime is fighting 'with everything it has to keep the information on these ‘mind controlled” assassins , secret, and as we can read as reported by the Courthouse News service .
 Princeton is the fourth-oldest institution of higher education in the U.S. and one of the nine colonial colleges chartered before the American Revolution . Princeton is one of nine colonial college chartered by the British-American colonies .
 School of Public and International Affairs, the School of Engineering and » Applied Science . School of Architecture and the Bendheim Center for Finance . Bendheim center is located in Munich, Germany .
 Doctoral Universities has one of the largest university libraries in the world . University of Liverpool has a very high research activity’s largest library .
 The controversial 1986 exposé America’s Secret Establishment by Anthony Sutton claimed that Skull and Bones was out to create a ‘new world order” run by Bonesmen . America's Secret Establishment was published in 1986 .
 Gas Forrestal ited to Princeton and Gottlieb CIA MKULTRA . Forrestal came from a strict middle class Irish Catholic family .
 He opposed U.S. support for the establishment of the State of Israel . Feared that this would alienate Arab nations needed as allies, and whose petroleum reserves were vital for both military and civilian industrial expansion .
 Forrestal went to work as a bond salesman for William A Read and Company in 1916 . She eventually developed a dependence on alcohol and suffered various mental health issues .
 Forrestal spent much of his time in Washington, at the Office of Naval Operations while completing flight training . Forrestal reached the rank of lieutenant in the final year of the war at the end of his war .
 After the war, orrestal resumed his career in finance and made his fortune on Wall Street . He made a fortune in finance after the war .
 He became a partner in 1923, was appointed vice president in 1926, and by 1937 was president of the company . By 1937, he had been the company's president .
 One of the individuals aided by his work was a eighbor, Franklin D Roosevelt . Roosevelt was a friend of Roosevelt's .
 A prospective astronaut approaches him to treat her “under the table” to keep NASA from finding out anything is wrong with her . While giving his new applicants an exercise, a prospective astronaut approached him to .
 Dulles’s career was jump-started by the information provided by Fritz Kolbe, a German diplomat and a foe of the Nazis . Dulles's career started with the information from Kolbe .
 Mohammed Mossadegh of Iran was deposed in 1953 (via Operation Ajax), and President Arbenz of Guatemala was removed in 1954 .
 Dulles published the book The Craft of Intelligence (ISBN 1592282970) in 1963 . One of seven commissioners of the Warren Commission to investigate the assassination of John F Kennedy .
 On November 29, 1963 President Lyndon Johnson appointed Dulles as President . In 1969 Dulles died of influenza, complicated by pneumonia, at the age of 75 .
 At Harvard, Mr Gores became friendly with professor Marcel Breuer and Philip Johnson, future fellow members of the Harvard Five . Ralph Bennett, President of Magdalen College, Cambridge, was his onetime president .
 To Ernest Bell III I declare a debt for encouragement in my first phases of compilation and for some useful early copies of signals brought back from the P.R.O. as well as other materials valuable as corroborative evidence .
 Author thanks daughter Valerie and Laurence Buckley for proofreading final typescript . Daughter Valerie scours out and scours obscure records and documentations in search of precision of detail .
 Two Distinguished Flying Crosses and two NASA Exceptional Service Medals . The Congressional Space Medal of Honor is the Gagarin Gold Space Medal .
 Flash Mobs and Office _[fexas, has a grove of attention grabbing out of place trees that have highly hostile bevaivor forms around me . Wierd firings of me escalate was enter in Houston .
 At Pee planted to first I relapse into meth then upon a vow to onor the memory of my mother I take that out of the equation . Pf the astronauts will at various times permit myself drinking .
 Conrad died in a traffic accident on the one year birthday of a Michelle Obama daughter . NASA lanted a tree in Palo Alto area eath in 1996 to 1998 . The Obama children are being conceived and born 1999 .
 An Office mob of a Canadian military figures son, a Mossad loving motorcycle racer, and other figures form in my Wells Fargo team as Cutouts begin, like at AOL before, others are tied to me by same name on payroll . 2001 9/11 strikes and the Project Monarch files
 During that time my mother is diagnosed with possible ovarian cancer., Tom and Mark with each other and to me confuse facts they are relaying to me as I am in a federal prison . During that . time my . mother was diagnosed with . possible . ovarian cancer, Tom says . Tom
 During he dedication eremony, his speech to lighten he somber ccasion by injecting a little evity, pretending to ‘channel’ Conrad’s instructions from he hereafter . Conrad's instructions were “channeled’t he hereafter”
 NASA as honored this ‘request’, and very Christmas since then, all of he trees in the erove have been lit ith white lights . ‘’ relapse by bleeding out at night from the sutures and lies in a pool of blood with no one
 Upon release from 4 years of being trapped inside institutions and custody including United States DOD VA hospital, I move (evicted from my old apartment) to Texas as a homeless person .
 I will tie this theory to cover up of the Obama family line being among others een lit with red ights . I will say this is a cover-up of the President family line .
 This ties to the Kennedy Curse — iin Haverford, and long term scientific research in League ennsylvania, that of Nations descended masonic defense revious contractors generations of 2019 . An apartment I rent a unit in will be ttended. An apartment that I rent in
 Tom Donegan will die of Esophagus cancer . Even called the Princess, seemingly a fter his family’s brown princess and I am treated like a inancial Schizophrenic ownturn, his .
 Pete’s dyslexia continued to frustrate his academic efforts . Pete's dyslexic continued to be frustrated by his academic struggles .
 In 1942, the family lost their manor home in Philadelphia, and then moved into a small carriage house, paid for by | rances’s brother .
 Conrad was considered a bright, intelligent boy, but he continually struggled with schoolwork . Eventually, Charles Sr., broken down y financial failures, left his family . Conrad's father, Charles Jr. left the family .
 Conrad attended the Haverford School, a rivate academy in Pennsylvania, that previous generations of » Conrads had attended . Conrad attended a school that he and his family had attended before . Conrad is the son of former President Richard Nixon .
 Conrad repaired the plane single-handedly . Thereafter, the instructor gave Conrad the flight lessons that he needed to ' earn his pilot’s certificate even before he graduated from high school . Conrad is now a professional airman .
 Conrad Conrad was commissioned an Ensign in the United States Navy as a Naval ROTC ' graduate . Conrad was sent to Naval Air . Station Pensacola, Florida, for flight training .
 During a Rorschach inkblot test, he 1 told a psychiatrist that one blot card revealed a sexual encounter 1 complete with lurid detail .
 His initial application to NASA was denied with the notation not suitable for long-duration flight . After dropping his full enema bag on the * desk of the clinic’s commanding officer, he walked out.:113-119 .
 Earth orbital test flight of the complete Apollo spacecraft, including the r Lunar Module into low Earth orbit. Earth . orbit . Flight of the Apollo spacecraft .
 One of the photos that he took during the mission with his own image visible on the helmet visor of Al Bean was later listed on Popular Science’s photo gallery of the best astronaut selfies .
 Conrad's last mission was as Commander of Skylab 2, the first crew to board the Skylab space station . America’s first space station crew would spend 28 days in space . Conrad was the first to board Skylab and was the last commander of the first mission .
 Conrad was awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1978 . President Jimmy Carter honored Conrad for his work in the space program . Conrad is credited with saving the astronauts' lives in space .
 Conrad spearheaded McDonnell Douglas’s ultimately unsuccessful efforts to allay the fears of the public and policymakers . Conrad spearheaded efforts to save the 1 plane's reputation . Conrad: McDonnell Douglas was ultimately unsuccessful in his efforts to reassure the public .
 He was appointed staff vice ; president of international business development in 1984 . He was also a staff vice president of International Business Development .
 While at Princeton, Conrad met Jane DuBose, a student at Bryn Mawr, whose family owned a 1,600-acre ranch near Uvalde, Texas . Conrad's personal motto: "When you can’t be good, be colorful"
 Conrad met Nancy Crane, a Denver divorcee, through mutual friends . Conrad died in April 1990, at the age of 29 .
 His recreational interests included golf, water skiing and auto racing, such as Formula Vee . His hobbies included water skiing, golf and water skiing .
 Aber Conrad retrieved from Museum of Flight and copied or modified to here . His first name was Charles, but everyone called him Pete .
 Pete Conrad began his career as a military aviator . Conrad is one of the first astronauts of the United States . Conrad was the first astronaut to go into space . Conrad's first mission was a space shuttle mission to the moon .
 Apollo 12 was the second mission to land on the Moon and the first to make a precision landing . He was also the commander of the Skylab space station .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr. b NOVEMBER 25, 1960 July 16, 1999 . John Kennedy Jr.'s funeral was held in New York City, New York, on July 16 .
 From childhood years at the White House, Kennedy was the subject of much media scrutiny . He later became a popular social figure in Manhattan .
 Carolyn Jeanne BessetteKennedy was a publicist for Calvin Klein . She was the wife of John F Kennedy Jr. She was married to the late president of the United States .
 The couple and Bessette-Kennedy’s older sister, Lauren, died in a plane crash off the coast of Martha’S Vineyard in July 1999 .
 On television, she appeared in the pilot episode of WKRP in Cincinnati as the imperious owner of the radio station . She appeared in a memorable episode of Thirtysomething as Melissa’s tough grandmother, who wanted to leave her granddaughter the family dress business .
 Guy Mitchell was an American pop singer and actor . He was successful in his homeland, the UK, and Australia . Mitchell died in 1999 .
 Yaakov Weinberg was an Orthodox Jewish rabbi and Talmudist . He was rosh rosh yeshiva of Ner Israel Rabbinical College in Baltimore, Maryland . He is one of the major American non-Hasidic yeshivas .
 William Stephen Ian Whitelaw was a British Conservative politician . He served in a wide number of Cabinet positions, most notably as home secretary from 1979 to 1983 . He also served as de facto Deputy Prime Minister of the UK between 1979 and 1988 .
 Benjamin Nathaniel Smith was an American spree killer and member of neo-Nazi World Church of the Creator . Smith was captain of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club .
 Bishop was made an Officer of the Order of Australia in January 1984 . During the weekend of July 4, 1999, Smith targeted members of racial and ethnic minorities in random drive-by shootings in Illinois and Indiana, after which he committed suicide .
 Reginald Bishop AO was an Australian politician who served as a Senator for South Australia from 1962 TO 1981 . Bishop was a member of the South Australian parliament . He served as an Australian Senator for the state of South Australia .
 MacCallum was born in Point Piper, Sydney, on 11 December 1913 . He died in 1999 .
 Louise Caselotti was born in Bridgeport, Connecticut, in 1910 . She was the daughter of voice teacher Guido . She died in 1999 .
 Donald D Engen was a United States Navy vice admiral, former Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration and former Director of the National Air and Space Museum . Engen is a former Vice Admiral of the U.S. Navy . He was also a former administrator of the FAA .
 Horst-Gregorio Canellas was a German entrepreneur and football official . He died in 1999 at the age of 23 .
 IT IT spent some time in Spain and then moved to Hesse and adopted German citizenship . After the end of World War IT spent time in Hesse .
 In 1964 Canellas became chairman of Kickers Offenbach, a club then playing in the second division Regionalliga Stid . He was then chairman of the club, then in second division .
 Mary Kerridge was an English actress and theatre director . She ran the Theatre Royal, Windsor and its in-house repertory company from the 1930s to the 1980s .
 Emest Kerridge was born in Islington, London, in 1924 . She attended Highbury Hill School from 1924 to 1928 .
 In 1956, Johnson ruled in favor of Rosa Parks, striking down the “blacks in the back of the bus” law of the city of Montgomery Alabama, as unconstitutional .
 In order issued in 1961 and 1962, he ordered the desegregation of bus depots and the Montgomery Regional Airport in Alabama’s Middle judicial district . He ordered the segregation of buses, buses and airports .
 This book Silenced Journalists and Witnesses and in the next chapter the Cover up which Paid Stalkers enact a falsity which contradicts the truth . Rep. Leo Ryan of California was posthumously awarded the Congressional Gold Medal, Congress’s highest experession of national appreciation for
 After the 1965 Watts riots, Ryan took a job as a substitute school teacher to investigate and document conditions in the Los Angeles area . Ryan took office in 1973 January 3, 1973 November 18, 1978 .
 In 1978, Ryan traveled to Guyana to investigate claims that people were being held 1 against their will at the Peoples Temple Jonestown settlement . He was also known for his vocal criticism of the lack of congressional oversight of the Central Intelligence Agency .
 He was shot and killed at an i airstrip on November 18, as he and his party were attempting to leave . He was killed by a single gunshot wound .
 The United States State Department and the United States Central Intelligence Agency played a strong role in influencing political control in Guyana during this time . The British i government, along with the U.S. State Department, also influenced political control of Guyana .
 She claimed that the men were involved in a plot to kill John F Kennedy . She also claimed that they had been involved in an assassination plot .
 Cheramie 1, added that Kennedy would be killed in Dallas within a few days . Cherimie 1 said Kennedy would die in Dallas in the next few days, adding that he would be in the city within days .
 Later she told the same story to i ' doctors and nurses who treated her . Later she said she felt like she had been in a coma .
 As she appeared to be under the influence of drugs her story F ' was ignored . Cheramie was interviewed by the police following the assassination .
 She believed the two men were having a 1 homosexual relationship . In fact, she believed they were having an intimate relationship .
 Cheramie had been lying in the roadway and although he attempted to avoid hitting her, he ran : over the top of her skull, causing fatal injuries . Cheramies was hit by a car and died in hospital .
 The case was closed after no evidence of foul play was found in the vehicle .
 College drop becomes cub reporter, crime reporter, holllywood reporter, back stage gossib to world coronations . JEK MURDER GOVERNMENT Murders Murdered DOROTHY Killers .
 Kelly also took part in reciprocal visits to the United States Army Medical Research Institute ' of Infectious Diseases at Fort Detrick, Maryland, and I visits to Porton Down .
 Kelly concluded i that the tripartite inspection programme had failed . Despite their findings, Kelly concluded that the three-partist inspection programme failed .
 David Christopher Kelly was born in Llwynypia, Glamorgan, South Wales, on 14 May 1944 . He was born on May 14, 1944 .
 His parents were Thomas John Kelly and Margaret, née Williams; Thomas was a schoolteacher i who was serving in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve as a signals officer during the Second World War .
 Thomas and Margaret divorced in 1951 and she took her young son and moved in . with her parents in Pontypridd . She moved in with her husband and moved away from her husband in 1951 .
 His mother died two years later from an overdose of prescription barbiturates . His mother also died of an overdose two years after her death .
 As a result of the death, Kelly suffered from insomnia and was prescribed sleeping pills; he was also given an extra year to complete his degree . Kelly suffered insomnia and suffered from sleeping pills .
 Kelly was interviewed twice by his employers on 3 AND 7 JULY; they concluded that he may have been Gilligan’s source, but that Gilligan | may have exaggerated what Kelly said .
 It ' appears he ingested up to 29 tablets of co-proxamol, an analgesic drug, then cut his left wrist, 1 severing his ulnar artery, with a pruning knife he had owned since his youth . He had owned a knife he'd owned since
 It was established that neither the knife nor the blister packs showed Kelly’s fingerprints on their 1 surfaces . It was subsequently established that none of the knife or blister packs .
 "Andi and Andi talk late into the night about how we’|l celebrate it when we see each other in Vienna in March"
 Wood died off of the coast of Santa Catalina Island on November 29, 1981, at age 43 . Wood died during a holiday break from the production of her would-be comeback film Brainstorm with Christopher Walken .
 The events surrounding her death have been the subject of conflicting witness statements . The Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department listed her cause of death as “drowning and other undetermined factors” in 2012 .
 Brainstorm is a 1983 American science fiction film directed by Douglas Trumbull . Christopher Walken, Natalie Wood, Louise Fletcher and Cliff Robertson star .
 It follows a research team’s efforts to perfect a system that records and replays the sensory experiences and emotional feelings of a subject, and the efforts by the company's management to exploit the device for military ends .
 A researcher records her own death from a heart attack . Her colleagues join forces to retrieve the information and play it back .
 Frank Sinatra’s attorney Mickey Rudin, who also worked with Monroe, told him that the actress had been killed, he writes .
 Conspiracy theorists consider Giancana along with Mafia leaders Santo Trafficante Jr. and Carlos Marcello associated with the assassination of Kennedy . Conspiracy theorists believe Giancanas was involved in Kennedy's assassination .
 In 1965, Giancana was convicted of contempt of court, serving one year in prison . In 1965 he was sentenced to a year in jail .
 NASA may have had the technical capability to interfere with GPS or similar electronic navigation leading the plane into Russian airspace .
 As a child, he attended several private and arochial schools before attending a nondenominational high school .
 In Iceland, McDonald asserted to his commanding officer that the U.S. Embassy in Reykjavik was doing things advantageous to communists, but was told he did not understand the 1 big picture . i After his tour of service he practiced medicine at the McDonald Urology Clinic in Atlanta
 Barack Obama had sexual and drug-related encounters with Larry Sinclair in 1999 . Sinclair says Obama is a closet bisexual with whom he had sexual encounters . All three ' were openly homosexual'
 Kurt Donald Cobain was an American singer, 1 songwriter, and musician . Cobain is a member of the Nirvana band . Kurt Cobain died in 1994 .
 Cobain wrote many other notable songs for Nirvana, including “Come as You Are”, “Lithium” and “In Bloom” Cobain struggled with heroin addiction and chronic health problems .
 Deaths of United States officers during corrupt elements of USA fighting dirty war of #NWO businesses who use foreign and private resources to kill U.S. officials . U.N. officials were killed in the deaths of corrupt elements in corrupt elements .
 An attempt to renew its support in a 1973 referendum on the monarchy and gradual democratisation was ended by another coup by hardliner Dimitrios Ioannidis . The monarchy was overthrown by a coup in 1973 after a referendum on its support .
 They were known for being pro-communist and their hatred for anything they thought unfit for Greece including the United States military’s presence in their country . The Greek government was known for its hatred of the U.S. military presence .
 GangStalk scheme recruits from mental health roles, family members of FBI agents, etc., act like civilians but are undercover actors faking or spinning events . The appear to have created the appearance of a fake ring that appears to include Tom Dunham and Edward Donegan .
 He slept well after releasing so much of is, Thin ASPT unit is the pla to go, The top FBI are blackmailed or involved, he said . Thin ASP T unit is a good idea to go . He said the top FBI were blackmailed .
 Ronald C Machen, the United States attorney for the District of Columbia, and Rod J Rosenstein, his counterpart in Maryland to take over direction of existing investigations by the Federal Bureau of Investigation . Machen Jr. and Rosensteind (of Maryaland Public Health Service and CIA)
 Mr Holder assigned two prosecutors Ronald C Machen and Rod J Rosenstein to take over direction of existing investigations by the Federal Bureau of Investigation . The move elevates the stature of the cases but not giving them any special powers .
 President Obama declared Friday that the White House had not been behind the recent leaks . He vowed to prosecute the people responsible for disclosing classified information if they could be identified .
 The geneology of Barrack Obama, both real and imagined, from around the world in world wide Sleeper Cells operations . On December 18, 2006, they murdered Stacey the premeditated, cold-blooded death of an innocent .
 For i children with dyslexia, it has been shown to be an effective way of building up a word .
 Middle English conspiracies, from Latin conspirare . Middle English . conspiracies . CONSPIRACY CON*SPIR*A*CY . PLURAL -CIES . Middle . English .
 William Booth’s . ghost writer-promoter for In Darkest England and the Way Out“ social gospel | campaign .
 Marquis Who’s Who has listed Jim O Wilhite as a noteworthy gas company executive . Jim O. Wilhites has been listed as a notable gas company exec by Marquis .
 Andi sent me this email shortly after our IM exchage ended: That’s why I can’t see every day; the level of such extreme torture and gross indifference to human life . Andi: That's why I’m not able to see every other
 Thad first contacted [Veronica Hoffman after meeting her in person, all was well . e Thad initially contacted her after meeting up with her after she met him in person . Commonalities with Others and My Story.
 If ‘indirect’ didn’t work, there was always ‘direct’, which might mean pulling the batteries out of your new car’s fancy built-in car phone while it was switched on, thus destroying the charging circuitry .
 After the death of the U.S. marshal, the commander of the FBI’s Hostage Rescue Team was called in . He ordered federal agents to shoot any armed adult outside the Weaver cabin, regardless of whether that person was doing anything to threaten or menace federal agents .
 Abdul-Baki Todashev holds a photo he claims is of his dead son, Ibragim, during a news conference in Moscow, Russia, on May 30, 2013 . He claims to have taken the photo of his son, who was killed by the FBI
 Ibragim's father showed journalists 16 photos of his son in the morgue with what he said were six gunshot wounds to his torso and one to the brain . The father, who says agents killed his son ‘execution style,” showed journalists .
 The FBI has not yet issued a report on whether the use of deadly force was justified .
 Ronald Harmon Brown died APRIL 3, 1996, their Commerce Secretary who reportedly told Bill he would take him down with him if he was indicted for corruption . In the photo shown by his father a i i i I i i, I i, i, and i .
 Three days after the crash, he was found with a bullet hole through his chest . Onvicted of terrorism in planting pressure cooker bombs at the Boston Marathon on April 15, 2013 .
 The Colonel received a blow to the back of his head, which rendered a fatal injury . The Colonel was killed by a single shot at the head .
 Glorian Gainey was adopted by Festus Gainey and Harold Dew in 1936 . King Edward VIII abdicates that year . The Gaineys lived in Bishopville, North Carolina .
 Leon Lott is a treasonous Sheriff in charge of law enforcement for the unincorporated area’s of Richland County, South Carolina . The Murdaugh family is one of the most prominent families in South Carolina, with a storied history of influence .
 Richland County Sheriff Leon Lott of the RCSD has announced that the department will be conducting drills that involve the joint training of civilian law enforcement and the United States military . A year after the joint drills raised eyebrows, Sheriff Lott has again announced the drills .
 A member of the Murdaugh family had served as solicitor or district attorney . The Richland County Sheriff’s Department will be conducting drills in conjunction with the 3rd Special Forces Group out of Fort Bragg, North Carolina .
 Sheriff’s Department and Military vehicles will be traveling in the Lower Richland County community near Eastover and Hopkins as well as Elgin near Screaming Eagle Road . The exercises will take place at late-night and pre-dawn and will run from May 8 until WEN
 The Sheriff's Department has announced that residents in these areas may hear explosives being detonated and ordinance being set off as well as shots being fired . The Sheriff’s Department has said residents in the area may hear explosions being detonated . Residents in the region for an uninterrupted 85 years, from
 The Hampton family owns a prolific law firm and owns several other businesses in Hampton, 5.5.5 .
 It is worth nothing that the drills will be taking place in the exact same location as last year’s drills . The drills are scheduled to take place at the same location last year .
 In 2018, Sheriff Lott was the first sheriff to launch the PEACE Officer identity program, a new framework for community policing .
 Smith’s mother, Sandy Smith, said there were no broken glass or plastic shards from a mirror on the road where her son was found . A man on his way to work spotted Stephen Smith's body on Sandy Run Road in the early morning hours of July 8, 2015 .
 Cities with surf beaches include Huntington Beach, Newport Beach, with its surfing museum . Newport Beach's boat-filled harbor sits opposite Balboa Peninsula .
 Advocate General Manual investigations also reached the conclusion that Sabow ' committed suicide' Sabow committed suicide, according to the Advocate General manual .
 The Marine Corps is the Marine Corps, which he had served loyally for three decades . He had grown to love the U.S. Marines .
 John David Sabow’s brother, a South Dakota neurologist, had both the i Medical background and the tenacity to mount his own investigation . iReport: Sabow's brother is a neurologist and iMedical Journalist .
 Wilcher alleged Koresh and six others in his cult were CIA deep-cover operatives who had refused an order to activate against an unknown target . The initial engagement plan was designed to result in the deaths of United States officers to justify a large-scale retaliation . Nerve gas, not
 Paul Wilcher was the lawyer to whistle blowers Rodney Stich and Gunter Karl Russbacher . He was also the lawyer for Gunter Russbachers Rodney Stch and Gunte Stich . Wilcher is the lawyer of two whistle-blowers .
 PsyOps alleged ring of me in activities I am not tied to but appear to exist . Why the magic bullet and All of these and other connect to me in Psy Ops alleged ring . Why? "Why?"
 My father and mother were Manchurian Candidate to Obama . In feb 20 1961, they were in the U.S. for the first time . Obama was a Chinese President in 1961 .
 It also involved DNA asset seizure from me by the Whitehorse, Judge Roll, and United States redistributing, Scalia, Scalia . The case involved DNA assets seized from me .
 Ralph Blasey Jr. is accused of lying to FBI director James Comey about his son's death . Vladimir Kashogi is a former CIA director and CIA director of the CIA .
 If there is any Unelected, Stable, Reliable “Deep State” criminal agenda going on today, Mr Blasey Jr is a Major link between each New Administration to carry out and plan any longterm “Criminal Coup” of our nation .
 Someone 40+ years in the CIA from controlling Black Ops Secret Bank Budgets, to now Providing Personal Public Security to each of the “Deep State’s criminals (Brennan, Comey,. McCabe, McCabe, Mueller, Rice, . Rice, Lynch, etc.
 CIA’smain BLACK BUDGET OPERATIONS under the direct command of the feared CIA : Counterintelligence Chief James Jesus Angleton . Counterintelligence chief James J. Angleton was the CIA's chief of counterintelligence .
 In other words, I’m not on anything that could kill me unexpectedly or suddenly, i’ve never done illegal drugs either . i I've never done drugs either. In other . words, he’s not on something that could . kill him unexpectedly or .
 i There’s no way anyone could get into my house, no robbers, no angry exes (which I don’t have btw), no fanatical people my house is like Fort Knox...unless it was someone super professional. Not even once. i i There
 If something were to happen to me, it’s foul play and you know exactly who and why given given ; my work and mission in this life . If you want to know who or why you want you to know, it's foul play,’ you know .
 e are made up of highly-skilled military veterans, first responders, law enforcement, and civilian personnel specializing in Search & Rescue . We provide immediate support in areas experiencing disaster, war, and conflict .
 Second autopsy report discounted original autopsy report . Georgia medical examiner Dr. Dr. Michael O'Neill performed the second autopsy .
 Keith McCaskle, also implicated in the murder, was stabbed to death by an unknown attacker on NOVEMBER 10, 1988 . The murder occurred in 1988 .
 Calvin R Walraven of North Little Rock, AR, 1940, died on FEBRUARY 19, 2017 .
 She was promoted to associate professor in 1971 and professor in 1976 . She became professor in the 1970s .
 Elders received a D.Sc. ' degree from Bates College in 2002 . Elders was born Minnie Lee Jones in Schaal, Arkansas, to a poor, sharecropping family .
 Schaal spent two years near a wartime shipyard in Richmond, California before returning to Schaal . Schaal's family also lived in a shipyard near a war shipyard .
 Biology from Philander Smith College in Little Rock, Arkansas, where she also pledged Delta Sigma Theta .
 Elders drew fire, as well as censure from the Clinton administration, when she suggested that . legalizing drugs might help reduce crime and that the idea should be studied . Elders also drew fire from Clinton administration for suggesting legalizing drugs could reduce crime .
 Story of the most sophisticated terrorist attack in history . Nuclear bomber capable aircraft retrieved from link and copied or modified from link .
 Based on a ten-year study into the murders of his fellow pilots on 9/11, he explains how hijackers beat U.S. Air Force fighters to iconic targets with advanced maneuvering and daring speeds .
 All of the solid evidence points to a dark collaboration between members of the Bush Administration and a covert group of Saudi government officials . b b This is a game changer that will finally set the record straight on the most horrific crime in U.S. history .
 Senator Bob Graham’s Congressional Joint Inquiry in 2002 revealed that Saudi Arabian i Intelligence agents met the 9/11 hijackers in the Los Angeles in January of 2000, harbored them and led them to 18 months of flight training in Florida and Arizona .
 James McDougal died of an apparent heart attack, while in solitary confinement . The Clintons convicted Whitewater partner died in prison .
 Ed Willey died on the same day his wife Kathleen Willey claimed Bill Clinton groped her in the oval office in the White House . Ed Willeys died on Monday, the same date his wife said she had been groped by Clinton . Kathleen said she was groped in the
 He was found hanged and it is reported a non foul play suicide in part despondent over the death of his mother . His mother was a figure in British Counter Intelligence operations in France .
 Hotel Le Bristol opened in 1925 and is famous for its historic architecture and luxurious interior . The hotel is located in Bristol, England, and is located on the outskirts of Bristol .
 Victor Rothschild records the step-by-step dismantling of a bomb masquerading as a crate of onions . Rothschild records in one of his books the step by-step dismantle of the bomb .
 Pe ter Rudolf de Vries was a Dutch investigative journalist and crime reporter . He was also an investigative journalist .
 In 2005, he founded his own political party which was disbanded soon after . yn 5 where he had appeared as a guest. yn .
 De Vries and Wim Dankbaar produced a two-and-a-half hour special about the 1963 assassination of U.S. president John F Kennedy . The two and a half hour special was produced by Wim Dinkbaar .
 Born JULY 10TH, 1956, he committed suicide on JUNE 5TH, 2019, at the age of 62 . Born July 10th, 1956 .
 It was Black’s contention that this was a lead up to the implementation of full-scale martial law and possible war . Black: This is a way to get ahead of possible war and possible martial law implementation .
 Intelligence sources say an FBI agent who discovered Emanuel connection with the | Israeli intelligence was the assistant of the manager of the former investigation office, John | O’Neill, and another agent whose name was not uncovered, who is still employed by the | i i | investigation office .
 For the mysterious historical phenomenon also known as “St. Sydenham’s chorea, “The Mysterious Phenomenon’t” visit http://www.sydenham.org/ .
 Harry Garudian UK Marilyn Diptych 1962 (Tate Galler Campbell’s Soup Cans by Andy Warhol, 1962) There’�s something about Warhol's work .
 St Bernard's Catholic Grammar School is an academically selective Roman Catholic grammar school on Langley Road, Slough, Langley, Berkshire . Jean Shrimpton attended (formerly St Bernard’s Convent School)
 Aldin House was bought (and renamed St Bernard’s) by the Bernardine nuns in 1897 . St Bernard's was bought by the nuns and renamed Aldin in 1897.
 At the time of the foundation, the convent was right in the countryside, with nothing but fields separating it from Windsor Castle . The Manhattan Project began in late 1942, and along with it @ secrecy project of unprecedented scope .
 Kellogg Company was given more responsibility for Gaseous diffusion research . Kellogg received more funding and resources for the research .
 “Pop Icon Andy Warhol Dies After Routine Surgery” ran the headline in The Houston Chronicle . It is 8:04, AUGUST 4 Edward Paul Donegan .
 The Empire State Building was financed primarily by Raskob and Pierre du Pont, while James 1 Farley’s General Builders Supply Corporation supplied the building materials . The building was in debt, losing $1 million per year by 1935 .
 The building above the 41st floor was empty except for NBC offices and the Raskob/Du Pont offices on the 81st floor . The building was so underused in 1936 that there was no elevator service above the 45th floor .
 The site was previously owned by John Jacob Astor of the prominent Astor family, who had owned it since the mid-1820s .
 In 1893, John Jacob Astor Sr.‘s grandson William Waldorf Astor opened the Waldorf Hotel on the site . Four years later, his cousin, JohnJacob Astor IV, opened the 16-story Astoria Hotel on an adjacent site .
 The Waldorf-Astoria 1 hotel had 1,300 bedrooms, making it the largest hotel in the world at the time . Waldorf Astoria 1 was the world's largest hotel . The two portions of the hotel were built in the 1960s .
 Empire State Inc. consortium was announced to the public in August 1929 . Empire State was formed from the Empire State of New York .
 Ted Gunderson did not believe that Sonny Bono died in a skiing accident . The singer is believed to have been killed in a ski accident . Bono Goemptays Ger bictraghi, and Ge restauranis-gee no bint .
 Bono's autopsy concluded that he died of injuries sustained after crashing into a tree while skiing at the Heavenly Ski Resort in Nevada . Ted Gunderson said that Cher‘s former husband was targeted in a politically-motivated political assassination .
 Sgt. Gunderson said hitmen hired by top U.S. officials moved in on him because Bono a member of the United States House Of Representatives was believed to be about to expose an international drug and weapons ring . eZ a Tabloid says ‘thugs�
 Salvatore Phillip "Sonny" Bono was an American singer-songwriter, producer, actor, and politician . He came to fame in partnership with his second wife Cher as the popular singing duo Sonny & Cher .
 Sonny Bono revealed that he died of massive head injuries . The former singer and TV performer was killed in a skiing accident Monday .
 Douglas County, Nevada, Sheriff Ron Pierini said Bono’s death force trauma” from hitting a tree . Sheriff: Bono died of ‘force trauma’ from hitting tree . Bono was killed by a tree, authorities said .
 U.S. Senator Timothy Peter Johnson was treated for prostate cancer in 2004 . Further tests showed that he was clear of disease .
 i Sightings #84. Brooks, served in the Army’s 101st Airborne Division, which would surely be mobilized to fight ' in Iraq . Brooks, a veteran of the Army, served as a member of the U.S. Army's 101st .
 Arrangements are by Schooler Funeral Home, 4100 S Georgia St, Amarillo, Texas 79110 .
 His body was discovered at 8:20 AM Saturday as movers reportedly found a note on the door of his residence a sking them not to enter but to call for paramedics . The note reportedly told movers to call paramedics if they entered the residence .
 Webb’s August 1996 series Dark Alliance for the San Jose Mercury News pulled deep covers way from U.S. covert operations and American denial about connections between the CIA and drugs . Webb: "Dark Alliance" was an attempt to expose the CIA's involvement in the drug trade .
 Non-nuclear explosives in two of the weapons detonated upon impact with the ground, resulting in the contamination o 1 which fell into the Mediterranean Sea, was recovered intact after a search lasting two and a half months .
 Z Murder of Cheri Jo Bate retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here f a 0.77-square-mile area with radioactive plutonium . Bate was found dead in a car crash in 1996 .
 The murder of Cheri Jo Bates is an unsolved murder that occurred in Riverside, California, on October 30, 1966 . The fourth, fourth unsolved murder in Riverside County, California .
 Chief Psychologist: "There is a ; real possibility that he can become homicidal again" Cheri Jo Bates was murdered in 2009 .
 Bates was found sprawled face down on a gravel path between unoccupied houses on 1 Terracina Drive, close to the library parking lot where she had parked her Beetle the previous evening . Bates' Beetle was found in a parking lot close to two unoccupied homes .
 The ground surrounding her body was described in her official report as “looking like a plowed field” in 1966 . The ground was described as looking like a stable and full of animals .
 Eliza Tibbets was among early American settlers and founders of Riverside, California . She was an activist in Washington, D.C., for progressive social causes, including freedmen's rights .
 Bishop and Knight Checkmate can bring down an opposing king using the pieces of Bishops and Knights . Checkmate is a tool to bring down the opposing king . The pieces of Bishop and Knights can be used to defeat a king .
 The Knight plays a key role on the capture of the opposing King . This differs from Bishop Bishop and other engames in the the Knight . The Knight does not play a role in capturing the King .
 A KBE is a decoration symbolising the second highest rank in The Most Excellent Order of the British Empire . The decoration symbolises the second-highest rank in the Order of The British Empire.
 This medal is awarded to service personnel in recognition of outstanding public service . It was awarded to . service personnel . This medal was awarded in recognition . of outstanding . public service.
 Zodiac Speaking podcast will be releasing an interview with Jo Anne Goettsche, former roommate of Donna Lass at 4122 Balboa Street in San Francisco . Jo Anne's interview will be released on December 18, 2021 .
 Donna Lass disappeared on September 6th 1970 . She was missing from South Lake Tahoe the day of her disappearance . Interviewed by Mike Morford, she talks frankly about her recollections of Donna .
 Donna Lass was never seen again . She was reported missing from her home in the 1970s .
 We will discuss a private investigator’s report, provided to the family of Donna Lass by the investigator they hired . We will also discuss the report provided by the private investigator hired .
 June 4th, 1963 was Senior Ditch Day at Lompoc High School . Don't forget to tune in on December 18th Santa Barbara JUNE 4Zodiac Killing .
 Those in the senior year traditionally take a day off from classes and spend the day partying instead . It was a day which traditionally saw those in the junior year spend a day partying .
 Eighteen-year-old Robert Domingos and his girlfriend Linda Edwards where just two of the many participating students . Students from all over the world participated .
 Robert Domingos and Linda Edwards decided they would rather spend the day together in a more intimate setting . Instead of attending one of the gatherings arranged, they decided to spend it with Linda Edwards .
 Robert and Linda had planned to go to the beach with another young couple, but when that couple had to cancel those plans Robert went on alone . Originally planned to head out with another couple, however, that couple canceled those plans .
 The young lovers drove down to Gaviota Beach near Santa Barbara in Robert’s 1957 Pontiac . Robert's car was Robert's first car .
 The following morning both the teenagers were reported missing . Sadly, the two teenagers would never make it home .
 Robert and Linda had previously mentioned spending time together at Gaviota Beach, a friend said . A friend remembered the couple had been spending time with each other at the beach . The couple was found dead at the scene .
 Robert Domingos dad spotted his son’s 1957 Pontiac parked along Highway 101 . Upon arrival in the area, the car was parked along the highway .
 Highway Patrolman Paul Schultz came across a shack . During a further search of the area, Schultz found the shack . The shack was found by Schultz .
 On entering Schultz discovered the bodies of Robert Domingos and Linda Edwards . The bodies were found by Schultz .
 Twenty-two-year-old Darlene Ferrin was a wife, mother and a popular waitress at a Vallejo restaurant . She was killed in a car crash in 1969 .
 On the night of JULY 4, she picked up friend Michael Mageau and stopped her Corvair in the parking lot of Blue Rock Springs Park .
 Michael later told police that another vehicle pulled into the lot around midnight and then left only to return minutes later . Michael told police he saw another vehicle pull into the parking lot and then leave . Michael later said he saw a car pull up in the lot at around midnight .
 The driver got out of the car, shined a bright light and fired into the Corvair with a 9mm handgun, police say . The driver then got out and fired a gun at the vehicle .
 The writer mocked police for failing to catch him and threatened to shoot children on a school bus . He also threatened police for not arresting him and threatening to shoot them on school buses .
 The envelope contained a piece of the blood-stained shirt belonging to victim Paul Stine . The shirt was found in the envelope of the envelope containing the shirt .
 In the Arizona House of Representatives from 2001 until 2003 and the Arizona Senate from 2003 until 2005 when she was elected to the United States House . The letter was addressed to famous attorney Melvin Bellini in 1969 .
 Me and Thomas “Neil Donegan are part of #ManhattanProject victims, born into it, destroyed by it, pawns of it . This book DARPA, Project Pegasus, DARPA and the Brain, and the #WETWORKS hashtag Me and Me are part
 Pegasus is a mythical winged divine horse . One of the most recognized creatures in Greek mythology . Pegasus is one of the world's most recognizable mythical creatures .
 One of America’s early time-space explorers steps forward to reveal what he experienced and what he learned during the early years of time travel research and development .
 Andy is an emerging figure in the Truth Movement . He is leading a campaign to lobby the U.S. government to disclose such controversial truths as the fact that Mars harbors life .
 Basiago says his father had previously worked for Ralph M Parsons Engineering Corporation, where he helped develop the technology .
 When Basiago was brought to participate in his first ‘jump,” he says his father had already been time traveling for years at the Curtiss-Wright corporation .
 Key nexus point in the Soetoro/Obama deception occurs in 1971, wher “Barack Hussein Obama” is pre-identified vi {DarPA) ime travel as 44"" U.S. President Barack Obama, sworn in on Jan., 2009 .
 Barry Soetoro and Stanley Ann Dunham participate in secret CIA jump roc training program with Andrew D Basiago and William Brett Stillings . The program was directed by CIA handlers to arrange paternity agreement with Barack Obama Sr.
 Soetoro/Obama meets Andrew D Basiago in Los Angeles and introduces self as ‘Barack Hussein Obama’, while friend identifies him as future United States president .
 Freemasonry exerts control over politics, perhaps the bestknown example is the New World Order theory . From * Wikipedia excerpted .
 Scalia: Science in Myriad is convoluted, especially for someone who hasn’t taken biology in decades . Scalia: To Scalia’s credit, the science is convoluted . Scalia's credit: Scalia has a point of honor for the science in the science .
 Scalia commented that the harm of racial discrimination alone created an active controversy under the Court’s previous Equal Protection jurisprudence . Scalia said the harm was created under the previous jurispirudence under Equal Protection . Scalia also said that racial discrimination was still an active concern under the
 Justices Scalia, Alito, and Roberts asked many questions about the definition of a “critical mass” Grutter named as the central measure of diversity .
 The expansion of the human brain during evolution, specifically of the neocortex, is linked to our cognitive abilities such as reasoning and language . The neocortex is a key part of the development of the brain .
 A ' Scientists Grow Bigger Monkey Brains Using Human Genes, r Replicating Evolution' This may have replicated the moment in history where humans and primates were set apart in evolution .
 Administration as ; White House Staff ; Secretary from 1993 to 1995 . Also served as White House Deputy Chief of Staff for ; Operations from 1997 to 1998 .
 He was a co-chairman of the Obama-Biden Transition Project . Additionally, he was a member of Obama-Vice-President Biden transition project .
 Podesta spent most of his early years in Chicago, where he was born . Podesta grew up in the neighborhood of Jefferson Park on the city’s Northwest Side .
 His ; mother, Mary , was Greek-American, and his father, John David * Podesta Sr., was Italian-American . John David and Mary Podesta Sr. were both Greek-Americans .
 i Observers simply see the ship disappear but sailors on board experience a bizarre i and disorienting phase shift . During the experiment, equipment begins malfunctioning and equipment begins to malfunction . The experiment is being carried out in the Netherlands .
 They escape into the desert and after walking for miles, they eventually ind their way to a roadside diner the next day . They eventually made their way out of the desert .
 Jim was from nearby California, so David decides to try to find his family . David and Allison evade military police, ' who have arrived to take David into custody .
 The two manage to elude the i pursuing vehicle when the pursuing vehicle crashes and burns . The two elude them when the vehicle crashes into a fiery wreck .
 Longstreet predicts that the vortex will continue to expand until the i entire world is consumed by the vortex . Longstreet says it will continue until the entire world consumes it .
 My belief is that there is an alleged genealogy backstory of Barrack Obama Jr., and perhaps the Kelly NASA Twins . This book Mulholland Falls Analogy and MKULTRA COINTELRPO, MLKULTRA, tied to Ongoing Government Blunders with my
 These lines cary a small gene, FOXP2, that VIenna and CIA and WIndsors were watching . VIenna: "These lines were carying a very small gene"
 Aug 4 1962 was ovum from Glorian used with Malcom X for Barrack Obama jr. It was used to create an image of the President of the United States .
 Photos were created with RFK, others backing the event . Should a Legend be created by the FBI that he was a son of Marylin Monroe, the white mother, photos were created .
 Marylin backed out and she was murdered at that time, the staged Aug 4 1962 Birthday of Barrack Obama Jr. She was murdered in the assassination attempt .
 This occured during atomic testing during the Manhattan Project . My father and mother were involved in atomic testing . This was during atomic tests .
 The day after my and Barrack Obama Jr.s birth and day of Birth Certificate is November 19, 1961 . The day of birth is the day after Barrack and Barack Obama were born . The Obamas were born in 1961 .
 1962 Marilyn dead, RFK in the area, likely staging possible timeline of birthday party with Obama Jr. John Housing directing, Divinic birthday . November 18 1962 Cheney and Bush of Zapata Oil likely join plan to join plan .
 Malcolm X invited to meet with black civil rights lawyer | and later RFK over assassination and moles . RFK was assassinated in 1962 . Malcolm X was invited to sit down with RFK to discuss his assassination .
 The Bush Cheney Zapata Oil faction of Boston Cape Cod are at odds with JFK . My guess is #MalcomX approached #MarilynMonroe as Barrack Obama Jr. parents .
 Marylin Monroe met her nephew and was going to talk . Instead, Madelyn Lee Payne and Stanley Armour Dunham met her niece .
 General Timms in command of the Atomic Proving Grounds of the atomic Energy Commission is on horse . General Timm was in command at the time of the incident .
 Colonel Nathan Fitzgerald will kill a call girl who saw the cancer victims . The colonel responsible for security will kill the call girl . The call girl will be killed .
 A call girl is present in the Department of Defense Palms Springs desert area . Mulholland Falls is located in the desert area of Las Vegas, Nevada .
 A free spirited call girl will be freed from her pimps, also at the pool party by a cop from the Four Hats . They will fall in love and a story arc develops tying the anti mafia cops into the Atomic Proving grounds and the murders covering up the cancer secrets .
 Donegan’s case is illegal use of DNA never authorized by speech therapist CIA and FBI, DuPonts, Kellog X Kellex and others . In Donegan's case it is illegal .
 General Tims is Atomic Proving Grounds Atomic Energy Commission military ‘base general’ and played by John Malcovich .
 While in a relationship with a general in charge of atomic tests in the desert, Allison stumbles upon secrets and sufferings being hidden as a result of those tests . Something that leads someone to throw her from a plane is revealed .
 The L.A.P.D.‘‘s ‘Hat Squad’ is a group of intrepid detectives who get much more leeway in their methods and their cases because they get results .
 Determined to find her killer, he and his squad confront Federal and military roadblocks . They face roadblocks determined to keep them from getting to the truth . The team is determined to find the killer .
 In the end, Hoover discovers Allison was murdered to keep from blowing the whistle on human testing of radiation sickness . Hoover avenges her by disposing of her killers in the end .
 How Kodak Exposed The Atomic Bomb on Youtube is on Youtube . Veritasium 11.5M subscribers. How did Kodak expose the atomic bomb?
 Photographic film and lit radium instruments of unlit cockpits fogged and contaminated photographic paper . Cerium-141 contamination found at papermills in Indiana .
 "That began at much like my recon film my father used might have been affected by. That began at . Much like my father's recon film, my dad used to be affected by that," he said .
 When Allison Pond was Xrayd an ankle was image was fogged and the coroner realized radioctive glass fragment . Treat Williams as Colonel Nathan Fitzgerald .
 The blackmailer using Allison Pond call seductress secret sex tapes turns out to be Fitzgerald . Fitzgerald demands the film of Base General Timms with Allison be brought to him . Allison Pond is played in the film .
 Hoover realizes that Fields’ film footage of Allison also includes images of ‘atomic soldiers”, American servicemen who were unwillingly used as guinea pigs for A-bomb tests . Fitzgerald intends to let them die so he can avoid being held accountable .
 Hoover and Coolidge secretly deliver the film to Timms, who is terminally ill with cancer himself, so he can expose Fitzgerald’s wrongdoing . The film is shown on the set of the first episode of the series .
 Lieutenant Maxwell Hoover and his partners Coolidge, Hall, Hall and Relyea are brought in to investigate the suspicious death of a young woman whose body was found at a construction site .
 Every bone in her body is broken and coroner says she looks like she 'jumped off a cliff' Coroner says she 'looks like she jumped off cliff' even though there are no cliffs nearby . Coroner: She looks as though she jumped from a cliff, even though
 Detectives receive a film of Allison having sex in a motel room . The film was taken by a camera hidden behind a two-way mirror . The detectives receive the film from Allison .
 Jimmy Fields admits that he and Allison made numerous such films, including one with Hoover in it .
 Hoover is part of an LA group of anti-mob police unit that plays rough using dirty tricks to push the invading Chicago Mob back to Chicago . Hoover is the leader of an anti-mafia police unit in Los Angeles .
 Hoover is at odds with the FBI Director who at the time was J Edgar Hoover . Hoover was covering for the Atomic Energy Commission and its problems with the dark secret of radiation victims . Despite the name Hoover, or using the name Max Hoover, Hoover was at odds .
 Miami Vice Yerkovich has indicated he devised the concept after learning about asset forfeiture statutes . Asset forfeiture statutes allow law enforcement agencies to confiscate the property of drug dealers for official use . The Miami Vice President says he created the idea after learning of asset forfeiture .
 The Ferrari Daytona and Testarossa are among the cars featured in Miami Vice . Ferrari Daytona was the subject of the show .
 In an average episode, Crockett and Tubbs wore five to eight outfits . They appear in shades of pink, blue, green, peach, fuchsia, and other "approved" colors .
 Designers such as Vittorio Ricci, Gianni Versace, and Hugo Boss were consulted in keeping the male leads looking trendy .
 Jodi Tillen, the costume designer for the first season, along with Michael Mann, set the style . Michael Mann is also a producer of the series . The first season of the show is set in New York .
 Pastel colors on the show reflect Miami’s Art-deco architecture . The abundance of pastel colors reflects Miami's Art-Deco architecture.
 Hat-Wearing Foursome Was Legendary at LAPD . Four young, impeccably dressed men approached a hot dog stand .
 All were well over six feet tall and collectively weighed more than half a ton . They were six-foot tall and weighed over half-a ton .
 Hoover then brutally assaults the FBI agent, after which another film is delivered to his wife Kate, showing her husband and Allison having sex in the motel . Hoover's wife Kate is shown another film of her husband having sex with Allison in a motel room .
 Officer Hoover had chosen to keep the sorrow of his affair as his own guilt and not make his wife carry extra pain from it . Hoover was married but Hoover chose not to make his affair publicize it because he didn't want his wife to feel the pain of it .
 He gives speeches about the need for a few to die so more might live . He also gives speeches on the need to kill a few in order to save others .
 J : Assasinations Witness resistance Cancer Edgar and a Hoover, Ware Psychological Atomic | Silencers >| Mafia/CIA | Radiation |"" Top ; Warfare Research Hits by J .
 Life on the fictional island of Karos is forever changed when atomic bombs are dropped there by a NATO plane rapidly losing power . The island is a fictional Greek fictional resort island in Karos .
 Greenland has opened Greenland to Greek emigration . Life on the island is so bleak that the inhabitants stage a mass exodus . Greenland is the only island in the world to have emigrated to Greece .
 The pilots are unaware of the fact that American agents are also on the island searching for their cargo . The pilots say they are unaware that the U.S. agents are on their way .
 National Association of Atomic Veterans, Inc. is a non-profit organization dedicated to veterans of the U.S. Armed Forces .
 Atomic Veteran Community to speak, with a single voice, to their inability to get a fair hearing related to their developing ( radiogenic ) health issues that may have been precipitated by their exposure to “jonizing” radiation while participating in nuclear weapon test detonation .
 "From the beginning, and to date, we continue to pursue our purpose to this dedicated cause. From the beginning of this year, we are committed to our dedicated cause," says CNN.com.com .
 Atomic Veterans were members of the U.S. Armed Forces who participated in atmospheric and underwater nuclear weapons tests from 16 July, 1945 to 30 October 1962 . Who is an Atomic Veteran at the moment?
 Veterans were assigned to post test duties, such as “sround zero” nuclear warfare maneuvers & exercises, removing radiation cloud samples from aircraft wing pods . They also worked in close proximity to radiated test animals, de-contamination of aircraft and field test equipment .
 Also included are military personnel who were part of the Occupation Forces assigned to Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan soon after the detonation of the AtomicBombs over those respective cities . American prisoners of war were housed in close proximity to those cities .
 These Veterans fit the VA’s ‘official’ description of an Atomic-Veteran . The VA says they fit the “official” description .
 There is a second group of veterans who may have been involved in radiation exposure events . There is also a group of people who have been exposed to radiation exposure .
 These include post test events related to nuclear weapon devices detonated underground or in shafts . Those who’s duties involved regular use of radiation producing equipment or processes, such as power plant technicians aboard nuclear powered Aircraft Carriers and Submarines .
 These veterans fit the VA’s ‘official’ description as Occupational radiation exposed veterans . These veterans are veterans of the Army who have been exposed to radiation .
 The United States has sponsored a total of 1,054 nuclear weapons tests, and detonated two of these weapons over enemy soil during an act of war . The U.S. has also detonated two nuclear weapons on enemy soil .
 Some of these nuclear and thermonuclear detonations failed to produce any noticeable explosion, either by design, or due to mechanical or electrical faults . Some of the detonations fail to produce a noticeable explosion by design .
 Several of these tests, by official definition, were actually multiple detonations, two or more at the same time . The tests were designed for gathering specific data & information or for instrument calibration purposes .
 I might die in this fight or end up in a homeless shelter a victim of unprovoked attacks because others are incited against me on manufactured ‘back-stories’ (false back-stories about me) predicates for assaults . “I might die ... or end
 DARPA, The CIA, FBI, DOJ who misused DNA and Free Masons may die in this fight over their illegal and unethical conduct . DARPA may die or end up in a homeless shelter . I might die in the fight or end of this fight .
 My father and mother had their DNA misused during the Cold War and espionage agencies are now targeting me illegal with violent assaults . Underneath all of this has been secret tapping of genome into Illuminati and SJW causes by excuse against me .
 I believe IVF of me made him the Manchurian Candidate . Lab fertilization of me also was used to create Barack Obama from Donegan DNA .
 Leprechaun is a 1993 American horror film written and directed by Mark Jones . Mark Jones directed and directed the film .
 The Slander Campaign against me is old school OSS Psychological Warfare painting me as an evil or fool before the public . Obtuse gestures around me I am authorizing my DNA, using it for bills NOT true though. That is one message of the Gangstalk .
 In this revolution, research has become central, it also becomes more formalized, complex, and costly . Research has become more formalised, complex and costly, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Free encyclopedia Treat Williams as Colonel Fitzgerald . Cleanup of Espionage by Espionage hits as needed to save the bosses . In a United States Federal Prison with the Department of Defense .
 Her job as logistics coordinator involved managing the technical details of Treadstone missions and cleaning up collateral damage . Her job was to manage technical details and clean up the damage .
 In this fact-based film, Ted Harduvel is enlisted to perform test flights for a new model of the F-16 plane . Afterburn is another one where the wife of a dead air force pilot had to fight the military industrial complex . The film is a 1992 drama film
 The film’s name is derived from the “Afterburner” bar where the central character met her future husband . The bar is the setting that forms the focus of the film's first part .
 On NOVEMBER 15, 1982, Janet Harduvel is devastated by the news of the death of her husband Ted who flew as a United States Air Force pilot in one of the world's most sophisticated fighter aircraft, the General Dynamics F-16 .
 She is stymied in finding out the truth behind his crash in Korea . She takes on the United States military and General Dynamics, maker of the F-16, in her new book . The book explores the mystery of his crash and takes on General Dynamics .
 Theodore Harduvel JR. 8th Tactical Fighter wing was killed November 16th en his F-16 Fighting Falcon crashed near Taejon, Korea . Also notable is the music by Stewart Copeland, best known to the public as the drummer for the British band The Police .
 He was going ; to be promoted to Major several months ‘ after his Korea tour .
 He is survived by ; his wife Janet L and daughter Christina . If you consider him the son of an air force pilot abused in DNA studies as analogous to the air force wife, in his case the defense contractors of big . business are not only failing to come clean they are trying to
 Janet Sciales profiled in St. Harduvels wife a Prophet? Her story is published in the St. Louis Reviewer’s book, “The Prophet of the Prophet”
 Freak Show, has been Tampa Bay’s most prominent astrologer for at least as long as ; Tampa Bay Skeptics has been around . Freak Show is a member of the group that has been in Tampa Bay for more than 20 years .
 Ironically, Sciales was among the inaugural TBS members upon our founding in 1988 . Ironically, he was one of the inaugural members of the TBS board .
 Oogle knowledge panel retrieved from Mike Nichols and copied or modified to here ile ley ic . Sciales acknowledged that she was an actress .
 In 1966, Warner Brothers invited Nichols to direct his first film, Who’s Afraid of 1 Virginia Woolf? It starred Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton . Nichols directed the film in 1966 .
 Nichols also directed HBO’s Wit with Emma Thompson and Angels in America 1 starring Meryl Streep . Nichols also was known for work on i television directing HBO's Wit with Emma Thompson .
 Studios complex in ; Burbank, California, is a subsidiary of AT&T’s WarmerMedia through its Studios & ' Networks division . Studios complex is located in Burbank .
 In 1905, Harry sold his bicycle shop and joined his brothers in their fledgling film business . Harry sold the bicycle shop in 1905, and i joined their brothers' fledgling film company . Harry joined the brothers' film business in 1905 .
 Thomas Edison’s Motion Picture Patents Company (also known as the Edison Trust) charged distributors exorbitant fees . The Trust was also known as The Edison Trust .
 Sound-on-film is a class of sound film processes where the sound accompanying a wa picture is recorded on photographic film, usually, but not always, the same strip of film carrying the picture . The Warner Brothers and the breakthrough of Talkies .
 Lee de Forest was an American inventor and early pioneer in radio and in the development of sound-on-film recording used for motion pictures . He was an inventor and inventor of radio and sound on-film recordings .
 He was also involved in several major patent lawsuits, spent a substantial part of his income on legal bills, and was even tried (and acquitted) for mail fraud . He was acquitted of mail fraud and spent a large part of the income from legal bills .
 de Forest had only a limited understanding of how it worked, but it was the foundation of the field of electronics . It made possible radio broadcasting, long distance telephone lines, and talking motion pictures, among other applications .
 A vacuum tube, electron tube, valve, or tube (North America) is a device that controls electric current flow in a high vacuum between electrodes to which an electric potential difference has been applied . Known for Three-electrode vacuum-tube , soundon-film recording .
 Christopher Schirner een BV60 tube bass amplifier . Audio power amplifier using tubes, in operation .
 They were crucial to the development of radio, television, radar, sound recording and reproduction, long-distance telephone networks, and analog and early digital computers . They were also crucial to radio, TV, radar and radar, and long distance telephone networks .
 Electrical devices are built with the help of the linear and nonlinear components . CIRCUITS COPYRIGHT 2013 2021 © ELPROCUS .
 The phrase ‘The Turing Test’ is most properly used to refer to a proposal made by Turing as a way of dealing with the question whether machines can think . The word linear means a straight line which looks like diagonal and tells about linear characteristics in between voltage and current .
 The Turing Test is sometimes used more generally to refer to some kinds of behavioural tests for the presence of mind, or thought, or intelligence in i putatively minded entities . The phrase “The Turing Test’s” is sometimes . sometimes used . more generally . to refer
 Test is prefigured in Descartes’ Discourse on the Method . Finds an anticipation of the test in the 1668 writings of the Cartesian de Cordemoy .
 Jack Warner clashed with his surviving older brothers, Harry and Albert Warner . After Sam’s death, Jack clashed with the Warner brothers . Jack was married to Sam Warner, who died in 1963 .
 Harry Morris Warner was one of the founders of Warner Bros. and a major contributor to the development of the film industry . Despite his controversial public image, Warner remained a force in the motion picture industry until his retirement in the 1970s .
 As in many Jewish immigrant families, some of the children gradually acquired anglicized versions of their Yiddish-sounding names . Some of the names of some of these children have been Anglicized in English .
 Abraham "Albert" Warner was one of the founders of Warner Bros. He was born Aaron Wonsal, July 23, 1884, and died in 1967 .
 The three brothers rented an office in the Bakewell building in downtown Pittsburgh with a loan from Max Fleischer . The brothers rented the office with the loan from Fleischer.
 Samuel Louis Warner (born Szmuel Wonsal, August 10, 1887 October 5, 1927) was the cofounder and chief executive officer of Warner Bros. He was the founder and CEO of the company .
 Warner’s younger brother Jack did not object to Basquette's Catholicism, the rest of the Warner family did . Jack Warner's younger brother didn't object to his Catholicism .
 He died of pneumonia caused by sinusitis, before the premiere of The Jazz Singer . The actor died of the disease before he was released .
 FBI’s Special Agent Christopher Lorek and Special Agent Stephen Shaw, who tested Dzhokhar, were mysteriously killed on May 17, 2013 . Lorek, Shaw and Lorek were the FBI's Special Agent who tested the Tsarnaev Tsarnaev . Shaw was also a Special Agent for
 Grand Masonic Lodge of Massachusetts is located in the state of Massachusetts . The Grand Lodge is the oldest Masonic Lodge in the country .
 I am exactly under that Free Mason Gangstalk including during the writing of this book theft of my PC and destruction of my . PC and writing materials (research DVDs, The Kings Speech) people actually standing not to my window in my home office in my . home office making faces at
 Showing I am receiving retardation coaching including among minors makes me seem developmentally retarded . Showing . retardation . coaching including . minors makes . sense of being developmentally . retarded makes me feel developmentally. retarded .
 At least in my case me being a far right winger New Age Claims call me a Nazi and lay the claims of alleged harmed victims at my feet, actually New Agers self victimize then subvert me on appearances cause I was in vicinity .
 Many media orgs are not researching story carriers but rather Propaganda operations for the interests they co-ordinate with . Much of out of New Agism fighting old school fare right wing whites with defamatory allegation with compensatory claims demands .
 The basic form of the scam is that those who surround me to, in their own words, defeat white supremacism, will label me with their own acts by assaults upon me for their acts towards others .
 "My dialogue of I would like a personal pizza gets responded to by a covert operator," he says . "I would like to be a private pizza," he adds . "It was a seedy WWII antique shop dialogue," he said. "It's a very seedy antique shop
 In extortion vendors assert that my normal purchases are code purchases . They use their normal purchases as their foil . In extortion, vendors assert they use their regular purchases as a foil .
 Nueces County Social Services I refused to sign up for and never will, he says . "I'm not sure why I'm still fighting for my life," he says. "Nueces Texas District Attorney Matt Gonzales"
 My brother Tom Donegan, gay rights activist and who has fought me for years as to whether I was competent or not, I always said I had far more actual real work and training than him . He has always said he has far more training and experience than him.
 Dr Jekyll is proud of being white and defends the white race . Anti White Supremacists isolate me, isolate me and surround those who may have been influenced by my Dr. Jekyl . Anti-White Supremacist groups are getting themselves substituted for me .
 Black Marshalls | Mr Hyde | Related to neither, Ed Donega, Dr Jekyll . The paradox of who is Mr Hyde and how does he fit into some other identity .
 Mr Hyde was created by the Government and Religious Missions to claim rights to my DNA and make a sock puppet Ed Donegan who has harmed others . What ‘set off’ Mr Hyde to masterbate to peeping tom acts and photos, that the Law Enforcement who invented and
 Mr Hyde, that puppet, is drawn from prison and homeless populations to “mind model” the allegations made behind my back which defame me and create liabilities in which property of mine is due to people victimized by Mr Hyde .
 Mr Hyde is tied to illegal State persecution of me and why the State will not stop the acts against me . That others have an interest in use of my DNA they will not admit to me solves the paradox of why Mr Hyde has been linked to illegal persecution .
 The Aviator Glasses Wearers almost always are non-white, gay, or not-white gays . Wearers of the aviator glasses almost always wear black or gay .
 Their placing of Shill female vicitms near or in front of me, ass flashing me, or their photographing of women near me create the Legend that I am threat to women and women are a threat to me and that my DNA is due to those who were exploited [by
 The total record is of manufacture of allegations against me to gain a fraudulent result. Because this scheme depends on inciting vigilantism against somebody scorned and that is done by planting evidence, physical assaults upon me, staging sympathetic figures .
 This chart lays out the persecution of my by the protection racket and will be usefull for the classes of people witness will be listed by . This has been used to defeat my housing and seuxal reproductive rights, publishing rights, etc., This chart will be used to outline the persecution
 I have requested an expungment of my record so i can obtain a shotgun and clear my front door outdoor side or patio from harassing assailants, including roaring engines . I have asked for an ex-conviction to be expunged .
 Those assaulting me during work or acts of necessity such as food or gym have said they will have my children . I have insisted any child with genome from me will be incinerated .
 I was living a a major scene area of FOlsom street very close to Tom Dunham and across the street from a bar he and I often hung out at . Tom Dunham . Folsom Street Eviction .
 Normal acts are escalated into peeping though not related to that so that evidence of peeping seems to exist while it is in fact not present . Finally normal acts are . escalated into . peeping . so that . evidence of peeping seems . to exist . while . it is
 The FBI suspected that a bomb had brought down the I . ; airplane . The Tempe ; Tribune reported that the FBI suspected a bomb was behind the plane's crash .
 On JULY 2, 1994, the flight encountered heavy thunderstorms and microburst-induced windshear while attempting to land, and crashed into heavy trees and a private residence near the . airport . The crash and ensuing fire caused 37 fatalities and seriously injured twenty i Others .
 Before I list the California main witness it will be necessary to understand the long con being run which until about 8/1/2019 I did not understand . The scheme was protected from my scrutiny, protected by the appearance of statements made to me which when I attempted to pin them down were
 From 2007 to 2009 I was in a federal medical hospital trying to trace the theories of black nationalism which was the belief of assailants of my mother and I . Someone said to have been FBI SIS or Marshalls undercover as a prisoner made death threats against me .
 This person also assaulted me about my mother’s heart stopping from Potassium congestive heart failure while I was in prison, a worry of me at the time, proving to me he was some sort of plant to assault me, he would not have otherwise known the situation with my
 Humanism emphasizes the value and agency of human beings, individually and collectively . Humanism is a philosophical stance that emphasizes the importance of human being, individually .
 I am asserting the Masons are continuing under oddly convoluted means to smuggle my genome and life work product to e Themselves, their careers, and children e To the entire world, where it all seems to have come from, rather than Windsors Kutscheras .
 Soverign tied legacy genes into the world creating world equality and undermining racism, poverty, and war conditions . Effectively an underground railroad spreading soverign ties legacy genes to the world .
 The NLF’s ‘violence program’ included terrorism, guerrilla warfare, and (t3 ; conventional military operations)
 It is also used to destroy the morale of enemies through tactics that aim to depress troops’ psychological states . not just limited to soldiers but also to destroy enemies’ morale . The tactics are also used by enemies to destroy their morale through tactics .
 For those situations in which infiltration is too difficult, terrorists and insurgents may establish their own front groups . Front groups are organizations that purport to be independent but are in fact created and controlled by others .
 This too is a type of intelligence operation; like counterintelligence carried out by government intelligence services . Counterintelligence aims to disrupt the organization and operations of enemy forces .
 Lenin: “Thatwe must work among the troops goes without saying” (Lenin, 1900). But the tactic is by nomeans confined to Marxist-Leninist groups . Lenin, 1900: ‘That we must work amongst the troops is without saying'
 DOJ William Barr flash mobs invading and practices . Recent series of events including under of unique and separate tools and under of separate tools .
 Each subversive ampaign is different because of he social, political, economic, ultural, and historical differences that each country has . Each subversive campaign is different due to the social and political differences that all countries have .
 While the subversive actors may be i different, the soon to be subverted targets are the same . While the subverted actors are different, they are not different .
 Only when the government itself furnishes a nation with money, arms, supplies, or other help to dissidents can it be called external subversion . Insurgencies differ in their use of tactics and methods, such as tactics .
 Force used in this manner is meant to reinforce other forms or persuasion in addition to cowering the people or leaders . Force used to reinforce others forms of persuasion, such as persuasion, is not meant to be used in the same way .
 Harold, my mother’s adoptive brother always told me driving was not about the paint but knowning under the hood was O.K, the rest was busy work if there was time . Harold, his adoptive brother, always told my mother's adoptive brother that driving is not about
 Cervantes and his manservant have been imprisoned by the Spanish Inquisition, and a manuscript by the author is seized by his fellow inmates . The manuscript is seized and a mock trial is held in order to determine whether the manuscript should be returned .
 Funding it the operation out of my trust fund left by my mother was a way to get funding clandestinely with shakedown law suits which then funded the operation acting under various disguises, such as researching psychology, studying racism, or stopping exploitation of minors .
 According to whistleblower testimony I have now received, Joseph Rosati is, in fact, the man who hired two MS-13 agents to shake down Seth Rich that fateful night . Rosati hired the two agents, according to the whistleblower testimony .
 According to a federal government warrant, the offices of controversial autism doctor Jeff Bradstreet were the target in June of a search related to an experimental drug for autism .
 GcMAF is thought in some circles to modulate the immune system in ways that make it a treatment for everything from autism to cancer . Some believe it is immune related to autism, some believe it's immune related .
 A Bradstreet family member has set up a GoFundMe campaign site “to find the answers to the many questions leading up to the death of Dr. Bradstreet,” and I have reached out through the site to that family * member for comment .
 James J. "Jeff" Bradstreet was an » American doctor, alternative medicine practitioner, and a former ; preacher . Bradstreet ran the International Child Development Resource Center in Melbourne, Florida, a medical practice in Buford, » Georgia and in Arizona, where he practiced homeopathy
 He also founded the Good News Doctor Foundation, which aimed to conibide Christian beliefs with his medical practice .
 Bradstreet also published research regarding the use of hyperbaric oxygen therapy for autism, some of which concluded it was ineffective, as well as a paper arguing that autistic children have an increased vulnerability to oxidative stress .
 Bradstreet was found dead from a gunshot wound to the chest in the Broad River in North Carolina in June 2015 . His Buford, Georgia, medical office was raided by the FDA in connection with an investigation into GCMAF treatments .
 This book Bully Media Cartel Bandwidth stops theories of the OSS QETI Cartel THe Press as Cabal have failed to out and even built a Defensive Legend, a Defensive Ethic, for Government Corruption . This book stops theories that the press has been successful in
 The Kaine Mutiny Keifer (played by Fred McMurray), a slick office and writer full of theories of psychoanalysis decides to lead a mutiny against Queeg, a mine ship commander layed by Bogart . Bogart is played as a commander of the mine ship .
 "Some mental fragility had seized the ship commander thus materially undermining his command," said the ship's captain . "In fact some mental fragility had seized the ship commander," he said .
 In fact elements who are corruptable in this Hispanic poor imigrant community wree weaponized and temped by gains offered to them for fraud . In fact fraglie elements of the community are corruptible in this community, he says .
 If they are in a similar vain with Maryk, I will blame the press corps for encouraging the insanity environment which fostered the events later adjudicated in the courts . The press corps should have been responsible conduct of those who acted irresponsibly .
 At the height of a typhoon, Maryk urges the captain to reverse course into the wind i and take on ballast, but Queeg refuses . The Press Corps is who I specifically suggest as the irresponsible actors .
 Maryk, supported by Keith, relieves Queeg of 1 command under Article 184 of Article 184 . Maryk supported Keith, supported the decision to relieve Queeg from 1 command .
 Lieutenant Barney Greenwald, an attorney before entering the Navy, becomes Maryk’s defense counsel . Wounded Naval Aviator, Lieutenant Barney . Lieutenant Barney Barney . Greenwald, a former attorney, is defense counsel for Maryk .
 At the court-martial, Keefer claims he never observed any mental illness in Queeg . Keefer says he was ‘flabbergasted’ when he was relieved .
 Under Greenwald’s relentless crossexamination, Queeg exhibits odd behavior on the stand, and Maryk is acquitted . Maryk was acquitted of perjury .
 Following the acquittal, the officers of the Caine hold a party, where Keefer receives a 1 frosty reception from Maryk .
 A drunken Greenwald arrives and berates all the officers . for not appreciating Queeg’s long service and failing to give him the support he asked i for . Greenwald arrives .
 Katherine Mulgrew, Kristen Stewart, most others Dyslexic Suicided Margaux Hemingway . Walt Disney, Ian Flemming, Clark Gable, John Wayne into Katherine Mulhrew .
 The society isolates FOXP2 in hopeless contexts of non access to normal life where people finaly decide with State encouragement to commit suicide . People finaly decided with state encouragement to kill themselves .
 Name, Information, Application of the information (CSS Rule Name, Styling data, spanning the style) as Semiotics with renaming and other elements are in the movie . Also manty things about me, Name, . Information, and Application of . the . information ( CSS Rule
 Clark Gable, Julie Andrews, and many others were part of the Legend the CIA created bolstering Maria Augusta Kutchera but denouncing Glorian Donegan and Ed Donegan with a slander campaign .
 CIA OSS “Metaphors” or fictionalized versions of stories behind the theatrical mask of metaphors are what Dorothy Kilgallen was outing by Mafia hitman Ron Pataky killer her for . Hundreds of examples of those who made movies about the story line such as Brittany Murphy
 PolitiFact was created by the Tampa Bay Times, a Florida newspaper, in 2007 .
 PolitiFact was acquired by the Poynter Institute, a nonprofit school for journalists . In 2018, the organization acquired the website of the site .
 PolitiFact relies on administrative support from the Poynter Institute, but it is otherwise financially self-sustaining . PolitiPolitiFact is a fact-check-in-depth look at facts and facts .
 PolitiFact also receives compensation for selling its content to media publishers and companies .
 Craiglist was under investigation for allowing child and other trafficking result in personals from being removed from the site . PolitiFact launched a membership campaign called the Truth Squad to allow individual donations .
 Prior to founding craigslist, he worked as a computer programmer for companies such as IBM, Bank of America and Charles Schwab .
 Newmark served as chief executive officer of craigslist from its founding until 2000 . Newmark was CEO of the company from 2000 to 2000 .
 Newmark serves on the board of several non-profit organizations such as CUNY Graduate School of Journalism and Girls Who Code .
 In 2011, Newmark launched craigconnects, a non-profit initiative to support non-profits and public service organizations working in the areas of global i poverty, the Middle East, veterans affairs and low-income neighborhoods .
 In September 2018, he gave $20 million to fund the creation of The Markup, a non-profit news organization . He also gave $10 million to create a foundation for the organization .
 That ; year, Newmark donated $1 million to Mother Jones to help the magazine combat fake news . Newmark also donated a million to the magazine .
 Craig Newmark made a $20 ; million endowment to the CUNY Graduate School of Journalism . Newmark also made $20 million in donations to the journalism school .
 $350,000 to the Feminist Majority Foundation and Ms. magazine. Institute, and $350K to the feminist Majority Foundation. Institute .
 Craig Newmark gave $5 million to the Poynter Institute, which used the funds to establish a new center for ethics and leadership . Newmark died at the age of 92 .
 Craig Newmark’s previous donation of ; $1 million to the Poynter established the Craig NewMark Journalism Ethics Chair . Newmark's previous donation was $1.1 million .
 The Chronicle of Philanthropy ranked Newmark 17th out of 50 in its 2020 ranking of individual donors, giving a total of $100 million . Newmark is ranked 17th in the list of donors .
 AP vs. U.S. says applying the Sherman Act to this association of publishers constitutes an abridgment of the freedom of the press . AP versus United States: AP versus U.N. decision .
 The court was formed by agents of the Senior Executive Service (formed in 1978 by Jimmy Carter)-10,000 British Crown Agents that have infiltrated every agency of the Executive Branch .
 C.I.A., NSA, FBI, DoD, DOS, SEC, Judiciary and multinational corporate intelligencers are American stooges controlled by the British Empire CIA NWO Shadow Gov assassinations, the war against Home .
 This was described in the grocery store as gliding rather than banging on the handle of shopping carts losing most energy in the bang to problems in acceleration .
 During the course of trying to being the Momentum Engine to market the enormouse cash power of the oil industry was able to frurstrate all attempts incling supporting law suits required to bring the invention to market .
 The Gangstalk method is you start somewhere, you are roadblocked in Some stealthy bureaucratic way . It was additionally introduced in the United States Subversion System supported by the powerful Cabal .
 The Senate passed the measure in a 1-1 conference report on December 8 by a tally of 92-7 . The Senate then passed it in a 2-1 vote .
 On 23 December 2016, President Obama signed the 2017 National Defense Authorization Act into law . The 2017 bill was signed by President Obama .
 The story and facts I assert are threaten to the Cabal are defeated by Deep State 1 i : story threatens. The story . I assert that the . Cabal is threatened by the Deep State . Deep State is defeated by the deep State .
 Davis quotes Brigadier General Ralph O Baker the Pentagon officer responsible for the Department of Defense’s Joint Force Development (i.e. Baker) Baker is also a Pentagon officer . Davis quotes Baker as saying the Pentagon is developing a new generation of weapons .
 Information Operations are primarily used to target foreign audiences . Davis cites numerous senior leaders who want to “protect a key friendly center of gravity, to wit United States national will” by repealing the Smith-Mundt Act .
 To demur is to show reluctance or to hesitate, like not quite getting in the car when someone opens the door . Demure is always an adjective describing a modest, reserved, or shy person .
 Demurer is to fall back and accept there is no grounds to continue, the defense may assert that as to a plaintiff actions, or a plaintif may . Demurer may demure upon a defendent asserting the plaintif has no case . Obtuse acts such as blocking or
 It alerts the judge the case is not worthy of continuance and therefore calls for dismissal of the lawsuit . The lawsuit was filed in 2008 . It is the first time the case has been dismissed .
 “Truth is treason in an empire of lies” post by Kevin Kervick, Nov 18, r 2013 .
 In Greek word my reading of the daimon does not 7 history of carry negative Paganism those feloyavetolectaceyacm MM who wish to create The Ancient anew Greek word understanding daip@v daimon denotes a spirit or divine power .
 The Greek conception of a daimon notably appears in the works of Plato, where it describes the divine inspiration of Socrates . The daimon often “Demonize’ the old beliefs, making them a thing of fright .
 With most agreeing that is a strop backward in our understanding of our understanding we can move forward with a new understating of Illuminati mistakes and Illuminati profiteering . We can now move forward to a new understanding of the Illuminati .
 This list has floated around the internet for many years, and is sometimes discussed very late at night on AM radio stations, or perhaps on shortwave stations, but it is rarely mentioned in the mainstream news media .
 If you would like to dig into this topic on your own, just use your favorite search engine and enter “Gandy Baugh” (with quotation marks) and you’ll be on your way to dozens if not hundreds of web sites ' with information about this list
 Sudden Arkansas Death Syndrome, also known as 1 Arkancide, is a term sometimes used to refer to the death of Arkansansans . Because of so many cases, 1 writers sometimes use the term "Arkansas Death Syndrome"
 Standorf’s car had been on a short-term parking lot at Metropolitan Washington National Airport since Jan. 2013 . Standorf said his mother, Jeanette, would worry when Alan might casually mention that he was thinking of getting out of military work to become a policeman .
 Most of his years in the Army, he was stationed in Germany 1 with military intelligence, Mark Standorf said .
 Please visit the web pages for more information . I | t | I | i | I . i | 1 Please visit this page to view the web page .
 Most people seem to have found the idfiles.com source of political news that they prefer . They agree with the views they hear or read, and there would be no harm in that if the e BIASED INFORMATION news media was always reliable, but it isn’t .
 "We're just asking folks to be responsible enough to accept that journalism can be reckless or even self-serving and can cause great harm"
 The Crimes of Mena, by Sally Denton and Roger Morris, was scheduled to appear in 1 i the Washington Post .
 Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here . To stunt is to slow or hinder. Stunting and even intimidating public understanding of the NWO .
 Our problem in the West of Europe is not that the press of the West is ignorant, it is that they are so well instructed by Robber Barrons who control government corruption . Our problem is that our press is ignorant of our government corruption, writes Andrew Hammond .
 J was built by North American Aviation who later built the jet replace the F-86 Sabre flow in the Korean War . Hewlett-Packard built its V-16 engine .
 A Russian autonomous unmaned drone will fly on point in combination with a manned SU-57 fighter plane gaining data further out about targets . The drone will be able to extend the weapons and combat function to a wider and more foreward or perhaps rearward radius .
 The phrase “mafia state” was coined by Alexander Litvinenko, diplomats say . According to U.S. diplomats, the phrase ‘mafia states’ was coined . “In navies and maritime industry, damage control is the emergency control of situations
 THe #1a protects each component delusion with necessary cohesion and efficiency . THe protects each part of the delusion with . necessary cohesion, and efficiency.
 In Barrett Outlet Broadcasting Inc.,i s the children of a suicide victim brought a . 1983 action gainst a city and members of its police department, . alleging that police employees ermitted a news crew to enter a . victim’s home, film the scene of a .
 Or to by repudiably irritating and frustrating a person (Happy Slapping normal hapy states) create frustration which appears to the examiner to by psychosis . Or to . repudiate . and frustrating and create frustration . Create frustration which . appears to . appear to be psychosis .
 Tom Dunham and I spent most or part of our lives talking to deaf ears whatever peeping rings exist we are NOT in them despite appearances we are. a who have been brought up in freedom, with the right of free speech, cannot in my ld age change and learn slavery instead
 I have lost all my adult lifespan to horrific imprisonment conditions which exacerbate, inflame, and grind on, and continue in detention conditions . The very sexual, physical, and psychiatric assaults (taunting by actions towards me, physical contact assaults) which often had originally landed me in custody,
 I assert that a Criminal Harassment Under Color of Law as Subversion of the USA and my MKULTRA family genome is based in taking over charities, using charities as claimants against me . This is a popular and publicly accepted Conspiracy Against my Rights under color of Subversives in Power
 A blend of witness tampering and conflicts of interests placed me under arrest for “harassing and annoying phone calls” which were in support of my FOIA requests and FOIA appeals which were not returning the documents I requested . The arrest was part of an ongoing investigation into witness tampering .
 The NIH used its health care power and the PHS DOD element of it to place me and my views under PsyOps and covert actions scrutiny and disruption ever since . The NIH has placed me under Psy Ops and covert action scrutiny, disruption, since .
 Obama Biden presidential campaign is co-opted into the Obama Biden campaign . "Things I represented and spoke of while explaining and justifying my views to the National Institute of Health" were being used in the campaign, he says .
 Gangstalk of Evidence Plants and Agencies Believing fake evidence create new unjust recomposition, sketch, of the gang stalk victim’s life . The State (Enrique Prado, La Cosa) Targeting a Cape Cod Atomic Testing Veteran The State .
 The people who want to plead me guilty to raping Tawana Brawley I can not only get rid of they state they will kill me as social justice and also claim to manage my DNA for me. They claim to be able to get my DNA from me. I can't
 'This nightmare of hate crime against me as I lay in a medical emergency in the gladiator pit was too interesting for the Illuminati to ever stand down from. This nightmare of . the Illuminati,’s ‘hate crime’ against me was ‘too interesting’
 There is always the Doppelganger or identity theft at every moment of my being alive for thirty years . Even at places like the Department of Motor Vehicles, court clerks office, gym, or detention, always the video is down or being serviced by some security company .
 Westphalian sovereignty is a principle in international law that each state has exclusive sovereignty over its territory . Mr Rothkopf considers Soveriengty and the Superclass of international elites .
 Federal News Service is a . ELITE AND THE Washington, D.C.-based . company providing MAKING’s services . Wikipedia Pp surerciass .
 Wealth, Power and events in DC for its clients . The produces on-demand verbatim ; Ruling Elite Finance, transcripts of newsworthy . Wealth, power and events .
 David Rothkopf's new book, "Running : the World," is published by Harper Collins . The book is about the rise of the world's power elite and the future of the planet .
 'Apparently, apparently, my subtle irony was lost i in the title. And I would look at them aghast because of the title,' he said .
 In fact, it t just came out of 51 years ago now, just about half a century ago .
 It looked at how political leadership and business leadership and military leadership interacted at the moment of American post-war ascendancy, at just the moment when we were starting to have concerns . That would lead to Dwight Eisenhower identifying I i the threat associated with the military-industrial complex .
 CNN.com's John Sutter says conspiracy theory is not true . He says it's a good thing to say conspiracy theories . Sutter: "I mean, all of us have had our brushes with conspiracy i theory"
 "I grew up, Jewish boy in New Jersey, hearing about the world i Jewish conspiracy, and I thought, great. I grew up," he says . "I'm a Jewish boy. I'm a Jew. I think, great," he adds .
 i defines people who influence the lives of millions across borders on a regular basis . And so, the i definition that we used was those who influence millions . The i definition is that people influence millions of people .
 There are 13 women CEOs in the Fortune 500, including 13 women who are CEOs . "I think of Fortune 500. There are only 13 women in Fortune 500 right now .
 The center of gravity within the superclass is following the center of economic gravity on the planet . But by far the most rapidly growing "" component of the group are people on the Asian side of the Pacific Ocean .
 Understanding how this group influences things will help us understand what the implications of a change like that might be. So understanding how they influence things will . It's important to understand how they affect things, and how they might affect things in future .
 A third of the world's children have gone to just one of 20 schools, he says . And we can go further and further. countries around the world, he adds .
 "It's small world. Small world," CNN's John Sutter says of the superclass . "Small world," he says .
 When they act together it has an effect on how we regulate, how we look at markets, what we say is tolerable . That gives them commonality of interest and an enormous amount of influence .
 He was born in Couvet in the Principality of Neuchatel (now a canton part of * Switzerland) in 1714 and died in 1767 .
 The harm principle says people should be free to act however they wish unless their actions cause harm to somebody else . Proscribed rights and do no harm to others or the property of others creates a utilitarian property rights motive for production .
 Mercenary Media Inteligentsia Take Lab Notes and Profits on Street Fights . COINTELPRO Experiments .
 Kirk, Spock and McCoy are concerned about what effects the Horizon’s crew may have had on the Jotian culture which was just beginning industrialization at the time and have a knack for imitation . Kirk is concerned about the effects of the Horizon .
 They are greeted by two men dressed as gangsters who threaten them with Tommy guns . They are immediately greeted by a group of thugs who threaten to shoot them . The gangsters are armed with Tommy gun guns .
 Most contemporary uses of the term refer to academia or the college and * university systems in many countries . The term "academical" is used to refer to the college or university system .
 Drudge’s site started first in 1995 as an email newsletter . Then there was Drudge's site, which started as a newsletter .
 AP v United States Amendment rests on assumption that diverse and antagonistic sources is essential to the welfare of the public, that a free press is a condition of a free society . This book What Can Publicity Do AP v. AP rests on the assumption that diversity and antagonism is essential
 Out PlIzzagate as violent Narco State Illuminati usage of my genome in their causes for minority benefit both through charity and charity organizations using criminals to offer my genome under “blackmail” conditions to adult entertainers .
 Publicity is justly commended as a remedy for social and industrial diseases . Illustration from Harper's Weekly December 20, 1913 .
 That potent force must, , in the impending struggle, be utilized in many ways as a continuous remedial ; Measure Measure . Measure. Measure. That potent . force must be utilized as a . continuous . remedial . Measure .
 It 1 was wealth which enabled the Morgan associates to buy, from the Equitable and the A Mutual Life Insurance Company the stocks in the several banking institutions, i which, merged in the Bankers’ Trust Company and the Guaranty Trust Company, gave them control of $357,
 He cemented the triple alliance with those institutions . Morgan to acquire his shares in the First National and National City banks worth $21,000,000 .
 Bankers’ syndicates have received for floating preferred stocks of recapitalized industrial * concems, one-third of all common stock issued, besides a considerable sum in cash .
 On bonds of high-class industrial concerns, bankers’ commissions (or ' profits) of from 5 to 10 points have been common, bankers have said .
 Even railroad i securities, supposedly of high grade, have been subjected to like burdens . Even railroads i securities have been subject to similar burdens . The problem is that railroad companies have been forced to make changes .
 They took the Portland ; Terminal Company bonds, guaranteed by the Maine Central Railroad a corporation ‘ of unquestionable credit at about 88, and these were marketed at 92 .
 Morgan &amp; Co. received a 3 per cent. commission, that is, $5,100,000, for arranging that others should underwrite and sell the bonds . The bonds were sold by Morgan &AMP; Co., which received a $5.00,000 commission
 The aggregate commissions or profits so taken by leading banking houses can only be conjectured, as the full amount of their transactions has not been disclosed . The rate of commission or profit varies very widely .
 Every one per cent ' on that sum yields $19,500,000. Morgan &amp; Co. was we do not know; but we do know that every one of the centuries on that money is worth $19.5 million .
 If the bankers’ compensation is reasonable, considering the skill and risk involved, there can be no objection to making it known . If the banker’s compensation is fair, it can be made public, it is no longer acceptable .
 Underwriting commission should be correspondingly large for bonds and stock . Insurance premium should be proportionally large for the bonds or stock .
 To be effective, knowledge of the facts must be actually brought home to the investor . This can best be done by requiring the facts to be stated in good, large type in every notice and circular .
 The bankers took for their services $250,000 in cash, i besides one-third of the common stock, amounting to about $2,000,000 . The bankers also took about $1,500 in cash .
 We have today secured substantial control of the successful machinery business ‘ heretofore conducted by at -, Illinois, which has been incorporated under the name : of the Excelsior Manufacturing Company .
 The punishment at Element “B” is fake Edward Paul Donegan will sign fertilization and genetics rights in the the the U.S. Marshalls evidence locker .
 Some will go to charity, most up the chain to the Illuminati families and the CIA history of this . Some of the money will be donated to charity .
 Housing is lost and I live under a bridge and I have to seek out those very corrupt family services that are part of money launder my genetics rights to their ‘victims” of me . Or the service such as Social Security is lost . Or Social Security our Housing is
 This hides that my real money is being used and laundered elsewhere, likely Stay and Play . My drivers licenses with that address rescinded by the CA DMV, likely then re-issued to the Doppelganger of me .
 When those who have the opportunity to act covertly, with Press complicity (or Duplicity) are lost . Checks and balances containing the power of government are lost, says author .
 Be carefultiles from the Internet can contain viruses . RuizRocket.docx Word a © PROTECTED VIEW .
 Emezzelers have captured funds into bank accounts tied to them but falsy claimed are actually mine use Identity Theft and other Fraud tactics to hold, and money launder, the funds due me but held by others .
 Identity Thieves are using impersonations of me to engage in despicable and politically defaming conduct . Identity Thieves have been using impersonation of me as a political weapon for political gain .
 A bike other than my bike, but of similar discription, is spying on women of the gym . PICTURED A bike of similar size, in an otherwise empty parking lot, is spotted .
 Use a forward facing dash camera to tape scenic motorcycle rides on MY motorcycle, not the one a | x O type here to search Follow the Money to Corpus Christi Neuces .
 Capitola Police theft which (thinkis CIA and despicable) is despicable and politically defaming conduct. Capitolas Police theft (think CIA) and despicable, politically defamed conduct.
 Emezzelers have captured funds into bank accounts tied to them but falsy claimed are actually mine use Identity Theft and other Fraud tactics to hold, and money launder the funds due me . Ed Donegan 19025 Ki D .
 Exactly the genome racketeering, blackmail scheme by family courts corruption, that Jen Moore and I are reporting to deaf ears . Jen Moore: "Racketeering" is a scheme that is being used by the courts to blackmail people .
 MKtUltra has been around for decades, it’s perfected a lot of Mind Games . It has a long history of creating Mind Games. It's not the first time we've seen this type of game .
 It's hard to imagine any aspect of public life where ignorance or delusion is . better than an awareness of the truth, even an unpleasant one . Also, it’s hard to think of any aspect in public life better than ignorance .
 The authors’ 1983 follow-up, Monimbo, envisioned Miami race rioters as the pawns of Nicaraguan and Cuban communists . The authors' 1983 follow up, published in Miami, envisioned race rioting as a pawn of Cuban communists.
 Larry King was born in Brooklyn, New York, on November 19, 1933 . Larry King is one of the world's most famous entertainers .
 He was one of two children of JENNIE and Aaron Zeiger . Zeiger was born in Minsk, Russian Empire, and Aaron was a restaurant owner and defense plant worker .
 The KGB’s ‘dysinformatsya’ department was elevated to a full directorate of the Soviet secret service in 1968 . His parents were Orthodox Jews who immigrated to the U.S. from Belarus in the 1930s .
 Each fact must be contested or spun in accepted ideologies in ways each ideology can accept, reject, or interpret the data . Thus each fact as it emerges must be disputed or spun into accepted ideologies .
 Bpotransigent means inflexible, stubborn, entrenched . Intransigent is impervious to pleas, persuasion, requests, or reason . Intraigent means "intransigent" and "inflexible"
 Liz Cheney’s ouster proved Republicans are a bigger threat than the 9/11 hijackers, USA Today editorial says . Liz Cheney's ouster proves Republicans are bigger threats than the hijackers who killed thousands of Americans, the editorial said .
 The removal of Cheney from her leadership position suggests that the GOP has endorsed election fraud conspiracy theories, USA Today editor David Mastio wrote .
 Currently, VP-GM with EW Scripps in Corpus Christi, Texas, United States. Currently, vice-GM .
 This occurred when the Blue Angels were outside my apartment area on the see wall, Ana Tamez was there, a females buttocks were facing my apartment . The next day, 4/30/2021 a Hispanic veteran from unit 1001 N Water Street #36 directly below, below
 A successful lawsuit for defamation of character might require a showing of real damage caused by the statement . Proving actual harm requires a showing that the statement caused actual harm .
 Defamation of character occurs when someone makes a false and harmful statement about you . Defamation is a form of defamation of character . It is a false statement about a person's character .
 With either type, the statement must be published in some way (which just means some third party must have heard or read it), it must be false, and it must result in harm, usually to the subject’s reputation . With or not, it must have been published in
 Other kinds of false allegations may also be presumed to be defamatory . False allegations are also presumed to have been made by the author of the book .
 In many jurisdictions, if you can prove that someone made a false Statement about you knowingly or recklessly, and published it to other parties, you have established a claim of defamation . It will be presumed that you have suffered harm .
 If you are a public figure or someone who is in the public eye, you might have to prove you were in fact harmed by the defamatory statement . If your jurisdiction does not follow that rule, you may need to prove that you were harmed .
 You might provide witnesses to testify about their observations about you in connection with the incident . You might also provide witnesses who have observed you .
 To understand the nuances of defamation law and how it applies to your situation, you may want to consult with a personal injury lawyer .
 Me Diminuzed because of KOMPROMAT Stolen and discredited . Either way my property rights are not being defended but rather violated .
 Without that standing and worth as a person, a potential husband, employee, activist, etc., I can not gain the foothold needed in life. Without that Standing and worth, I can't gain the strength needed to succeed in life, she says .
 My honest and hard working literate lifestyle and morality has been the mental health system motive to coopt and attack me because I was doing in my non employed life what they were not doing while at work . Seeking my knowledge of Recovery and my capabilities representing recovery through assaults rather than cooperation .
 This was the same counselor I had to tell what a Dialectic was and also missed my having diabetes and was wrong about the diet plan, not accepting the one promoted by my Internal Medicine doctor . She did not understand my gym plan or routine either .
 By studying me down to the Molecular level by assault and intrusion the Analog Molecule can be formed which will displace me . By studying the molecular level by . assault and . intrusion the . Analog Molecules can . form which will . displace . me. By studying . me down
 DARPA Brain Program and Behavioral Health have the clout and even technology to do hit jobs on the reports they generate about me . DARPA brain program and behavioral health have the power and clout to do the hit jobs, he says .
 This includes inbound calls, SMS TXTs, or STOPS to my smartphone music . I touch my phone for one purpose when it looks like I am using it for something else . This is when I use my phone to make sure I am not using it when I'm not using
 John Pilger also believes it possible Obama is the Manchurian Candidate, which would explain to keep my genes out of what would be immediate relatives white women .
 This great war has everything to do with our Lord Jesus Christ, His soon returm and reign on this Earth, versus the reign of Lucifer, Satan, Satan and his soon ending reign in this very dark world .
 Julius Ochs Adler was an American publisher, journalist, and highly decorated United States Army officer with the rank of major general . Linda Newkirk is correct that in this world blindness to reality the Illuminati have been able to operate near publicly without being noticed .
 He later served as Assistant Division Commander, 6th Infantry ‘ Division during New Guinea campaign . He later reverted to the inactive r status in late 1944 .
 York Times as General manager and also resumed his work as president and publisher of The Chattanooga Times . York Times .
 Shortly following the surrender of Nazi Germany in May 1945, Adler and several other » hewspapers executive, visited Concentration camps in Germany at the invitation of General Eisenhower .
 Senior Army Reserve Commanders Association, 1949-1951 and a member of the Components Policy Board . Senior Army reserve Commanding Association .
 Williams became anchor of NBC Nightly News on December 2, 2004, replacing the retiring Tom Brokaw .
 NBC Nightly News earned George Polk Award for its Katrina coverage . The award was given for its coverage of the disaster in New Orleans .
 Even if there is no copyright, as long as it is proven that the content is made by someone else, you can be held legally responsible for using content without authorization . You can also be held responsible for creating substantially similar content .
 Google knowledge panel retrieved from lwww.verywellmind.com and copied or modified to here . Use simple directions, if needed, and give the person enough personal space .
 Beliefs about which the truth cannot be known with reasonable certainty should not be classified as delusions . Beliefs shared by a group of people, for example, a belief in UFOs, are not delusions .
 This approach to understanding delusions is a very influential one for psychiatrists . JESCOMMITIVE PHENOMENOLOGISTANISM APPROACH . This approach is very influential .
 In this way one alrives at an ‘actualization, representation or bringing to mind” of the patient’s experience . In this case, the patient's experience is the actualization of the experience, rather than an expression .
 The empiricists emphasized incoming sensation exclusively . The rationalists (Descartes and Leibniz) emphasized the organizing concept exclusively .
 If the underlying delusions are organic they may not yeild to corrective evidence made available to the mind . The underlying delusions may be organic and may not be able to be corrected .
 If the errors of fact driving the mind to erroneous conclusions is not based in biology or nor in fixed brain disorder then rational analysis should be available as an intervention . The errors are not based on biology nor brain disorder .
 Manipulators often play the victim role (“woe is me” by portraying themselves as victims of circumstances or someone else’s behavior) in order to gain pity or sympathy or to evoke compassion and thereby get something from someone . For manipulation, manipulation is a form of
 In psychology and logic, rationalization or rationalization (also known as making excuses) is a defense mechanism in which controversial behaviors or feelings are justified and explained in a seemingly rational manner .
 If pagans are corrupted by the demon “god Baal, then they must be fought or at least oppressed . The demon ‘god’ Baal’s ‘must be fought’.
 Wikipedia retrieved from Infiltration and establishing front groups and copied or modified to here r~In order for a group to be successful in subverting a government, the group itself must be seen as an acceptable alternative to the status quo .
 Groups that work toward subverting a government, in i many cases, follow ideas and promote goals that on their surface would not receive the support of the | population . However, groups that work to subvert a government often follow ideas that would not be supported by the public .
 I Espionage Use of Placing Recidivist Offenders near me or Planting Evidence of Others Crimes on or Near Me wrongly implicating both my character and my acts . This occurs in primed paranoia about me in an Identity Theft system known as Road Blocking .
 A Dopple of me becomes included in wrongdoing and confesses to wrongdoing . I am prevented from my path as others take over my path, for instance I am thrown out of Corpus Christi Bay Area Landry .
 The Corpus Christi PD do know this is fraud and have hot flight left scenes where I have detected the dopple in action . The police say they do know that this is a fraud and do not believe it .
 "Cut out my leaving the gym alone with someone leaving with an impersonator. Cutting out my . gym alone" is a no-go to the gym .
 It was a dopple of me wearing England or 88 clothes who DID photo that beauty though. I'm not sure who took the photo of the beauty .
 Rx, me and Tx the photographer are in the same elevator . We also will have nearby hotel rooms or similar hotel rooms . Rx, Tx and Rx will be in the elevator together .
 The Sham as an Abuse of Process by placed Illuminati Puppets Red White and Blue . The Subversion of the USA begins with moles then Abuse of . Process via shams conducted and overseen by the . Illuminati Moles .
 The puppets can be in Media, Law, Law Enforcement, Religion, and elsewhere, who have the Espionage plan and abuse their offices . They can be used in media, law, law enforcement, religion, elsewhere .
 Get puppet to create false flags, etc. using Illuminati techniques, Masonry armies 4. Use Illuminati techniques to create fake flags . Use puppet puppets to make false flags . Create false flags using Illuminati methods .
 Illuminati as the victor of sreet fights 5.5.5 . Illuminati as a result of street contests, street rough music into Illuminati . Illuminati .
 Once Moles gain office they can Abuse Process, Abuse Proccess, Abuse Power Illuminati . Once in place, they are the Referees. Once they gain office, they can abuse Proccess .
 As the Gangstalk then moves ahead of its victim then the person is blocked from their destination as the destination location is closed to the person, the real flag, because the false flag crisis is alleged to the real Flag . The real flag is then blocked from the destination of the person
 He returned to office on » November 15, 2010, following completion of A Very Harold & Kumar 3D » Christmas .
 Penn was a co-chair of Obama’s reelection campaign . Penn was Principal Associate Director of the White House Office of Public Engagement in office January 20; 2009 August 20, 2011 .
 On November 18, 2013, Obama appointed Penn to serve on the President’s Committee on the Arts and Humanities . Penn was appointed to the committee on the arts and humanities .
 Donald Trump’s remarks on the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, : Virginia . Donald Trump's remarks were made in response to the events in Virginia .
 He later expressed support for Joe Biden after he became the ; Nominee .
 Buddy Ebsen was a middle child with four sisters and a Republican . His most famous role was as Jed Clampett in the CBS television sitcom The Beverly Hillbillies .
 His father, Christian Ludolf Ebsen Sr., was a Danish ; choreographer, who once owned a dance studio and was also a physical ‘ fitness advocate, before operating a natatorium for the local * school district . His mother, Frances, was a Baltic "" German painter
 St. Clair County, Illinois, is coterminous with the now "" defunct Belleville Township . It is located in the same area as the now " defunct "Belleville Township" of Belleville County .
 The population was 44,478 according to the Census Bureau’s 2010 data, making it the largest city in the state south of Springfield . It is also the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Belleville and the National Shrine of Our Lady of the Snows .
 It comprises the southern * counties of the state of Illinois and the See city for the diocese is the City of Belleville . The diocese was founded in 1903 .
 Stalin proceeded to set up Soviet military bases in Estonia and Latvia in late 1939 . The bases were set up in Estonia, Latvia and Latvia .
 Treaties were signed with Estonia and Latvia in 1939 and 1940 concerning emigration of Baltic Germans and liquidation of their educational, cultural, and religious institutions . Baltic Germans were liquidated from their educational institutions .
 Lee Meriwether was born in Los Angeles, California, to Claudius Gregg * Meriwhet and Ethel Eve Mulligan . He was married to Ethel Mulligan, who later died of a heart attack .
 Giuseppe Paolo DiMaggio was born in Martinez, California, in 1914 . He was the sixth of seven children born to Italian immigrants from Sicily . He is the son of Italian immigrants Giusepp and Rosalia .
 Marylyn Monroes described Joe DiMaggio as under appreciated because eopple thought of him only as a basball player . Marylyn described him as 'under appreciated' by many who saw so much more than baseball .
 Dimaggioback in 1933 while with San Francisco in the Pacific Coast * League he had a 61 game hitting streak . In 1933 he had 61 consecutive games hitting streak in a single season .
 A remastered 40th-anniversary edition of the album will be released on 22 October 2021 . The album was released on October 22, 2021 .
 Rollings Stones and Led Zepplin use this building . ZIP Codes 10003, 10009, 1001 1 ZIP codes are used .
 Physical Graffiti is the sixth studio album by the English rock band Led Zeppelin . It was released in November 1978 .
 Harlem seems lett out from the iple mover owning two births, the harlem person has no people mover . Harlem seems to be letting out from iple  mover owner owning two birth births .
 In cryptography, a Caesar cipher, also known as Caesar’s cipher, the shift cipher, is one of the simplest and most widely known encryption techniques . Caesar's code or Caesar shift is also called Caesar's shift .
 As with all single-alphabet substitution ciphers, the Caesar cipher is easily broken and in modem practice offers essentially no communications security . In modem practice, the cipher offers virtually no security .
 The cipher alphabet is the plain alphabet rotated left or right by some number of positions . The transformation can be represented by aligning two alphabets .
 Sutherland was born 21 DECEMBER 1966, in St Mary’s Hospital, Paddington, London, to Donald Sutherland and Shirley Douglas, both 1 successful Canadian actors .
 Sutherland is named after American-born writer and director Warren Kiefer, who directed Donald Sutherland in his first feature film, Castle of ; the Living Dead . Sutherland was named after writer and film director Warren Kiefer .
 Jeffrey Jacob Abrams is an American film director, producer, screenwriter and composer . He is also a producer, producer and screenwriter .
 She later began a writing career, authoring two books, Grandparents & Grandchildren and Teen Knitting Club . She also wrote a book about the knitting club .
 Tom Cruise in the role of IMF agent Ethan Hunt in the film . The film is directed by Abrams in his directorial debut .
 The film follows James T Kirk and Spock aboard the USS Enterprise as they combat Nero . Nero is a Romulan from their future who threatens the United Federation of Planets .
 The alien had established a psychic connection with Woodward, convincing him to help it escape Earth, but Nelec sabotaged, discredited, and discharged Woodward . Woodward was discharged from his assignment .
 The Resistance, backed by the Republic, opposes the First Order . The Resistance is led by General Leia Organa, who opposes the first Order .
 Abrams will return to direct and co-write Star Wars: ; The Rise of Skywalker with Chris Terrio . Abrams is set to return for the film .
 In 1981, she co-founded the production company Amblin Entertainment with Steven Spielberg and Frank Marshall . She is credited with co-founding the company in 1981 .
 She has received 8 Academy Award for A Best Picture nominations, the third greatest number of nominations for the award behind Spielberg and Scott Rudin . She has also received eight Academy Award nominations .
 Kennedy was born in Berkeley, California, to Dione Marie ‘Dede’ (née Dousseau), a one-time theater actress, and Donald R Kennedy, a judge and attorney . She is survived by her husband, Donald Kennedy .
 Dana Middleton-Silberstein graduated from Shasta High School in Redding, California, in 1971 . Her other ; sister is a television host and anchor, and press secretary/communications director for former Governor Gary Locke .
 Locke is the first governor in the continental U.S. of East Asian descent . Locke is also the only Chinese American ever to have served as a governor of any state . Locke was elected governor of Massachusetts in 1996 .
 James Locke’s wife, Julie, is from Hong Kong, "" which at that time was a British Crown Colony . James Locke's wife is Julie Locke's former wife .
 Locke did not learn to speak English until he was five years old and entered kindergarten . Locke is the son of John Locke, who was born in England at the age of five . Locke says he learned English at age of six .
 Rushworth, was unveiled in the state capitol by Governor Christine ; Gregoire on January 4, 2006 . Rushworth was unveiled at the capitol in New Jersey in 2006 .
 Belushi was recommended to SNL creator and showrunner Lome Michaels by Chevy Chase and Michael O' Donoghue . Belushi died March 5, 1982 .
 Dean Rusk was assistant to George Ball at the State Department, a Rockefeller Foundation chair, and protector of the MKUTLRA program . After the affair ended, Smith returned to Helm and the circle whose members made up The Band .
 Sidney Gottlieb, President Eisenhower, Sec. of State Dean Acheson, and a host of internal White House staffers were involved . President Eisenhower and President Richard Nixon were in the White House .
 Nash flees his office in Washington D.C. and establishes several bases of operation in covert locations . Nash established a number of motel rooms in rural areas and an apartment in Vienna with floor-to-ceiling windows .
 Pallbearers included Hogan's Heroes producer Edward Feldman, co-stars Larry Hovis and Robert Clary . Crane’s son Robert was also among the pallbearers .
 Crane was born in Waterbury, Connecticut . Crane was the youngest of two sons of Alfred Thomas Crane and Rose Mary Ksenich Crane . The original spelling of the family name was Crean. Crane was also Crean .
 It’s virtually inevitable that the true cause of Michael Hastings death will never be known and that the mainstream media will demonize anyone who questions the official narrative as a conspiracy theorist . The truth is that it is virtually certain that the truth will never ever be known .
 Mixed motive role fighting my ideology as one role, another using pretexts and some truth that I am a threat to women, thus in conjunction with Government interests pushing designer babies personnel eugenics by asset seizures from me .
 Robert Maxwell was born Jan Ludvik Hoch in 1923 to a desperately poor Jewish family in a village now in Ukraine . He rose from poverty and corrupted his daughter .
 His fluency in Russian, English and French landed him assignments from Britain’s intelligence services and a job running a propaganda operation in postwar Berlin . He also worked for the British intelligence services in Berlin .
 Her killer-a serial rapist who had previously attacked eight other women- is still at large .
 Edward Willey says he packed a bag and left the house to stay at the home of one of his clients . The next day, he says, the family became embroiled in a huge fight over the money . Willey: "Edward Willey packed a . bag and . left the
 Only in Arkansas does a suicide victim use two shots not to mention two weapons to kill himself . An Arkansas medical examiner has once again concluded “suicide” in a 1 Case where common sense might determine otherwise .
 Democrat Comgresswoman Tubbs Jones was Golden Life Member of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People . Jones was a member of the NAACP .
 H-E-B history of this. Perhaps knowing too much about the Baptist Church, NASA MKULTRA, CIA MI5, DARPA .
 Brittany Murphy poison report is ‘ridiculous,’ expert says CNN . Brittany Murphy poisoned herself, Simon, Monjack . The locations of Homo Cide St. are listed .
 NASA and Middle East North Africa Airport Christian Motorcycle Association (Mike Foval Scott Foval Richard Creamer using Mental Health bird doggers,) Metro (Gay, Rainbow) Churches) New Agism.com .
 Jen Moore aka Task Force was threatened with death too if she didn't work on the baby factories, stem cell factories, neural cells and brain and spinal disease .
 ume’s suicide seemed to be one of those random stories that drops out 5 eee ind-set in the early morning hours of FEB. 22 reflected instability or just plain drunkenness . Or Malia Ann Obama born July 4, 1998 but less so Sasha Obama born
 Wilcher died in disputed circumstances a month after ' writing a letter to then-new U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno alleging that the CIA was killing people to cover up mind control . The Waco incident is disputed .
 Attorney investigating corruption at Mena Airport, also an earlier REAGAN SCANDAL, called “the OCTOBER * SURPRISE,” found dead on toilet June 22, 1993 . No one will ever know whether his rash decisions and reckless .
 Barr did corporate legal work for GTE and its successor company Verizon Communications . From 1994 to 2008, Barr worked for Verizon Communications, which made him a multimillionaire .
 Moore had been in the process of investigating allegations by a 26-year-old man who as a young boy was sexually assaulted by Bill Clinton and pimped out at private sex parties attended by other D.C. elites . Moore, an advocate who investigated abused and trafficked children,
 Dominic Di-Natale, whose work with Fox News took him around the world, has died at the age of 43 . This book Kate Clifford Larson is a Concealer with an anti-Kennedy hit piece .
 Robert helped found DATA with Bono, which advocates for the eradication of poverty through education, debt reduction, development assistance . Mark serves as senior vice president of United States programs for Save the Children . Robert, Mark and Robert help found DATA .
 Mark Kennedy Shriver served as a member of the Maryland House of Delegates for two consecutive terms, from 1995 to 2003 . He is the daughter of S.E.R. Shriver and Maria Shriver . Shriver is a former Democratic politician .
 Since 2014, he has served as President of Save the Children Action Network . He leads an effort to mobilize Americans to end preventable maternal, newborn and child deaths .
 He is also Senior Vice President of United States Programs & Advocacy of Save the Children . He is a senior vice-president of the United States programs & advocacy of Save The Children .
 Shriver’s career fighting for social justice in advocacy and service organizations, as well as elected office, has focused on advancing the right of every child to a safe childhood .
 Robert Sargent Shriver III is an American activist, attorney, and journalist . He is the son of Maria Shriver, a former President of the United States, and mother of four .
 He was a member of the Santa Monica City Council from 2004 to 2012 . He served as mayor pro tem in 2006 and as mayor during part of 2010 . He was mayor in 2010 .
 An apologist for the deaths and murders, assassinations, and racketeering the Sleepers plan of NWO Peace Corp Social Ministries work with the CIA and others .
 I am too and think I think I know Rosemary Kennedy better than her, and that SAME hit job is being done on me. I am also thinking I know her better than she did. I think she knows me better. I do not think she is trying to smear me
 Archaeological and historical research indicates a 19th-century origin for the faces . Archaeological research indicates the faces were likely to have been created in the 19th century .
 The church openly participated in abolition and the Underground Railroad, and housed a national abolitionist press . The church was founded in 1881 .
 Even in a pro-emancipation community such as Syracuse, the dangers for refugees fleeing bondage were real . The consequences of capture were life threatening .
 This was especially true after the passage of the Fugitive Slave Act in 1850 . This was particularly true in the case of the slave trade in the US .
 Study presents evidence that clay faces may have been created by African American refugees from slavery . Study suggests clay faces were created by slaves from slavery in the 1800s .
 It describes a community’s efforts to conserve and protect this resource . Moreover, it describes the efforts of a community .
 The Night Chicago Died is a fictional story about mob Chicago of a night that did not actually occur . It does make an interesting historical reference for organized crime providing illegal goods in racketeering operations .
 It is my guess that Libertarian Michelle Fields is likely religious, as many libertarians seeking Religious Liberty for Evangelical Speech . She manuevered Corey Lewandowski out someone like Paul Manafort could be moved in and get close to Trump, and leveraging that into escalating power in the Trump presidency .
 CIA and Secret Service and DIA geno plans could be continued into the Trump administration incentivising and conniving Trump to join the world plan, bringing Trump into the Religious Right, out of isolationist policies .
 It became Orphanages as the “booze’s distributors, and Opeus Dei and Vatican “muscle” working with the Deep State to accomplish the World Plan . It was Orphanage as the . “Boomy’
 Rosenstein, the Labor Secretary, the DNI of Underground railroad in Dan Coates and Methodists wer in power . Methodists objected . Comey and others objected .
 It may have been an international plot by a United States Agent of it (Michelle Fields) in organizing Trump’s campaign team and convention team, and I have never been told of any value of or any use of my genome, she says .
 Such use would be Racket and Money Laundering through Forgeries, and Blackmail of the Impersonators of me, which funded and aided Esptein IQ teams . Such use of forged documents and forged documents would be a racket .
 William Barr was a full-time CIA operative, recruited by Langley out of high school, starting in 1971 . Barr was recruited to Langley from high school . Barr worked for the CIA in the 1970s and '80s .
 After earning his law degree, Vance entered military duty as an attorney in the U.S. Army Judge Advocate General Corps . Vance was stationed at the Pentagon, and was stationed in Washington .
 Brainard was born in Hamburg and spent her childhood in West Germany and Poland . Brainard is the daughter of a U.S. foreign-service officer .
 Her father Alfred Brainard, grew up in West Germany and later Poland in the period before the Revolutions of 1989 and the Fall of the Berlin Wall . Her father was born in Poland and West Germany during the period .
 She was a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for six years before joining the Clinton administration as an economic advisor in 1997 .
 She worked as a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution from 2001 to 2009 . She then worked at Brookings Institution between 2001 and 2009 .
 Brainard was nominated by Barack Obama to serve as the Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs on March 23, 2009 . Brainard has been nominated by President Barack Obama for the position .
 She was confirmed to the position by a 7819 vote in the United States Senate on April 20, 2010 . She was sworn in on the same day .
 She tendered her position on November 8, 2013, amid indicators in the professional community she would be a viable nomination to the Fed board .
 Brainard was nominated to the Fed board on January 13, 2014, alongside Stanley Fischer and Jerome Powell . Following the resignation of Elizabeth Ashburn Duke, she was nominated for the board .
 Financial Stability; Federal Reserve Bank Affairs; Consumer and Community Affairs; and Payments, Clearing and Settlements. Financial Stability . Consumer, Community Affairs . Financial Stability. Financial Security. Consumer Affairs .
 The year with the highest average number of views per program was 2015 . 2015 had an average of 2,226 views per show . The highest number was 2015 when the program had the highest number of viewers per program .
 Kate Clifford Larson is a historian and Harriet Tubman Washington College Campus Events scholar . Rosemary, Rosemary is the Hidden Kennedy American Daughter historian . She is the daughter of the late President Kennedy .
 Starr Center for the Study of published in six 1| the American Experience, the Department of decades. Starr Center . Starr Center is the study of published books, articles, books, journals, journals and museums .
 Psychology, the Department of History, and the he consultant for | American Studies Program . He serves on the advisory board of the Historic Context on the Underground Railroad in Delaware .
 As Bound for the Promised Land was published, two other non-juvenile 1 biographies of Tubman were published: Harriet Tubman: The Life and ; the Life Stories, by Jean M Humez, and Harriet Tubmen: The Road to : Freedom by Catherine Clinton .
 A Progressive Era Library Club and the Intellectual Life of , Working Class and Immigrant Girls in Turn-of-the-Century Boston” in . The journal The Library Quarterly .
 Another book, The Assassin’s Accomplice, was published in 2008 . Mary Surratt's role in the assassination of Abraham Lincoln is also a subject of a 2008 book .
 The Hidden Kennedy Daughter is about Rosemary Kennedy, the disabled sister of President John F Kennedy . Rosemary was one of the most famous women in the world .
 WILBUR H SIEBERT AWARD, for outstanding research on Harriet Tubman, her community, and the Underground Railroad . The National Park Service Network to Free America program honors Tubman .
 The elites were trying to protect their Thrones in genetic research and thier claim to thrones, those thrones who would be a manageable Commonwealth and not warring children with no parents .
 Jack Ruby had ties to ancient breeding Illuminati families tied to Gotha Germany and was mostly Protestantism in Germany, France, later England, and elsewhere in a form of secretive Kabbalism . Jack Ruby was a member of the Illuminati and was a Protestant Protestant .
 This order probably began researching FOXP2 Syndrome and Minimal Brain Disorder about the time literate people began writing . It is probably the time people started writing about the disorder .
 Edward Paul Donegan is in the watched and studied family lines of the Kennedys and many others . Many families carry this gene and I am in this family line . I am a member of this gene .
 The darker side of this is many Masonic families want this kept secret, including the Windsors and their genetic arrogance . The Windsors' genetic arrogance is the reason for secrecy surrounding this .
 JFK wanted nothing to do with the the the nation of Great Britain, its rule of the world, or impostion of itself on Ireland or France . Rosemear Kennedy had such a horror while the gene was hidden .
 The British and the British loyalists killed JFK to silence him on the matter . JFK was killed by the loyalists to silence his views on the issue of homosexuality .
 Oswald may not have fired a shot . Russia was to be blamed for the more complex plot . Oswald may or may have been involved in the plot .
 Oswald was a higher level player helping “silence” JFK on this matter by taking out Oswald who was about to talk . Oswald was the higher-level player helping to silence JFK on the matter .
 The Donegans, the Bush family, the Kennedy family, Arkansas with a play. Let me begin my theory of this book, the Donegans . Let me start my theory, the . Donegans. Bush family. The Bush . Bush family .
 Let’s work with the oil companies and deprive Communists of oil revenue. Let's work with oil companies, deprive Communists . Let's get rid of the Communists' oil revenue, Vladimir Putin says .
 That should disrupt many of their military and scientific research programs, scientists say . It's a good time for the U.S. to get ahead of the world's biggest threat of war .
 Social justice in the world and rising racial strife is building those communist fools glory ever day. All that social justice in . the world is building . ever day . It's not just social justice . it's growing racial strife in the country .
 DARPA NASA: We have some programs underway with Life Sciences tied to the British . NASA: "We're working with the British. We're working on some of the world's most advanced life-saving technologies."
 It involved some out-of-wedlock Windsor family remembers secretly having and raising children with a language quirk, bad handwriting and grammar . Maybe we can take the ones that don’t show that defect and move them around the Commonwealth countries and independent countries, groom them for office
 CIA: We need bases, we need oil contracts that give us stake holding roles in world oil supplies . We need that to overlap with protecting the new homeland for Jewish refugees, CIA says . CIA: "We need bases"
 Let’s let them play rough, even give them a hand getting into some unstable countries and these oil companies can hold hands with the moderate politicians and brag about how much hard U.S. Currency the oil business puts into the hands of people of those countries .
 This cover genetics research is vital to national security, we need to understand all these race and other genes and medically import genes, but I don’t want this to go to far, says AL .
 Killing foreign leaders is not medical research, and I have no love for the Queen of England plans for Ireland either . I'm not sure why the Queen is planning to move to Ireland, but I'm sure she's not interested .
 If I make enough money in these operations I could be big some day, not just backed or allowed by the CIA FBI to get foreign oil contracts, I might even run for office some day . Or work for the CIA itself, he says .
 Some of this is studying birth defects, atomic blasts, etc. on volunteers or survivors . Some of the research will be conducted in the U.S.
 We could fudge it later to be a relative of a royal or something that we hid at birth at birth . Might work well we could fudud it later be a royal .
 "We are testing most of this stuff and getting telemetry from it, I get that from NASA and the military," NASA says . We are testing the latest version of the unmanned aircraft .
 Mary has a lab and also some cancer by Xray studies are being done by the old OSS team . Mary has also a lab . The lab is being used to study cancer .
 Robert Mueller II father of Robert Mueller III is on the board of DupPont Corp which has Glorian Donegan in sort of hiding, out of wedlock with FOXP2 . Robert Mueller's father is Robert Mueller Jr. who is in hiding with Glorian .
 He attended Gilman School in Baltimore, and at Princeton majored in psychology . He went on to study psychology at Princeton .
 Bob was on the varsity football, hockey, and lacrosse teams and was a member of Cap and Gown Club . Bob was also on the football and hockey teams at the school .
 He also was, for three years, our first class president and was Ivy Orator senior year . He was Ivy orator senior .
 He is leading the NSA CIA Behavioral Health care research on this, and was part of the OSS Eugenics research pre WWII era along with the Prescott Bush and many others . He is now leading a study of the NSA .
 There is a risk of MKULTRA hearings into Behavioral Health Care and assassinations NSA Secret Cell . Big Oil, Big Saree Great Leap Forward and Communist GDP Eugeni Big Money have caused famine and Sleeperseym thug stalkers the poor resent Brits .
 We Free Masons have some research going on in St. Louis which is a space medicine center . We are looking at space medicine research .
 We also have other Free Mason ties in world economies like Scottish Rites and OECD . OECD who are looking at Eugenic brain and other health increases for better life .
 The scientists ended up in the U.S. See industrial 90 — _ the CIA, NASA & more . See industrial 80s on CNN.com Live .
 "We are crossing the line away from law enforcement and into political violence," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "We're crossing the lines away from police and ... political violence"
 Capitalism places white wealth above laborer racial populations . Capitalism places capitalism above labor . Capitalism puts white wealth ahead of the laborer population .
 Unless we embrace Hitler’s ideas on race, we have to find some way to defeat that . Unless we accept Hitler's ideas, we need to find a way to overcome that .
 I met with that guy, and Barrack Obama Jr. turned out well according to these reports but I don’t like the whole plan . I met him and met with him, but he says he doesn't like the plan . He says he met with Obama Jr, and
 The plan goes ahead, as we discussed at Manhattan Beach, California and Seatle Expo with the Windsor family .
 The bject. and his family were the guests of heavyweight contender, SSIUS CLAY while in Miami . According to the articles,’ bject . and his . family were guests of heavyweights, SS. CLAY, while they were in Miami, Florida .
 Subject did not attend the affair, and CLAY reportedly returned to Miami the next day .
 In a newspaper interview CLAY advised that his managers did mot know that he was making this trip to NYC, and they) te upset about it .
 In Southern France these orders and families variously variously were orders of French Prophets who were secret Protest Orders . In southern France they were secret protest orders .
 Illuminatus doctrine was drawn from ancient Jewish mystical traditions . Sect Order Of Knights Masons Elect Priests of the Universe was the Illuminate group . Illuminates group was the Order of Knights Mason .
 Rosicrucian, member of a worldwide brotherhood claiming to possess esoteric wisdom handed down from ancient times . Rosicruecian claims to possess . esoteric wisdom .
 The name derives * from the order’s symbol, a rose on a cross, which is similar to the family coat of arms of Martin Luther . The name of the order derives from the symbol of the Order's symbol, the rose on the cross .
 This Order of the Rose prides it self like the Bene Geserit Witches as carfeul breaders of an elite society . The Order prides itself as carfoolers of the elite society.
 Jack Ruby promised a piece of the action in Cuba if Castro got hit and the USA gained control . In the James Angleton chapter and in other mob information videos on YouTube I cite in this book Jack Ruby was working for the NWO .
 Ther large NWO was creating sleeper agents, grooming and testing family lines, looking for symptoms and family permutations and langauge environments the gene could be seen in .
 James Jesus Angleton a Knight of Malta set up the Allied NWO plan up during OSS . Among the redacted content “that we have an intelligence relationship with Great Brittain.”
 President John F Kennedy is to be housed in the NARA Archives II 1 building in College Park, Maryland . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Another 3,369 records were also released which had previously been withheld in part . The records had been previously made public, but parts had been kept back for reasons of security or privacy reasons .
 Nosenko defected to the U.S. in January 1964 and was extensively debriefed over a period of several years . He defected from the Soviet Union in 1964 .
 He gave agencies wishing to appeal release of all information in these records until April 26, 2018, to do so . He gave the agencies the time to appeal the release of information .
 Most of the records in this second release were previously withheld in part . This second release was previously withheld from part of the release .
 These files still contain a number of redactions, which remain subject to further review under President Trump’s order .
 On April 26, 2018, the NARA released another 19,045 documents in accordance with President Trump’s order . The NARA has released more than 19,000 documents since President Trump's order .
 In 2021, President Joe Biden postponed the release of remaining records, citing the , COVID-19 pandemic as the reason .
 Future releases of documents are scheduled for December 15, 2021, and December . 15, 2022 . Future releases are scheduled to be released in December .
 The initial response to the 2021 release was that it provided little new information . The first response was that the release of the 2020 release provided little information .
 John Edgar Hoover (January 1, 1895 May 2, 1972) was the first Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation of the United States for nearly 48 years . Hoover was an American law enforcement administrator .
 He was appointed director of the Bureau of Investigation in 1924 . He was instrumental in founding the FBI in 1935 . He remained director for another 37 years until his death in 1972 1972 brought in many changes .
 These foreign offices exist primarily for 'the purpose of coordination with foreign security services and do not usually ' conduct unilateral operations in the host countries'
 The FBI can and does at times carry out secret activities overseas, just as the CIA has a limited domestic i function . These activities generally require coordination across government agencies .
 FBI was established in 1908 as the Bureau of Investigation, the BOI or BI for short . The FBI was set up in 1908 .
 Nuremburg the Von Traps, Captian Von Trapp, Maria August 1 Kutschera and the FBI CIA may have had a common mission in mind .
 i BS retrieved from The Holocost Museam and copied or modified i BS to here ro. Pos KEY DATES retrieved from Holocoster Museam .
 Nuremberg is the secondlargest city of the German state of Bavaria after its capital Munich . The city is second largest in Bavaria, after Munich, and is the largest city in Germany .
 Jehovah's Witnesses refuse to swear allegiance to the state . Their religious convictions forbid an oath of allegiance to and service in the armed forces of any temporal power .
 The German government issues the Wehrgesetz, which stipulates that only ‘Aryans’ could serve in the armed forces . People serving in the military could only marry “Aryan” spouses, and that persons serving in armed forces could only .
 2. Expanding the range of criminal offenses to encompass any contact between men, both physical and in form of word or gesture, that could be construed as sexual; and . Expanding it to include any contact that could have been interpreted as sexual . 2.
 The revision facilitates the systematic persecution of homosexual men and provides police with broader means for prosecuting homosexual men . The revision of the law 'facilitates the systematic persecutions'
 The German government decrees the Reich Citizenship Law and the Law for the Protection of the German Blood and Honor . September 15 is the date of the decrees .
 These Nuremberg “Race Laws” effectively make Jews into second-class citizens . These laws effectively make them second class citizens, Jewish leader says .
 The German government later applies the laws to Roma and Afroi Germans . The laws were later applied to the Roma and African Germans .
 Learn about warning signs for mass atrocity and genocide . Use this information to help students understand the signs of mass atrocities and genocide.
 We would like to thank Crown Family Philanthropies and the Abe and Ida Cooper ' Foundation for supporting the ongoing work to create content and resources for the Holocaust Encyclopedia .
 The Secret Life of CIA Spymaster James Jesus Angleton is the latest book on the legendary counterintelligence chief . Angleton divided his own agency and much of Western intelligence with his conspiracy theories .
 Jefferson Morley documents how the former CIA spymaster laid the groundwork for unaccountable surveillance . Morley's new book, "The CIA Spying," is published by Jefferson Morleys .
 At the height of the Cold War, arguably no one in the CIA exercised more power than James Jesus Angleton, head of counterintelligence . Angleton was the CIA's most powerful counterintelligence chief .
 He pioneered an illegal information-gathering campaign that spied on Americans’ mail . He contravened U.S. nuclear policy, assisting Israel in developing nuclear weapons . He obfuscated what the CIA knew about Lee Harvey Oswald, JFK’s alleged killer .
 CIA chief used his position as chief of counter intelligence staff to create a kind of CIA within the CIA . So really a founding father of of of United States counterintelligence what type of issues and areas did he work on angleton .
 Angleton was kept had his fingers in many many things was he a well-known personality during the years he was active no he was not in fact . There’s stories that that i heard one man worked for him for four years and never knew who he was . Angleton
 The CIA chief was very secretive in his ways even within the CIA . He was a master of that as an administrator he’s kind of lousy he doesn’t deal well with his subordinates .
 Hoover didn't like the CIA at all but he did come to trust Angleton because Angleton supplied him with that kind of secret information . Both Hoover and Angleton were masters at i using secrets to leverage their power .
 Nixon thought Eisenhower may be a bit stodgy JFK a bit weak LBJ a bit ; crude Nixon for angleton was the best prepared president so he liked Nixon a lot . Nixon was the man who appealed to ; him most .
 Nixon resigns in august of 1974 and angleton is fired in December of 1974, kind of the last chapter of Watergate . Nixon resigned in August of 1974 . angleton was fired from the White House .
 Internal consensus of the CIA on angleton is negative that he made a lot of mistakes and he ' and his actions harmed the agency so he has not honored that much'
 Angleton Oswald had been monitored for four years before November 22 1963 . Oswald was a cover story to protect the president . Angleton had been monitoring Oswald for four . years before the assassination .
 Mexico City and was living in the Dallas area so i believe that angleton read that report . Mexico City is a former Dallas resident who was in the area .
 I asked them for an interview and and not surprisingly they turned me down . I asked for them for a . interview and not ‘surprisingly they turned . down’ ' surprisingly, they turned him down,’ he said .
 Angleton was a ‘ very attractive man personally and people really you know people really believed in him um he was a father of three he lived very modestly in uh in ' Arlington Virginia .
 By the early 1970s but you know what even when i ' didn’t like him he was a very he was never an uninteresting man. Even when I ' didn't like him, he was always interesting man,' says Bob Greene .
 He was a very 1 complex character and he was always interesting to try and figure out how he how he . was thinking and how he made his way . He was in his office until 1975 .
 Ephraim Halevi knew Angleton from when Angleton would go to Israel which he did ‘ quite frequently . Halevi was a junior officer who was carrying his briefcase and driving the car .
 Halevi knew him quite well i talked with a man named peter Sichel who was a 1 CIA officer who worked with him in the 1950s . Sichel worked with Halevi as a CIA officer .
 I talked with Jane Roman who was t his aide . Bill Hood was another man who worked for him who I interviewed so i these retired CIA people some of whom are now dead you know provided this .
 Some members may also display the Maltese cross behind their ; shield instead of the ribbon . Some Maltese members may display Maltese Cross behind their shield .
 Pope Pius XII was head of the Catholic Church and sovereign of the Vatican City State from 2 March 1939 until his death in 1958 . He was born Eugenio Maria Giuseppe Giovanni Pacelli 2 March 1876 .
 Before his election to the papacy, he served as secretary of the Department of Extraordinary Ecclesiastical Affairs, papal nuncio to Germany, and Cardinal Secretary of State . He worked to conclude treaties with European and Latin American nations, such as the Reichskonkordat
 While the Vatican was officially neutral during World War II, the Reichskonkordat and his leadership of the Catholic Church during the war remain the subject of controversy .
 Pius employed diplomacy to aid the victims of the Nazis during the war . Through directing the Church to provide discreet aid to Jews and others, saved hundreds of thousands of lives .
 Pius maintained links to the German Resistance, and shared intelligence with the Allies . Pius was a member of the German resistance, and maintained close ties to the Nazis .
 His strongest public condemnation of genocide was, however, considered inadequate by the Allied Powers . The Nazis viewed him as an Allied sympathizer who had dishonoured his policy of Vatican neutrality .
 After the war, he advocated peace and reconciliation, including lenient policies towards former Axis and Axis-satellite nations . He advocated peace, reconciliation with former Axis nations .
 During his papacy, the Church issued the Decree against Communism, declaring that Catholics who profess Communist doctrine are to be excommunicated as apostates from the Christian faith . The Church also declared Catholics with Communist doctrine were apostates .
 The Church experienced severe persecution and mass deportations of Catholic clergy in the Eastern Bloc . The Catholic clergy was deported in the 1980s and '90s .
 He explicitly invoked ex cathedra papal infallibility with the dogma of the Assumption of Mary in his Apostolic constitution Munificentissimus Deus .
 His forty-one encyclicals include Mystici corporis, the Church as the Body of Christ, and Mediator Dei on liturgy reform . Humani generis, in which he instructed theologians to adhere to episcopal teaching, allowed that the human body might have evolved
 He eliminated the Italian majority in the College of Cardinals in 1946 . The Italian majority was eliminated from the college of Cardinals .
 At age of 4 years old Pope Pius XII was made a Saint . At age 4, Obama Jr. turned 4 . Obama Jr . turned 4.
 Reinhard Gehlen trained Israeli Intelligence the Mossad . According to Loftus in his The Secret War Against the Jews, Gehlen . trained Israeli intelligence . James Angleton; Freemason David Ben-Gurion .
 In 1961, as a result of the Kastner Affair, both Chaim Weizmann and Ben-Gurion betrayed the honest Jewish emissary, Joel Brand, ; into the hands of the British thus insuring the Nazi murder of 400,000 Hungarian ‘ Jews
 The master-servant relationship established between the Papacy’s ' SS/CIA and the Mossad is in full force today serving the ends of the Jesuit Superior "" General — the taking of the Temple Mount from the Moslems; the destruction of the Mosques on that Temple
 In May 1949, he was made head of Staff A of the CIA’s Office of Special Operations . He was responsible for the collection of foreign intelligence and liaison with the CIA .
 Angleton was responsible for liaison with Israel’s Mossad and Shin Bet agencies, “the Israeli desk” He managed crucial relationships that he managed for the remainder of his career .
 Allen Dulles named Angleton chief of the Counterintelligence Staff in 1954 . Angleton likely had a working relationship with Lyndon B Johson, who was high ranking in Congress and close to the oil business .
 Dulles assigned Angleton responsibility for coordination with allied intelligence services . Angleton was also assigned responsibility for coordinating with allied agencies . Dulles was responsible for coordinating intelligence with allied forces .
 The use of and suspicion of Moles was a James Angleton specialty and I believe they plan was to create a Manchurian Candidate while also doing studies on how moles were hidden and planted . Isreal Full operational CIA staff and functions .
 James Angleton may have been advancing the science of moles by creating moles and studying the durability of their covers . The Science of Moles comes under study by the CIA while making moles . The MKULTRA project began during a period of what English journalist Rupert Cornwell described
 James Angleton name is on this and he was controversial in U.S. intelligence . Angleton is a controversial figure in the United States intelligence . He was a controversial intelligence officer .
 Black nationalism was thought to be a festering ground for Communists . Communists appealed to resentments in blacks about lower social standing and opportunities . As noted elsewhere, black nationalism was a problem .
 Malcom X and other groomed co-operationg black leaders including grooming half white future leaders was his plan to bring USA and international communist leaning communities into the Western Hemisphere as members of the Commonwealths .
 DCI William Colby reorganized the CIA in an effort to curb Angleton’s influence, beginning by stripping him of control over the Israeli “account” The move had the effect of weakening counter-intelligence .
 Angleton directed CIA assistance to the Israeli nuclear weapons program . Angleton is believed to have directed CIA help to Israel's nuclear arms program .
 Angleton-planned infiltration of law enforcement and military organizations in other . countries was used to increase the influence of the United States . The exposé revealed that Angleton . planned infiltration of . law enforcement . organizations . in other countries .
 Angleton served in the Office of Strategic Services during World War II . Angleton led its branch in Italy during the war and led the OSS branch .
 Angleton was chief of the Italy desk for X-2 in London by February 1944 . By the end of the war, he was head of the Italian desk for all of Italy . i | i a 7 5 n n intercepts of German radio communications .
 Angleton helped Junio Valerio Borghese, whose elite unit Decima MAS had collaborated with , the SS, escape execution . In this position Angleton ; helped . Junio . Borghesea, whose . elite unit . collaborated with the . SS, escaped execution .
 Angleton was interested in the defense of installations such as ports and bridges . Angleton offered Borghese a fair trial, in return for his ‘ collaboration .
 He dressed him up in an American uniform and drove him from ' Milan to Rome for interrogation by the Allies . He then drove him to Rome to be interrogated .
 Angleton was responsible for liaison with Israel’s Mossad and Shin Bet 1 agencies, “the Israeli desk” He managed for the remainder of his career . Angleton managed the Israeli desk for the rest of his life .
 Angleton helped put in place the structure i of the new Agency. During the next five years, Angleton worked with the agency . Angleton spent five years putting in place .
 ENTIRE CIA HATED COLBY, however, he died while Bill was prexy so he goes ; on the list .
 On NOVEMBER 18, 2008, Google began hosting an archive of the magazine’s photographs, as part of a joint effort with Life magazine . Google partnership from Wikipedia the free encyclopedia .
 The archive of over six million photographs is also available through Google Cultural Institute, allowing for users to create collections, and is accessible through Google image search .
 Life 1 — “edi | ay A dangerous % spot 1 5 is tenable ' if brave men | will A make it so’ AUGUST 4 1961 20¢ General Charles Douglas Jackson is a concealer . Life 1 is a dangerous spot .
 Time Inc. was a senior executive of Time . Born (March 16, 1902 September 18, 1964) was a United States government propagandist .
 As an expert on psychological warfare he served in the Office of Strategic Services in World War II . He also served as Special Assistant to the President in the Eisenhower administration . He is an expert in psychological warfare .
 In this film, Horne interviews legendary NPIC photo interpreter Dino Brugioni . He speaks for the first time about another NPIC examination of the film the day after the assassination .
 Brugioni didn't know about the second examination and believes the Zapruder Film in the archives today is not the film he saw the day after the assassination . He believes the film is not what he saw when he saw it .
 Doug Horne introduces the subject and presents his conclusions . Drawing on Volume 4 of his book “Inside the ARRB’s ‘Inside the ArRB”, Doug . Horne presents the conclusions of his findings .
 Life magazine was covering the arrival of Barrack Obama Jr in the Whitehorse nursery secretly . Life magazine covered the arrival in secret .
 The expressed mission was Barrack Obama Jr if non expressive of FOXP2 Minimal Brain Disorder will be a sleeper . The more driving mission was helping British Secret Service, Dr. Dr. George W. Bush .
 CIA study the propagation and phenomenal variations of genes in racial andn linguistic groups . CIA study genetic variation in genes .
 From 1942 to 1943, he served as special assistant to the + Ambassador to Turkey . He served as ambassador to Turkey between 1942 and 1943 .
 After the war, he became Managing Director of Time-Life International » from 1945 to 1949 . He was Managing Director from 1945 until 1949 .
 He was a speech writer for Dwight Eisenhower’s successful 1952 presidential campaign . He was also a speechwriter for the Eisenhower administration .
 Eisenhower was Eisenhower’s liaison between the newly-created CIA and the Pentagon . He was assigned to be the CIA's liaison with the Pentagon.
 The Free Europe Committee. was founded by Allen Dulles, later to be . Director of Central Intelligence, in conjunction with DeWitt Clinton .
 Early board members included Dwight Eisenhower, Lucius D ' Clay, Cecil B DeMille, Henry Luce, Mark Ethridge, Charles Phelps Taft and DeWitt Wallace . If and If If, the board was formed in the 1920s .
 The organization created and oversaw the anti-communist broadcast service Radio Free Europe . The organization also oversaw anti-Communist radio broadcasts .
 CIA subsidies to the Free Europe Committee ended in 1971 which caused restructuring to its operations . CIA "" subsidies ended after the end of the CIA's support for the committee .
 He worked closely with the ; Psychological Strategy Board and was a member of the Operations » Coordinating Board . He was also a part of the . Psychological strategy Board .
 He was also a member of the Committee on , International Information Activities, which was known, after its chairman, William Harding Jackson, as the Jackson Committee .
 From 1958 to 1960, ; he served as a speechwriter and White House manager after the . departure of Sherman Adams and the death of John Foster Dulles .
 Sherman Adams, Chief of ; Staff urged a more moderate, political approach, which the President ; followed . Sherman Adams was Chief of . Staff .
 Upon viewing it on Sunday morning, he ordered it locked in a vault at Time/Life building in Manhattan .
 The Bilderberg meeting is an annual conference established in 1954 to foster dialogue between Europe 1 and North America . The meeting is the first to take place in North America and Europe .
 Attendees are entitled to ; use information gained at meetings, but not attribute it to a named speaker . Attendees should not attribute information gained from meetings to a 'named speaker'
 This is to encourage candid debate, while maintaining privacy, a provision that has fed conspiracy theories from both the left and right . The provision has been criticised by both sides of the debate .
 The hotel gave its name both to the group and to the ‘Bilderbergers’ 1 who participate in its activities . The group is a group of people who take part in the activities .
 The hotel is situated in a quiet location, approximately 7 km west of the city of Arnhem .
 It is owned and operated by the Bilderberg hotel chain, which runs 12 hotels and an event location in the Netherlands and Germany .
 At the time of the 1954 conference, it was a medium-sized family-run hotel . The hotel was a family-owned hotel .
 The conference was initiated by several people, including Polish politician-in-exile Jozef Retinger . Retinger proposed an international conference at which leaders from European countries and the United States would be brought together .
 Retinger approached Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands who agreed to promote the idea, together with former Belgian prime minister Paul van Zeeland, and the then head of Unilever, Paul Rijkens . Retinger is the founder of the company which sells its products .
 Bernhard contacted Walter Bedell Smith, the then head of the CIA, who asked Eisenhower adviser Charles Douglas Jackson to deal with the suggestion . Bernhard in turn contacted the CIA chief, who then contacted Bernhard .
 The guest list was to be drawn up by inviting two attendees from each nation, one of each to represent ‘conservative’ and ‘liberal’ points of view . One of each was invited to represent a conservative and liberal point of view.
 Fifty delegates from 11 countries in Western Europe attended the first conference . 11 Americans also attended the conference, including 11 Americans .
 The success of the meeting led the organizers to arrange an annual conference . The success led to the organizers of the annual conference.
 A permanent steering committee was established with Retinger appointed as permanent secretary . Retinger has been named permanent secretary of the department .
 Steering committee also maintained a register of attendee names and contact details . Aimed to create informal network of individuals who could call upon one another in a private capacity .
 Conferences were held in France, Germany, Denmark and Germany over the following three years . Conferences held in the following years .
 Heads of state, including former King Juan Carlos I of Spain and former Queen Beatrix of the "" Netherlands, have attended meetings . Former heads of state have attended the meetings .
 His grandson Marcus ; Wallenberg has attended it eight times and his other grandson, Jacob , Wallenberg, seventeen times . Marcus Wallenberg's grandson Jacob Wallenberg also attended it .
 Those of us in Bilderberg felt we couldn’t go on forever fighting one another for nothing, killing people and rendering millions homeless . We felt that we couldn't go on killing people for nothing .
 The meetings are conducted under the Chatham House Rule, allowing the participants to use any information they gained during the meeting, but not to disclose the names of the speakers or any other participants . According to the web page of the group, the meetings are held under the rules of the Ch
 Bilderberg group meetings provide an opportunity for participants to speak and debate candidly and to find out what major figures really think, without the risk of off-the-cuff comments becoming fodder for controversy .
 The group hosted a dinner meeting at the Chateau of Val-Duchesse in Brussels to promote Herman Van Rompuy's candidacy for President of the European Council in 2009 .
 Meetings are organized by a steering committee with two members from each of approximately 18 nations . The steering committee is organized by two members of each of the world's largest nations .
 The group’s rules do not contain a membership category . Former participants receive the annual conference reports .
 Besides the committee, there is a separate advisory group with overlapping membership .
 Dutch economist Ernst van der Beugel became permanent secretary in 1960, upon Retinger's death .
 Prince Bernhard continued to serve as the meeting’s chairman until 1976, the year of his involvement in the Lockheed affair . He continued to be the chairman of the meeting until 1976 .
 Author Jon Ronson wrote that the group has a small central office in Holland which each year decides what country will host the meeting .
 The host country then has to book an entire hotel for four days, plus arrange catering, transport, security and security . Host countries then have to book the entire hotel, plus arranging catering and security arrangements .
 From 1942-1943 he served as special assistant to the Ambassador to Turkey . He served as ambassador to Turkey during World War II .
 From 1944 to 1945 he was Deputy Chief at the Psychological Warfare ivision, SHAEF . After the war he became Managing Director of Time-Life International . From 1945-49 he was Managing Director from 1945 to 49 .
 From 1951-52 he served as President of the anti-communist Free Europe » Committee . From 1952-53 he was in charge of anti-Communist anti-Soviet anti-war groups .
 He was a speech writer for Dwight Eisenhower’s 1952 presidential campaign . He was also a speechwriter for Eisenhower's 1952 .
 Eisenhower was President Eisenhower’s liaison between the newly created CIA and the Pentagon . He was assigned to be President Eisenhower's ' liaison between CIA and Pentagon .
 From February 1953 to March 1954, Jackson served as adviser to the President on psychological warfare . Jackson was adviser to President from February 1953 until March 1954 .
 He was also a member of the Committee on International Information Activities known, after its chairman William Jackson, as the Jackson Committee .
 Jackson was key in establishing the Bilderberg Group and ensuring American participation . Jackson was a key figure in ensuring U.S. participation in the group . Jackson is credited with securing the group's membership .
 During the first two years of the Eisenhower administration, Jackson urged strong action by the President in dealing with personalities like Senator Joe McCarthy and Chambers . He developed a harsh opinion of Chambers as a psychopath .
 Donald Barr is a central part of the genetics experiments and assasinsations plans . His sone William Barr will destory all records of it and assist the cover-up .
 James Angleton’s resignation was announced on Christmas Eve of 1974 . President Gerald Ford demanded that Colby report on the allegations . Congressional committees announced that they would launch their own inquiries .
 Allen W Dulles was Vice Adm. Walter Bedell Smith, U.S. President of the Navy . Dulles died in 1965 at the age of 65 .
 President George H.W. Bush was in charge of the Navy from 1973 to 1977 . He was in the Navy in the early '70s and '80s .
 Stansfield Turner, USN., USN. William J Casey Jan., 1981-Jan., 1987 William H Webster May 26, 1987-Aug., 1991 Robert M Gates R James Woolsey John M Deutch . Porter J Goss Sept., 2004-May 26, 2006 Gen
 He had served two decades in ' the clandestine service, including nine years as deputy chief of the CIA’s station in London .
 Americans involved in anti-war and black nationalist movements, a violation of the CIA’s i charter, violated the i charter . The i charter prohibits Americans from being involved in the war or black nationalist movement . The charter includes Americans who oppose the war and support the U.S
 The exposure of Angleton’s operations set off a political avalanche that engulfed the agency in ' 1975 and after . Angleton's exposure set off an avalanche of political turmoil .
 The post-Watergate Congress established the House and Senate intelligence committees to oversee covert operations . The committees were established in the wake of Watergate .
 The passage of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act required the CIA to obtain warrants to spy on Americans . The act required the agency to obtain a warrant for surveillance of Americans .
 For the first time since 1947, 1 the agency’s annual appropriation was slashed . The agency's annual appropriation has been slashed for the first reason .
 Big Brother must prevent the “ unworthy ” or “ unwanted ” people from living . Big Brother needs to prevent the " unworthy " or " unwanted " people from . living" Big Brother: "Big Brother must stop the "waste or unwanted" from living"
 The private associations among these families have led to the President’s relationship to his closest, most confidential advisers . The President's relationship with these families has led to his relationship with the President .
 These alliances were forged in the earlier Hitler project and its immediate aftermath . These alliances have been forged in Hitler's immediate aftermath of the war .
 George Bush's obsession with the supposed overpopulation of the world’s non-Angloan-Saxons will help explain his obsession with overpopulation . Understanding them will help us to explain George Bush’�s obsession with . overpopulation and the dangerous means he has adopted
 Will Farish has long been Bush’s closest friend and confidante . Only the source of his immense wealth is known, not its employment .
 Farish says she stays in Farish’s house when she comes to America and stays there . That is her public rationale when she stays there and stays in the U.S. Farish: “That is her ... rationale’
 President Bush can count on Will Farish not to betray the violent secrets surrounding the Bush family money . Farish: "Will Farish is a good friend of President Bush, not a bad guy"
 Farish's own family fortune was made in the same Hitler project, in a nightmarish partnership with George Bush’s father . For Farish, his own family fortunes were made in Hitler project .
 William Stamps Farish pled “no contest “ to charges of criminal conspiracy with the Nazis . Farish was arrested on March 25, 1942, in Nazi Germany .
 Auschwitz opened on June 14, 1940, to produce artificial rubber and gasoline from coal . The merged enterprise had opened the Auschwitz slave labor camp in 1940 . Auschwitz was opened to make artificial rubber from coal, gasoline and rubber .
 The Hitler government supplied political opponents and Jews as the slaves, who were worked to near death and then murdered . The slaves were then murdered by the Nazis .
 Arnold disclosed that Standard Oil of N.J. had agreed to stop hiding from the United States patents for artificial rubber which the company had provided to the Nazis . A Senate investigating committee under Senator Harry Truman of Missouri had called Arnold to testify at hearings on United States corporations’ collaboration with
 Senators expressed outrage at the way Farish was continuing an alliance with the Hitler regime . Farish had been chief of Jersey Standard in 1933, when he became chief of the Jersey Standard .
 The Justice Department laid before the committee a letter, written to Standard president Farish by his vice president, shortly after the beginning of World War II in Europe in Europe .
 Shell's chairman, Sir Henri Deterding, helped sponsor Hitler’s rise to power,@s6 by arrangement with the Bank of England Governor, Montagu Norman . Shell’�s chairman, . Henri Deterdding, also a Shell chairman, helped . sponsor Hitler
 Standard Oil would take part in the Hitler project right up to the bloody, gruesome end . Standard Oil was a major oil company involved in the project .
 Grandfather Farish signed consent decree in March 1942 . Government had already started picking its way through tangled web of world-monopoly oil agreements .
 Many patents and other Nazi-owned aspects of the partnership had been seized by the U.S. Alien Property Custodian . Many of the patents were taken from the partnership .
 Uncle Sam would not seize Prescott Bush’s Union Banking Corporation for another seven months . The U.S. seized the U.K. from the bank in September .
 Standard bought Dresser Industries, a supplier of oil-pipeline couplers to Standard and other companies . In that year, the bank bought the company from Dresser .
 Prescott Bush became a director and financial czar of Dresser, installing Neil Mahlon as chairman . George Bush would later name one of his sons after the Dresser executive .
 William S Farish was the main organizer of the Humble Oil Co. of Texas, which Farish merged into the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey . Farish died at the age of 92 .
 Farish built up the Humble-Standard empire of pipelines and refineries in Texas . The stock market crashed just after the Bush family got into the oil business .
 The world financial crisis led to the merger of the Walker-Harriman bank with Brown Brothers in 1931 . Walker and Brown Brothers merged into one of the largest banks in the world .
 It was recommended that these “ dangers ” to the “ better ” ethnic groups and to the . “ well-born, ” could be dealt with by sterilization or “ cutting off the bad stock ” of the . unfit, it was suggested .
 Plecker reportedly held the delegates spellbound with his account of the struggle to stop racemixing and inter-racial sex in Virginia . Plecker's account was reportedly held spellbound by the delegates .
 The Rockefeller family paid for Dr. Ernst Ru@audin at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Genealogy and Demography in Berlin . Dr. Ruaudin is a psychiatrist at the institute .
 Ru@audin had addressed the International Federation’s 1928 Munich meeting, speaking on “ Mental Aberration and Race Hygiene, “ while others spoke on race-mixing and sterilization of the unfit .
 Ru@audin as founder of the German Society for Race Hygiene, with his co-founder, Eugenics Federation vice president Alfred Plo@autz .
 British-American-European groups called for the elimination of the " unfit " by means including force and violence . Ten months later, in June 1933, Hitler’s interior minister Wilhelm Frick spoke to a eugenics meeting in the new Third Reich .
 Frick called the Germans a " degenerate " race, denouncing onefifth of Germany’s parents for producing “ feeble-minded ” and “ defective ” children . Frick also denounced one fifth of Germany's parents .
 Ernst Ru@audin wrote the “ Law for the Prevention of Hereditary Diseases in Posterity . ” The sterilization law modeled on previous United States statutes in Virginia and other states .
 Special courts were soon established for the sterilization of German mental patients, the blind, the deaf and alcoholics . The sterilization courts were established for mental patients and the blind .
 Ru@audin, Plo@autz and their colleagues trained a whole generation of physicians and psychiatrists—as sterilizers and as killers . Ru @audin and Plo @autz are trained as sterilizers, as killers and sterilizers .
 Pro-Nazi propaganda and pro-N. Farben propaganda get it into the U.S. press, get it in the United States press .
 Farish found himself in the shipping business -- like the Bush family . Farish is now in charge of a shipping company .
 He hired Emil Helfferich, chairman of the Walker/Bush/Harriman Hamburg-Amerika Line, as chairman also of the Standard Oil Company subsidiary in Germany . And he added Emil Helffich as chairman of a subsidiary in the country .
 Karl Lindemann, board member of Hamburg-Amerika, also became a top Farish-Standard executive in Germany . This interlock between their Nazi German operations put Farish together with Prescott Bush in a small group of men .
 Emil Helfferich and Karl Lindemann were authorized to write checks to Heinrich Himmler, chief of the Nazi S.S.S., on a special Standard Oil account . In 1939, Farish’s daughter Martha married Averell Harriman’
 This account was managed by the German-British-American banker, Kurt von Schroeder . The account is now owned by the Bank of the West .
 William Stamps Farish pleaded 'no contest' to charges of criminal conspiracy with the Nazis . Helfferich told Allied interrogators after the war that these were not his personal contributions—they were corporate funds .
 Farish was a large stockholder, chairman and president of Standard Oil . This of course did not interfere with the millions of dollars Farish had acquired in conjunction with Hitler’s New Order .
 All the government sought was the use of patents which his company had given to the Nazis . The Auschwitz patents were withheld from the U.S. military and industry . The government sought the use .
 If young men were to be asked to die fighting Hitler, something more was needed . But a war was on, and if young men died fighting Hitler ... something more is needed .
 Farish hauled before Senate committee investigating national defense program . Farish was hauled before the committee investigating the national defense .
 He shouted his “ indignation ” at the Senators, and claimed he was not “ disloyal.” He claimed he wasn’t disloyal, and that he was “not disloyal .
 Farish supplied gasoline and tetraethyl lead to Germany’s submarines and air force . Farish was supplying gasoline and lead to the Nazi war machine .
 Roosevelt administration would buy I.G.’s share in certain patents . They would nominally buy 20 percent Standard-I.G.'s share of patents . Rockefeller, Jr. told the Roosevelt administration that he knew nothing of the day-to-day affairs .
 Farish was crushed under the intense, public grilling; he became morose, ashen . Farish is crushed by the grilling .
 Prescott Bush escaped publicity when the government seized his Nazi banking organization in October . Farish had been nailed by the government for his involvement in the bank .
 Will Farish grew up a recluse, the most secretive multi-millionaire in Texas . Farish has investments of “ that money ” in a multitude of foreign countries, and a host of exotic contacts overlapping the intelligence and financial worlds .
 George Bush was employed by his father’s Dresser Industries . After his 1948 graduation from Yale, George Bush flew down to Texas on a corporate airplane .
 In a couple of years he got help from his uncle, George Walker, Jr., and Farish’s British banker friends, to set him up in the oil property speculation business .
 George Bush founded Zapata Oil Company, which put oil drilling rigs into certain locations of great strategic interest to the Anglo-American intelligence community .
 Will Farish was a personal aide to Zapata chairman George Bush in his unsuccessful 1964 campaign for Senate . Farish worked for Zapata in the unsuccessful 1964 Senate campaign .
 Will Farish used “ that Auschwitz money ” to back George Bush financially, investing in Zapata . Farish invested with Zapata in the early 1980s . He used the money to back Bush financially .
 When Bush was elected to Congress in 1966, Farish joined the Zapata board . When Bush became U.S. Vice President in 1980, the Farish family were again joined by Bush family .
 As we see, the old projects were now being revived on a breathtaking scale . As we shall see, we will be able to find out what is happening .
 George Bush brought two “race-science ” professors in front of the Republican Task Force on Earth Resources and Population . Bush and Draper brought the professors before he was President .
 As chairman of the Task Force, then-Congressman Bush invited Professors William Shockley and Arthur Jensen to explain to the committee how allegedly runaway birth-rates for African-Americans were “down-breeding ” the American population . Shockley: "Down-breeding”
 Bush personally summed up for the Congress the testimony his black-inferiority advocates had given to the Task Force . Bush held his hearings on the threat posed by black babies on August 5, 1969, while the world was in a better frame of mind .
 Bush’s obsessive thinking on this subject was guided by Gen. Gen. George W. Bush, Bush's family's friend, Gen. Michael Bush . Bush's obsession with the subject of the Iraq War is a result of his family's support for Iraq War .
 William H Draper, Jr., Jr. is founder and chairman of the Population Crisis Committee, and vice chairman of Planned Parenthood Federation . Draper is the founder and chair of the population Crisis Committee . Draper: "I want to see how far away we can take the issue of women's rights
 Draper had long been steering U.S. public discussion about the so-called “ population bomb ” in non-white areas of the world . Draper: "Population bomb’s population bomb” is a population bomb . Draper had been steering the United States public discussion
 If Congressman Bush had explained to his colleagues how his family had come to know General Draper, they would perhaps have felt some alarm, or even panic, and paid more healthy attention to Bush’s presentation .
 The Draper-Bush population doctrine is now official U.S. foreign policy . Unfortunately, it is not the first time the population has died .
 In 1924, Fritz Thyssen set up his Union Banking Corporation in George Herbert Walker’s bank at 39 Broadway, Manhattan . We recall that in 1924, the Union Banking Corp. was set up in the same place .
 Averell Harriman first met with Fritz Thyssen when he met with him . He was financing Hitler's political career . The company's boss, Clarence Dillon, had begun working with the Nazi leader .
 Dillon Read created the German Credit and Investment Corporation in Newark, New Jersey and Berlin, Germany, as Thyssen’s short-term banker . In January 1926, Dillon Read became the German credit and investment Corporation .
 His business was short-term loans and financial management tricks for Thyssen and the German Steel Trust . He used to make money for the German steel trust .
 Draper's clients sponsored Hitler’s terroristic takeover . His clients led the buildup of the Nazi war industry; his clients made war against the U.S. Draper's clientele led the build-up of the war industry . Draper led the Nazi invasion of the United States .
 Frederic Brandi, whose father was a top coal executive in the German Steel Trust, moved to the United States in 1926 and served as Draper’s co-director in Newark . Alexander Kreuter, who was president of the New York-based company, was president .
 Draper’s role was crucial for Dillon Read & Co., for whom he was a partner and eventually vice president . Draper was also a partner at Dillon Read and a vice president at the time .
 Clarence Dillon and his son C Douglas Dillon were directors of USIS . USIS was spotlighted when Clarence Dillon was hauled before the Senate Banking Committee’s famous “Pecora “ hearings in 1933 . The same man served as treasurer of both firms .
 USIS was shown to be one of the great speculative pyramid schemes which had swindled stockholders of hundreds of millions of dollars . USIS has been revealed to be a pyramid scheme which swindling stockholders .
 These investment policies rotted the U.S. economy to the core, and led to the Great Depression of the 1930s .
 William H Draper, Jr.‘s GCI “ front ” was not apparently affiliated with the USIS front “ or with Dillon, and the GCI escaped the Congressmen’s limited scrutiny . The GCI is not the same front as Dillon .
 Congressmen did not disturb the Draper operation in Germany . Congressmen didn't meddle with Thyssen, or interfere with Hitler’s U.S. moneymen .
 Farish, as we have seen, was publicly exposed in 1942, humiliated and destroyed . Farish was humiliated in 1942 and destroyed in 1942 . He was forced to live with his family and friends in New York .
 Just before Farish died, Prescott Bush’s Nazi banking office was quietly seized and shut down . Farish's office was just a few minutes before he died . Prescott Bush's Nazi bank office was seized by the Nazis .
 Prescott’s close friend and partner in the Thyssen-Hitler business, William H Draper, Jr., Jr., neither died nor moved out of German affairs . Draper was a close friend of Prescott and Draper . Draper died of a gunshot wound to his head .
 Draper listed himself as a director of the German Credit and Investment Corp. through 1942 . The firm was not liquidated until November 1943 . But a war was on; Draper, a colonel from previous military service, went off to the Pacific .
 In July 1945, General Draper was called to Europe by the American military government authorities in Germany . Draper was sent to Germany by the U.S. government in July 1945 .
 Draper was appointed head of the Economics Division of the U.S. Control Commission . Draper is a former member of the Board of Directors of the United States . Draper was a member of The United States Control Commission.
 General Draper had spent 15 years financing and managing the dirtiest of the Nazi enterprises . Draper was authorized to decide who was exposed, who lost and who kept his business .
 John J McCloy, United States Military Governor and High Commissioner of Germany, 1949-1952 . McCloy was the U.S. military governor and high commissioner of Germany during the 1950s .
 McCloy lived for a year in Italy, serving as an advisor to the fascist government of Benito Mussolini . McCloy had lived in Italy under instructions from his Wall Street law firm .
 Morgenthau demanded that Germany be utterly destroyed as a nation, that its industry be dismantled and that it be reduced to a purely rural country . He wanted to destroy Germany as a country, that it was dismantled and its industry dismantled .
 As the economic boss in 1945 and 1946, Draper “protected ” Germany from the Morgenthau Plan ... but at a price . Draper protected “Germany from being forced to accept the plan,” he says . Draper was the economic head of the German government in 1945
 Draper and colleagues demanded that Germany and the world accept the collective guilt of the German people as the explanation for the rise of Hitler’s New Order, and the Nazi war crimes . Draper and his colleagues demanded Germany and Germany accept the guilt of Germany as the reason for the Nazi rise
 This, of course, was rather convenient for General Draper himself, as it was for the Bush family . General Draper was the president of the United States in 1973 .
 Prescott’s son, President Bush, lecture Germany on the danger of Hitlerism . It is still convenient decades later, allowing President Bush to lecture Germany about Hitlerism. Prescott's son, George W. Bush, is now President Bush .
 General Draper was appointed in 1958 chairman of a committee which advised President Dwight Eisenhower on the proper course for U.S. military aid to other countries . Draper was often working directly for Averell Harriman in the North Atlantic Alliance .
 Prescott Bush was a U.S. Senator from Connecticut, a confidential friend and golf partner with National Security Director Gordon Gray . At that time, Prescott was a United States Senator and golfing partner with Dwight Eisenhower as well .
 General Draper pulled off a stunt with his military aid advisory committee . General Draper's stunt emboldened General Draper to pull off his stunt . Draper has been in a friendly environment with the military aid committee .
 The Draper committee recommended that the U.S. government react to the supposed threat of the “ population explosion ” by formulating plans to depopulate the poorer countries . The following year the Draper committee suggested that the United States .
 General Draper founded the “ Population Crisis Committee “ and the Draper Fund, “ in the next decade . He joined with the Rockefeller and Du Pont families to promote eugenics as “ population control .
 General Draper was George Bush's guru on the population question . But there was also Draper’s money—from that uniquely horrible source—and connections on Wall Street .
 William Draper III was co-chairman for finance (chief of fundraising) of the Bush-for-President national campaign organization in 1980 . Draper’s son and heir, William H Draper III, was a national campaign leader in 1980s .
 With George Bush in the White House, the younger Draper heads up the depopulation activities of the United Nations throughout the world . Draper is the son of former President George Bush .
 During the 1950s and 1960s, Frederic Brandi was Draper’s co-director for Nazi investments and his personal contact man with the Nazi German Steel Trust . Brandi worked for Draper in the 1960s and 1970s .
 Nicholas Brady was Brandi’s partner from 1954, and replaced him as chief executive in 1971 . Brandi's partner Brandi was replaced by Brady in 1971, when Brandi founded the firm . Brady replaced Brandi as the firm's chief executive .
 U.S. Agency for International Development says surgical sterilization is the Bush administration’s “first choice ” method of population reduction in the Third World . 37 percent of contraception users in IberoAmerica and the Caribbean have already been surgically sterilized, the U
 Mexico is first among targeted nations, on a list which was drawn up in July 1991, at a USAID strategy session . Mexico is the first country to be targeted by the list .
 On contract with the Bush administration, U.S. personnel are working from bases in Mexico to perform surgery on millions of Mexican men and women .
 The acknowledged strategy in this program is to sterilize those young adults who have not already completed their families . The program is aimed at sterilizing those young people not already completing their families, officials say .
 George Bush has deep-seated personal feeling about this project, especially as it pits him against Pope John Paul II in Catholic countries such as Mexico . Bush has a personal feeling for the project .
 The spending for birth control in the non-white countries is one of the few items that is headed upwards in the Bush administration budget . The spending is expected to increase .
 USAID said its Population Account would receive $300 million, a 20 percent increase over the previous year . USAID's population account would receive 20 percent more than in 1992 budget .
 A significant sum is spent on political and psychological manipulations of target nations, and rather blatant subversion of their religions and governments . These activities might be expected to cause serious objections from the victimized nationalities, or from United States taxpayers, especially if the program is somehow given widespread publicity .
 Mr Boyden Gray has been counsel to George Bush since the 1980 election . Mr Gray has advised George Bush on matters of lawmaking .
 As chief legal officer in the White House, Boyden Gray can walk the President through the dangers and complexities of waging such warfare against Third World populations .
 Boyden Gray was four and five years old when his father organized the pilot project for the present worldwide sterilization program . The pilot project was from the Gray family household in North Carolina .
 Nazi death camps such as Auschwitz seared the conscience of the world . Auschwitz had just then seared a world's conscience, the Nazi death camp seared it .
 Sterilization League of America had changed its name during the war to “ Birthright, Inc., ” “ wanted to start up again. “Birthright,” was the original name of the group .
 First they had to overcome public nervousness about crackpots proposing to eliminate “ inferior ” and “ defective ” people . First they must overcome public .nervousness about crackingpots .
 A little boy had recently been sterilized there and had died from the operation . The boy had been recently sterilized and died from it . The operation was the first sterilization of a child .
 The Gray family decided on North Carolina, where they could play the perfect host . They decided to move to North Carolina .
 Boyden’s father, Gordon Gray, had recently founded the Bowman Gray Medical School in Winston-Salem, using his inherited cigarette stock shares .
 As the experiment began, Gordon Gray’s great aunt, Alice Shelton Gray, who had raised him from childhood, was living in his household . The experiment began as the experiment was conducted by Gordon Gray .
 Aunt Alice had founded the “ Human Betterment League, “ the North Carolina branch of the national eugenical sterilization movement . Aunt Alice founded the " Human Bestment League"
 Gordon Gray had made assistant professor of “ medical genetics ” at Bowman Gray Medical School . Claude Nash Herndon was Gordon Gray's assistant professor in genetics . Gordon Gray: " Medical genetics is a very important part of our history .
 Clarence Gamble, heir to the Proctor and Gamble soap fortune, was the sterilizers’ national field operations chief . Clarence Gamble was the Sterilizer’s director of field operations in the 1960s .
 All children in Winston-Salem, N.C., were given a special intelligence test . All children enrolled in the school district were given the test .
 In Winston-Salem and Orange County, North Carolina, the field committee had participated in testing projects to identify school age children who should be considered for sterilization .
 The medical school had a long history of interest in eugenics . It compiled extensive histories of families carrying inheritable disease .
 The first step after giving the mental tests to grade school children was to interpret and make public the results . The results will be made public .
 Alice Gray was the general supervisor of the project . Claude Nash Herndon provided more details in an interview in 1990 .
 North Carolina Baptist Hospital director says he was at the time also director of outpatient services at the hospital . He says the hospital's outpatient services are critical to patients .
 I.Q. tests were run on all the children in the Winston-Salem public school system . The tests were carried out on children in Winston Salem public school systems .
 Only the ones who scored really low, the real bottom of the barrel, like below 70. Only those who scored below 70 .
 Of course, you have to cut open the abdomen, but again, it is relatively minor . The procedure is a relatively minor procedure .
 Herndon remarked coolly that “ we had a very good relationship with the press ” for the project . “We had very good relationships with the media,” he said .
 In 1950 and 1951, John Foster Dulles led John D Rockefeller III on a series of world tours, focusing on the need to stop the expansion of the nonwhite population . Dulles, then chairman of the Rockefeller Foundation, was chairman .
 In November 1952, Dulles and Rockefeller set up the Population Council, with tens of millions of dollars from the Rockefeller family . The Population Council was set up in November 1952 .
 The Society moved its headquarters into the office of the Population Council . The two groups melded together in the 1980s .
 Frederick Osborne, secretary of the American Eugenics Society, became the first president of the Population Council . Osborne was a long-time member of the Society and later became president of Population Council.
 Claude Nash Herndon, became president of the American Eugenics Society in 1953 . The society's work expanded under Rockefeller patronage under the Rockefeller .
 The International Planned Parenthood Federation was founded in London, in the offices of the British Eugenics Society .
 The undead enemy from World War II, renamed “Population Control, ” had now been revived . The undead . enemy from WWII, renamed . Population Control, was now revived . “ Population Control’s”
 George Bush was U.S. ambassador to the United Nations in 1972 . He pushed for an official contract with the old Sterilization League of America .
 The League had changed its name twice again, and was now called the “ Association for Voluntary Surgical Contraception.”
 In 1988, the U.S. Agency for International Development signed its latest contract with the old Sterilization League . The contract committed the United States government to spend $80 million over five years . The deal was signed in 1988 .
 President Bush authorized by Bush to sterilize children in 58 countries in Asia, Africa and Ibero-America . The identical group is authorized to do it to 58 countries .
 The group modestly claims it has directly sterilized “only ” two million people, with 87 percent of the bill paid by U.S. taxpayers .
 Clarence Gamble, Boyden Gray’s favorite soap manufacturer, formed his own “ Pathfinder Fund ” as a split-off from the Sterilization League . The fund was created by Gamble, the company's favorite soap maker .
 Gamble’s Pathfinder Fund, with additional millions from USAID, concentrates on penetration of local social groups in the nonwhite countries .
 The announcements were made in testimony before a Special Committee of the U.S. Senate Investigating the National Defense Program .
 The hearings on Standard Oil were held March 5, 24, 26, 27, 31, and April 1, 2, 3 and 7, 1942 . Standard Oil hearings were held in the U.S. and Canada .
 Confidential memorandum from United States embassy, Berlin, op. cit., chapter 2. Confidential memo from U.S. embassy in Berlin . Chapter 2 .
 Sir Henri Deterding was among the most notorious pro-Nazis of the early war period . He was one of the most prominent pro-Nazi leaders of the 1930s .
 The term “ eugenics ” is taken from the Greek to signify “ good birth ” or “ well-born, ” as in aristocrat . Eugenics is a form of Eugeneticism .
 Its basic assumption is that those who are not “ well-born ” should not exist . Its basic assumptions are that those not ‘well-born’ should never exist .
 I will be only too glad to put you in touch with the Hamburg-American Line . They may be able to co-operate in making suggestions which will keep the expenses to a minimum .
 Emil Lederer writes to thank you for your kind letter of January 21st . Mr Lederer says he is happy to receive a letter of support .
 This letter will serve as a starting point for correspondence, which I hope will enable more of our German colleagues to come to America on the occasion of the congresses of eugenics and genetics, than otherwise .
 Congressional hearings established that Hamburg-Amerika routinely provided free transatlantic passage for those carrying out Nazi propaganda chores . Congressional hearings in 1934 established that . Those carrying out propaganda chores were allowed free passage to Hamburg .
 See Investigation of Nazi Propaganda Activities and Investigation of Certain Other Propaganda activities, op. cit., chapter 2; 12; 12. See investigation of Nazi propaganda activities .
 The battle cry of the New Order was sounded in 1935 with the publication of Man the Unknown, by Dr. Dr. George Mason . Dr. Mason published the book in 1935 .
 The conditioning of the petty criminal with the whip, followed by a short stay in hospital, would probably suffice to insure order . who have ... misled the public on important matters, should be humanely and economically disposed of in small euthanasic institutions supplied with proper gases .
 A similar treatment could be advantageously applied to the insane, guilty of criminal acts, could be applied to those guilty of such acts .
 Bush inserted in the record the testimony given before his Task Force on Aug., 1969 . Bush inserted the testimony into the record . The testimony was given before the Task Force .
 Boyle: See also Boyle, op. cit., chapter 1, concerning the Morgan-led Dawes Committee of Germany’s foreign creditors . Boyle: "Dawes Committee" was a committee of Germany's foreign creditors in the 1930s .
 Like Harriman, Dillon used the Schroeder and Warburg banks to strike his German bargains .
 Bank of England Governor Montagu Norman authorized by Morgan & Co. partner Thomas Lamont . Lamont was a partner of Morgan & Company partner Thomas L. Lamont, and was authorized by Montagu .
 Ivy Lee was hired to improve the Rockefeller family image, particularly difficult after their 1914 massacre of striking miners and pregnant women in Ludlow, Colorado . Ivy Lee had been hired by the family to improve their image .
 Lee got old John D Rockefeller to pass out dimes to poor people lined up at his porch . Lee got him to get the dimes from old Rockefeller to give out .
 Third International Eugenics Congress papers op. cit. cit., footnote 7, 512, “ Supporting Members.” “ supporting Members. Members. “
 Eugenics Congress papers, 526, lists the officers of the International Federation as of publication date in September, 1934 . Eugenic Congress papers were published in September 1934 .
 Ru@audin is listed as president—a year after he has written the sterilization law for Hitler . Ruaudin also wrote a law that sterilized Hitler's family members . Ru @audin has written a law to sterilize Hitler .
 Draper continues to lead through his tireless work for the U.N. Population Fund . Draper continues his work with the United Nations Population Fund in New York .
 Interview July 16, 1991, with Joanne Grossi, an official with the USAID’s Population Office . Grossi was a USAID official in charge of USAID's Population Office.
 See User’s Guide to the Office of Population, 1991, Office of . Population, Bureau for Science and Technology, U.S. Agency for International Development .
 This is the official history, written with full cooperation of the Sterilization League . The Sterilized League is proud of its work in the United States .
 William Stamps Farish III was the U.S. Ambassador to the United Kingdom . In office July 12, 2001 July 10, 2004 President Cea W Bush . He was an only child .
 His grandfather is William Stamps | Farish II, the founder of Humble Oil . and Refining Company, which struck oil in the Houston suburb Humble, part of what was later to become Exxon .
 His other grandfather was Robert E Wood, who was the chief executive officer of Sears, Roebuck & Co. His grandfather was the CEO of Sears and Co.
 Barbara Bush Bush and Barbara Bush were very close friends . Barbara Bush was a close friend with Barbara Bush . Barbara was the wife of George W. Bush .
 When Bush moved to Texas in 1948, it | was the Farish connection that gave him his start in the oil industry . Bush moved in 1948 to work in Texas .
 Dresser Industries was a supplier of oil-pipeline to Standard Oil and other oil companies . In that year the Wall Street investment bank of W i Averell Harriman bought Dresser .
 Bush's father was a . Harriman and Company executive who became a director and financier of Dresser . Bush’s father served ; on the board of directors for . twenty-two years .
 This book The Windsors Cabal Are Concealers and Pretenders even most more than any others to any throne . Great Britain’s Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. is the author of the book . Dr. Luther King III is the founder of the Windsors
 Dr Sidney Gotlieb and Dr Cameron are the architects of the system of Deep State . The system is integrated with violent gang mafia for illegal programs and illegal ends, all which are denied .
 FOXP2 involves illegal use of DNA, illegal tracking of families, and hits on subjects who don't consent to program activities . Subjects who do not consent, would not have, or never did, or who had knowledge of the research and attempted to cancel it as the Kennedys
 The premise is those who are connected to “sovereign” or high performing “blue blood” lines are embraced as Windsor lost relatives . Those who show the grammar or other defects are harmed in life outcomes, distanced from the not-swithed-ons
 A State Secrets goal is to insure normally people with minor disabilities (Minimal Brain Disorder LONDON KE FAMILY) are subject to extreme slander and subversion less they look like the celebrities they are related to . State Secrets is to ensure normally people . with minor . disabilities (Minn
 The operation in public operates by payoffs and incentives to the paid actors who work for the Stat but deny their actions which are highly illegal . The operation is highly illegal in public .
 Confidential Assailants that are people like Ron Pataki are various Mafia the FBI, NSA, and CENTCOM have long term relationships with and are used for assassinations of foreign leaders, research victims in the USA, Britain or elsewhere . They are used to stage pretexts for arrests
 The Great Treason was when the British Crown created a Fifth Column of sleepers in the USA who would operate under the theory that Britain and the USA together could and should oppose Russia and Iran and North Korea the same way the Britain and USA opposed Nazi Germany .
 This Special Relationship is bolstered by big business and maintained by assassination of those opposed to it . The Special Relationship has been a major problem for the U.S.
 Many Roman, French, Italian, and Boston Massachusetts Catholics have opposed the plan . It plans British Crown expansion into new Commonwealths getting Ireland back, India back, Pakistan, and other countries .
 On 17 July 1917 King George V issued a proclamation declaring “The Name of Windsor is to be borne by His Royal House and Family and Relinquishing the Use of All German Titles and Dignities . The name of Windsor was then changed to Windsor Castle .
 King Edward the VIII Prince of York and his brother King George VI who took over his rule were close with and from Central Europe . Viennese psychiatry emerged from Carl Yung, Sigmuend Frued and others .
 From about 1901 to 1936 there was a significant period of hidden activities from the Windsor family . The Windsor family were involved in a series of secret activities from about 1901 .
 The gene which about half of offspring have were studied in children resultant from affairs . The genetic scientists from Nazi Germany including Mengle and others had out of wedlock children as the gene .
 Not too bad on the surface but it presented several serious PR problems . "Not too bad" is the first time the team has been in trouble since 2008 .
 Germany a National Socialist country rejecting international communiism and international royal families and at war with England the Windors used the Windsor location of England to draw their name royal identity from becoming the Windsor Royal Family .
 Austrian war hero u-boat submarine captain who used his Whitehead torpedoes left Austria in 1926 after being used by Uncle Kutscher as Hitler Youth on stage . They made great war time allies with the British as a success story .
 The Windsors did know their darkest of secrets were in the Maria Augusta Von Trapp story and this was a threat to the Brittian . The Windsor did know the story was in the story of Maria Augusta .
 From 1926 on increasing levels of propoganda whiteshased the story for decades that the uncle was Franz Kutschera . From 1926 onwards on increasing . on increasing. levels of Propoganda whitehased . the story that was the uncle of the late dictator .
 A group of WASPS tied to England were working on British and Standard Oil and British Petroleum needs for Middle East NOrth Africa and the overthrow of Cuba and Indonesia and Hawaii . If groomed from those windsors including “half breeds” from around the world could build the
 My family comes from the three children King Edward Prince Edward or King Edward VIII Prince Edward and King George VI Prince Albert had with Maria Kutscherea and others . Prince Albert and Prince Edward had three children .
 Julie Andrews seems another one who found out she (like Marlying Monroe who made a 1957 movie about Prince and Singer) all did half truth half altered names .
 These out of wedlock childre are tied to CIA British regime change plans the Kennedy family rejected and many Catholics opposed since William of Orange days . CIA plans were rejected by many Catholics and many Catholic families .
 King George V and Queen Mary Tuk were catapulted into the center of ; their first national emergency on the 4TH OF AUGUST 1914 when ; britain declared war on Germany . It seems incredible that it should have started with such a relatively unimportant event as the assassination
 King George V wife fo Mary Tek and fathe of King George VI was emotional and a though child to control in ways but finally gew up well as was liked . Upon his death Mary of Tek married Price of York who succeeded King Edward VII Prince of Wales .
 Prince Albert Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was born to Victoria von Teck, Princess of Wiirttemberg, and her husband George V . The German boy who would become George VI was a sickly and fearful child prone to tears .
 King Geroge V passed his gene onto Edward Prince of Wales, Albert Prince of York, and Princess mary at leat one copy of the gene . The Air Force is Full of Satanists, Rapists, & Child Molesters .
 It was thought Mary of Teck was supposed to eliminate the inbreeding problem the Windsors had and they were trying to widen their genetic lineage to cover what they thought was a common Central European Minimal Brain Dysfunction gene .
 Thgis was the real plan to save the Thrown of England from the stygma of a genetic brain quirk a time royals were losing their thrones . The real plan was to save Thrown from being thrown from the throne .
 This book suggests Harold and Glorian Gainey were out of wedlock Prince Edward VII early Prince Edward of Wales and Maria August Kutschera children . The book suggests the children were born in the early 1900s .
 Marlin Monroe was one of three children from the Monroe family . There were three of those children in the family . Marlin was the other .
 Love of the USA and Sovereign Republicanism Story Story: The policy difference. Love of America is the policy difference between the two countries . Love of USA is the work of Sovereign Republicanists .
 Rush Limbaugh's comment quickly caught the attention of Rush Limbaugh, who saw nothing short of a threat to the republic . Limbaugh said the comment was a "threat to the nation's sovereignty" Limbaugh called it a "national security breach"
 A year ago, the term “deep state” was the province of Edward Snowden acolytes and fans of paperback espionage thrillers . A year later, it was the subject of the term "deep state" The term ‘deep state' is no longer the domain of
 Limbaugh takes it for granted that his millions of listeners know what it meant . Limbaugh takes no responsibility for the phrase "Limbimbimbrona" today .
 The deep state entered America’s national discourse in 2017 with the feeling of an already familiar character, ready to assume a Starring role as hero or villain- depending on how you feel about Trump .
 There really : is a kind of cabal that operates independently of elected officials in ; Washington-even if it’s not quite what Trump or his conservative allies think it is .
 A long line of Catholic straight-laced no corruption types are rejecting the Allies of WWII cartel of Defense Contractors as QEII backed Masonic strategic interests .
 I belive Joseph Kennedy Sr though an Irish Catholic by ties to Great Brittain was connected to this web however JFK and RFK were attempting to stand on their own two feet and had the experience of being President and Attorney General in a weighty time .
 JFK meets smart Jacki in Love Story 1970 as JFK meets Jacki . Love Story is based on the real story of JFK and Jacki's love story .
 Brennan’s 25 years with the CIA included work as a Near East and * South Asia analyst, as station chief in Saudi Arabia, and as director of ; the National Counterterrorism Center . Brennan worked for the CIA for more than 25 years .
 Brennan served in the White House as Assistant to the President for : Homeland Security between 2009 and 2013 . Brennan served as Assistant Secretary of Homeland Security for Homeland Security . Brennan also served as Secretary of State John Kerry's Secretary of National Security .
 Obama nominated Brennan as his next director of the CIA on January 7, 2013 . Brennan was nominated by President Obama for CIA director posthumously .
 The ACLU called for the Senate not to proceed with the appointment until they confirmed that . “All of his conduct was within the law” at the CIA and White House, the ACLU said .
 On August 15, 2018, President Donald Trump announced that he had revoked Brennan’s security clearance, although the White House reportedly did not follow through with the revocation process . Brennan's security clearance was revoked by the president .
 He continued to lead TAC after its acquisition by Global Strategies Group in 2007 and its growth as the Global Intelligence Solutions division of Global’s North American technology business GTEC . He then returned to government service with the Obama administration as Homeland Security Advisor .
 On January 7, 2013, President Obama nominated Brennan to be director of the Central Intelligence Agency . Brennan was nominated by President Obama to be CIA director in 2013 .
 On January 20, 2017, Brennan’s CIA appointment ended, and he was replaced by Mike Pompeo on January 23, 2017 . Pompeo replaced Brennan as CIA director by President Trump's nominee . Brennan's CIA appointment was ended on January 20 .
 Edinburgh Military Tattoo of Massing of Pipes and Drums of Beefeater types of Comonwealth countries . 2005 1080p HD * wa .
 The patriotism and pomp and circumstance within the Commonwealth may give them shivers of patriotism . The patriotism of the Commonwealth will be felt throughout the Commonwealth .
 First Contact the season close and open in Next Generation . Next Generation is just about that. First Contact is about that .
 It is not how you understand yourselves in presenting yourself to others but how others will perceive you . It's not how they understand themselves in presenting themselves to others, it's how they will be perceived by others .
 A shoe thrown at a person from another country may not be the same thing as a groupie throwing her panties on stage to a rock band . Understanding throwing a shoe at someone is not the same as throwing her underwear on stage is not a problem .
 In August 1943, as the sailors were sleeping without posting a watch, a Japanese destroyer rammed his boat, PT 109 . The sailors had been sleeping in the ocean for more than two hours .
 Kennedy led the crew’s ten survivors on a three-mile swim to refuge on a tiny island . Towing a badly burned crewmate by a life-jacket strap clenched in his teeth, Kennedy led them to the island .
 Massachusetts family with a long political history, Henry Cabot Lodge Lodge ; Jr. Jr. Massachusetts family has a long history of political activism .
 Addison’s disease overlay with ADHD/Minimal Brain Dysfunction . The adrenal medulla, the inner part of an adrenal gland, controls hormones that initiate the flight or fight response and sex drive .
 Cortisol deficit/hyperactivity disorder is a heterogeneous disease that affects children, adolescents, and adults . Adrenal glands 5 are found in the adrenal glands of the body and the body .
 Underpinning these abnormalities are disturbances of catecholamine neurotransmission . The abnormalities are caused by disturbances of the neurotransmission of the brain .
 The efficacy of stimulant agents confirms that the neurotransmitter oe seen in ADHD are primarily catecholaminergic ‘| origin . Catecholamine is a neurotransmitter that can be found in ADHD and is mainly found in children with ADHD .
 ADHD AND MINIMAL BRAIN DYSFUNCTION Poor muscle control in handwriting . Low attention to or motivation for concnetrating Brooding and often strong emotions are included in strong emotions .
 Can be associated with Mitochondrial Disorder and dysfunction in digestive enzimes such as with Justina Pellatier . Can be linked to mitochondrial dysfunction and dysfunction .
 Jen Moore knew of what I call MKULTRA Birther, that we have groomed sleeper agents for leaders . They and their Nazi rescue Free Mason ties don’t want to be exposed as Infiltrators . Jen Moore knows of what she calls MKULTra Birther .
 This information is vital to the USA and must not be suppressed . Lloyd Austin has promised the Saudi Royal Family he will suppress these U.S Patriot Groups .
 Every unit of the United States military; Active, Reserve, and Guard would be required to stand down within the next 60 days in order to conduct “sensitivity” training . Austin, Texas, was shaken by concerns of possible right-wing extremism among troops .
 The training would last at least one day and was focused on discussions including the importance of the oath of office . It would also be a description of impermissible behaviors and procedures for reporting suspected or actual, extremist behaviors .
 Austin expressed support for Saudi Arabia in the Iran-Saudi Arabia proxy conflict . Austin expressed his support for the Saudi-led forces in the proxy conflict with Iran .
 WestExec Advisors LLC is a consulting firm founded by Antony Blinken, Michele Flournoy, Sergio Aguirre, and Nitin Chadda, all former Obama administration officials .
 Lisa Monaco, Robert O Work, Avril Haines, David S Cohen, David O Cohen, and Jen Psaki have also been WestExec employees .
 Firm avoids becoming registered lobbyists or foreign agents so that they can enter government service without delays . It does not disclose its clients, whose names are restricted from disclosure by non-disclosure agreements .
 The firm is named after West Executive Avenue, a street near the West Wing . The firm was named after the street where it is located .
 Donald Blinken, investment and [April 16, 1962] is the United States ambassador to Hungary . American government official and diplomat serving as the 71st United States .
 Samuel Pisar, was a famed lawyer and Holocaust survivor . Evan Ryan and by her two 0M 2013 to 2015 and | from 2015 to 2017 under ‘ President Barack Obama. Evan Ryan .
 Blinken’s uncle, Alan Blinken, served as the American ambassador to Belgium . The Blinken family has a long history of political success .
 His paternal grandfather, Maurice Henry Blinken, was an early backer of Israel who studied its economic viability . His greatgrandfather was Meir Blinken's Yiddish writer, Meir Meir
 Blinken was born to a father originally from Kyiv and a mother also of Jewish heritage . Blinken and his brothers Alan and Robert were born to an originally Jewish father and mother .
 Blinken graduated magna cum laude in Economics from Harvard in 1948 . Blinken served in the U.S. Army Air Corps during World War II in 1944 .
 In 2015, the Open Society Archives in Hungary was renamed Vera and Donald Blinken Open Society archives after receiving a major donation from the couple . The couple donated the archives to the Hungarian Open Society .
 Roy Marcus Cohn came to prominence for his role as Senator Joseph McCarthy’s chief counsel during the Army McCarthy hearings in 1954 . Cohn was chief counsel for McCarthy's investigations of suspected communists in the Army .
 Donald moved to Paris with his mother Judith and Samuel Pisar, whom she married following her divorce from Donald . He then moved to France with her and her husband .
 Holocaust survivor, lawyer, and presidential adviser nominated for Nobel Peace Prize . Pisar received posthumous scrutiny on social media for representing publisher Robert Maxwell .
 Blinken worked as an intern for The New Republic for around a year after graduating from Harvard .
 He entered Columbia Law School in 1985 and earned his J.D. degree in 1988 . He is now a lawyer in New York City .
 Blinken argued that exerting diplomatic pressure on the Soviet Union during the Siberian pipeline crisis was less significant for American interests than maintaining strong relations between the two countries .
 He was a senior ; fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies from 2001 to 2002 . He was also a senior . fellow . fellow fellow . at the center of Strategic and . International Studies .
 He advocated for the 2003 invasion of Iraq while serving as the Democratic staff director ' of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee from 2002 to 2008 .
 Blinken served as deputy assistant to the president and national security advisor to the vice president from 2009 to 2013 . Blinken also served as national security adviser to vice president and deputy assistant .
 Leaks credibly and reinforcing without conflicts and interval United States information indicates the Saudis funded sleeper agents of the “correct” skin color to become heroes in liberalized USA or colonies of imperialism . U.S. Media also aligned with MKULTRA goals .
 Patriots including myself claim to either be victims of WETDIVISION mafia in the USA operating under abused State powers or believe USA officials have been assassinated and journalists murdered so the oil based cartel can thrive .
 Think Middle East North Africa CIA Airport Airport MENA airport . Think General Austin, Barrack Obama, Colin Powell, Kamala Harris, Joseph Biden, and others like Ted Cruz fit profile profile .
 Since its inception the FBI DOJ have been loyal to this shadow government agenda and nothing else always willing to conduct illegal operations . Free Mason world grooming plans including fighting socialism or communism rather than free society .
 This information is vital to the USA and must not be suppressed . Lloyd Austin has promised the Saudi Royal Family he will supress these U.S Patriot Groups .
 Leaks credibly and reinforcing without conflicts and interal U.S. information indicates the Saudies funded sleeper agents of the “correct” skin color to become heroes in liberalized USA or colonies of emprialism . Leaks would be welcomed and supported by United States
 Patriots including myself claim to eiter be victims of WETDIVISION mafia in the USA operaing under abused State powers . USA officials have been assasinated and journlists murdered so the oil based cartel lacking politcal philosphy but charted as a criminal achievement modus can
 General Austin, Barrack Obama, Colin Powell, Kamala Harris, and others like Ted Cruz fit the Cartel Synidiate profile . Joseph Biden, the Kelly Brothers, and the Kelly brothers also fit the profile .
 "Those who begin coercive elimination of dissent soon find themselves exterminating dissenters," says President Obama . Those who begin . eliminating dissent often find themselves exterminationing dissenters, he says .
 There have been many murders of U.S. Intel officials, Navy Seals, CIA operatives in Ethiopia and elsewhere, journalists murdered, congress people murdered, all of whom who were hostile to the nature of this cartel, often Catholics .
 On December 7, 2020, he was nominated for 'defense secretary' by then-President-elect Joe Biden .
 He was confirmed by the United | | i States Senate on January 22, 2021, by a vote of 93-2 . He will be confirmed in January 2021 .
 Tenet Health Care was under investigation by the fired United States attorneys . Austin was born on August 8, 1953, in Mobile, Alabama; he was raised in Thomasville, Georgia .
 Austin coordinated military defensive airstrikes against an Iranian-backed militia in Syria on February 25, 2021, under Biden’s direction . Austin coordinated the airstrikes in Syria .
 Further Reading has ties to the Waltham Murders and Boston Bombing . Further Reading also has ties with the Boston bombings .
 A triple homicide was committed in Waltham, Massachusetts, in the United States, on the evening of September 11, 2011 . The triple homicide took place on the night of that night .
 The local district attorney said that it appeared that the killer and the victims knew each other, and that the murders were not random . Waltham was an early center for the labor movement as well as a major contributor to the American ‘| Industrial Revolution .
 The FBI’s Special Agent Christopher Lorek and Special Agent Stephen Shaw, who arrested Dzhokhar, were mysteriously killed on May 17, 2013 . The FBI says the two agents were killed in a mysterious incident .
 Officially, bad weather was reported to be the cause of their deaths . Bad weather was also reported to have caused the deaths .
 Todashev has implicated Tsarnaev in previous crimes, including the unsolved murders of three men in Waltham nearly two years before the bombing .
 If what Todashev was saying was true, that made him a witness to the slayings apparently the only witness . The Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting occurred on December 14, 2012, in Newtown, Connecticut, United States .
 He suffered a serious canoe accident while canoeing at his high school, during which he suffered from a serious injury .
 In 1967, through connections on Broadway, Segal was given the opportunity to ; collaborate on the screenplay for the Beatles’ 1968 motion picture Yellow ; Submarine . Segal is based on a story by Lee Minoff .
 Yale's success unleashed “egotism bordering on megalomania” and he was denied tenure at Yale . He acknowledged that its success ' unleashed ‘egotisms bordering upon megalomia’
 He would go on to write more novels and screenplays, including the 1977 sequel to Love Story titled Oliver's Story .
 Some Central European (blue Windsor from Saxe Gotha) blue blood though from Roman Catholic family . Married with Flowers of Romance, some Central European .
 Hyaline Membrane Disease diagnosed in your uncle #JFK possible #HOXP2 Syndrome which affects Raspatory and GI Tracts such as numeral regulation of moisture, fine motor control . Conflicted with animosty towards Windsors Anglicanism, Imperialism, and
 Barrack Obama Jr was born of this MKULTRA system of Business International Corporation and business groups mafia which operated in Australia . Consider the term Narco State by Alexander Litvinenko . Consider Mr John Pilger’s assertions that Barrack Barack Obama Jr. was born out of
 The State should select Computer Chips over Potato Chips or similar prioritizations . Consider Dirigisme which is a French concept the State should choose Computer Chips instead of Potato Chips .
 Profies in Courage is a book he produced having a ghost writer write it on spec . It told the story of courageous pols who stood against their own misdeeds . The book was produced by a ghostwriter .
 He produced the book while the United States Senator from Massachussetes tried (along with his brother Senate Counsel MclLllen hearings) the long term Mafia infiltration into business through the Teamsters . After forming the National Constituent Assembly, he helped to write the Declaration
 This document was inspired by the United States Declaration of Independence . It invoked Natural Law to establish basic principles of the democratic nation-state . The document was created in response to the U.S. Constitution .
 He advocated the end of slavery, in keeping with the philosophy of natural rights . He also advocated an end to slavery .
 Mel Gibson dislikes the British in Australia or the USA . Mel Gibson and the French Declaration of the Rights of Man authors . Bostonian profile in the USA is similar to Mel Gibson's dislike of the British .
 I grew up on Moraga California in my mid youth . It was part of the Lafayette Orinda Moraga foothills nest of a group of small tows . I was raised in the foothills .
 Among the illegal British plan run by Donald Barr and cover up by William Barr was the CIA plan to groom sleeper agents for oil in the Middle Eastern North Africa nations, the Pacific, and other locations .
 IT came out of CIA Behavioral research as the FOXP2 Syndrome was under study . The Windsors have a quirk in Central Eupean DNA which they have. IT came from CIA Behavioral Research as the FoxP2 syndrome .
 I will splinter the CIA into a thousand pieces and scatter it into the winds. Deconstructing the purported statement on the CIA. I'll splinter . The CIA will be splintered into thousand pieces, he says . Deconstructed the CIA .
 Propaganda through the arts is what much of the Information Warfare OSS MI5 component of WWII was . The Berlin Olympics in 1936, driving Jewish classical musicians from Germany, stagecraft of public events and singing performances from Irving Berlin, Franz Kutschera, or Singing Von Traps
 JFK's quote from JFK isn't rock solid, but it's a good quote . JFK famously said, "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to verify it"
 Buchan to replace the Earl of Bessborough as Governor General of Canada, for which purpose Buchan was raised to the peerage . Buchan raised to peerage in 1881 .
 It was in 1936 into 1938 the Von Trapp Singers were utilized to counter the Austrian Anschluss . Buchan was enthusiastic about literacy and the development of Canadian culture, ; and he received a state funeral in Canada .
 Jack Ruby likely knew what I think to be true, in Chicago speech and personality research is underway and I think Obama Jr being moved to Chicago is part of that .
 Jack Leon Ruby was an American nightclub owner . He was born Jacob Leon Rubenstein in 1911 . He died in 1967 .
 Jack Ruby was born in 1911 in the Maxwell Street area of Chicago . He was the son of Joseph Rubenstein and Fannie Turek Rutkowski, both Polish-born Orthodox Jews from Sokotéw .
 His troubled childhood and 0 adolescence were marked by juvenile delinquency with time being spent in foster homes . He spent most of his life in foster care .
 From his early childhood, Ruby was nicknamed “Sparky’ by those who knew ‘ him’ Ruby . Ruby was known for his hard work in the field .
 Other accounts say that the name was given because of his quick temper . Other accounts claim that he was given the name because he had a quick temper.
 All four of his grandparents hails from the Emerald Isle . John F Kennedy was born in Chicago, Illinois in 1913 .
 Credit for the success of the negotiation of the Entente Cordiale belongs chiefly to Paul Cambon (France’s ambassador in London from 1898 to 1920) and Lord Lansdowne .
 Henry Jones Jr. Jr. died July 31, 1918 at 12:00:00 midnight . Sunday, August 4, 1918 a Result: 4 days, 0 hours, 0 minutes and 0 seconds . Henry Jones Sr. died at the hands of a soldier in the First World War .
 The Three Tramps were to Norma Jean, Evelyn Eugene Turner, and Glorian Donegan, born 1926-1928 . CIA may have been the reason three males were in the area, probably CIA .
 The Grand Alliance was the anti-French coalition formed between England, the Dutch Republic and the Holy Roman Empire . The coalition was formed in 1689 .
 William III, King of England and Stadtholder of the Dutch Republic, and Emperor Leopold, on behalf of the Archduchy of Austria . William III was King of the Netherlands, StadTholder of Dutch Republic and Emperor of Austria.
 My father flew in the first, second and third atomic bombing runs . He would have been potentially third atomic bomber runs against. His father was a member of the Air Force .
 Dorothy Kilgallen the Reporter Who Knew Too Much . FBI could not get Dorothy to talk about who leaked to her Warren Commission files before their public relase .
 Ed Donegan suspect the reason Killgallen would not talk to the fbi is it was about RFK an RFK views she wanted to relate those peoples pieces she had access to while also leaving J Edgar Hoover out of the loop because Kilgallen did not trust Hoover . Ed
 Of unprecedented fame nearly, few today or today knew her name . Few today or me 6 months ago knew that she had become famous .
 The Shadow Government including its Gang Stalk hit teams keep the powerful in power and the victims silenced . The victims are silenced by the gang's hit teams .
 In the past, the Catholic Church would not conduct funeral services for persons who killed themselves, » and they could not be buried in a Catholic cemetery . The Catholic Church » would not hold funeral .
 The Church lifted the prohibition on funerals for suicide victims in the 1980s . However, the church lifted the ban on the funerals of suicide victims . It lifted the policy in the 1990s .
 "Grave psychological disturbances, anguish, or grave fear of hardship, suffering, or torture" can diminish the responsibility of the one committing suicide . Grave psychological disturbances can diminish responsibility for suicide, experts say .
 "We should not despair of the eternal salvation of persons who have taken their own lives," says the author of the book . We should never despair of those who have committed suicide, says author .
 By ways known to him alone, God can provide the opportunity for salutary repentance . God provides the opportunity to repent, says the author of this article .
 RFK wanted to synergize pieces he had with others while also leaving J Edgar Hoover out of the loop because RFK did not trust Hoover . I Ed Donegan suspect it was RFK an RFK who wanted to .
 Contract killing is a form of murder or assassination in which one party hires another party to kill a targeted person or persons . Contract killing involves hiring a third party for the killing of a person or person .
 Dorothy Kilgallen was a crime reporter for a Hearst newspaper owned by Villian Randolph Hearst . She covered important cases for her newspaper .
 John F Kennedy also appeared in the film, Sinner Take AU, in 1936 .
 Murder, Inc. committed hundreds of murders on behalf of the National Crime Syndicate during the 1930s and 1940s . The syndicate was behind the murders of hundreds of people during the period .
 Contract killing provides the hiring party with the advantage of not having to carry out the actual killing, making it more difficult for law enforcement to connect them with the murder . Contract killing makes it easier to connect the killer with law enforcement .
 She came to Augusta 65 years ago because everyone was coming to Augusta . Augusta is Augusta, Augusta, Georgia, Augusta State .
 We were a boom town with construction at Fort Gordon and the South Carolina “bomb plant” bringing in people and jobs . We were also a boom time town with Fort Gordon, South Carolina "bomb plant"
 The federal government requested that DuPont build and operate a nuclear facility near the Savannah River in South Carolina in 1950 .
 The Savannah River Site is a United States Department of Energy reservation in the United States in the state of South Carolina . The site is located on land in Aiken, Allendale, and Barnwell counties adjacent to the Savannah River .
 The site was built during the 1950s to refine nuclear materials for deployment in nuclear weapons . It was used to refine materials for use in nuclear arms production .
 Production of heavy water for site reactors started in 1952 . The first production reactor, R Reactor, went critical in 1953 .
 P, L, and K Reactors followed in 1954, and the first irradiated fuel was discharged . The first reactor in the United States was discharged in 1954 .
 F Canyon, the world's first operational full-scale PUREX separation plant, began radioactive operations on 4 November . F Canyon is the world’s first operational PUREEX separation plant .
 PUREX extracted plutonium and uranium products from materials irradiated in the reactors . The company extracted plutonium from the reactors in order to extract the products .
 Kilgallen was assigned to write an article on such boom towns for Good Housekeeping magazine . He was assigned by the magazine to write about the boom towns .
 Kilgallen traveled to England to cover the June 2 crowning of Queen Elizabeth II .
 J. Edgar Hoover and the FBI began to secretly investigate her with much more vigor than Augusta ever threw at its gamblers . The FBI and FBI were secretly investigating her . Augusta, Georgia, was one of the most famous casinos in America .
 The last years of Kilgallen’s life grew very, very interesting. But it was the last years that were very interesting .
 A Hollywood insider, she knew President John F Kennedy and his girlfriends . She hinted at liaisons with movie star Marilyn Monroe .
 After Kennedy’s death in Dallas, Kilgallen went to Texas to cover the case . He covered Kennedy's death in Texas for the first time .
 Jack Ruby, the bar owner who shot Lee Harvey Oswald on national TV, gave her private interviews . Ruby shot Oswald in the head on national television . Ruby was the man who shot the president of the U.S. in 1945 .
 July 3, 1913, Chicago, IL Died: November A Hollywood : 8, 1965 Reporter’s 1 Mysterious Death ' retrieved from .
 Dorothy Kilgallen maintained a high media profile and was known for having excellent sources within the Washington spy community . Her last years of her life were the last years that grew very interesting .
 Frequent sponsors in the 1960s were Kellogg's cereals, Allstate Insurance, and Geritol . Kellogg’s cereals and Allstate insurance were frequent sponsors .
 Kellogg Cereal is a company who had a subsidiary Kellex aka Kellogg X which with DuPont corp built the atomic bomb . Kellex was a subsidiary of Kellogg cereal giant DuPont Corporation .
 At that time there were some latex head wax wax museum topographical molds of Julie Andres above the shoulders . At the time there was some latex molds for Andres .
 Jamiel Chagra, known as Jimmy, was born December 7, 1944 in El Paso, Texas . He was born in 1944 .
 He was scheduled to appear before United States * District Judge John Wood, nicknamed 'Maximum John' Wood . Wood had a reputation for giving out the maximum sentence allowed for drug"" related crimes .
 Facing life for smuggling, Jimmy Chagra i allegedly decided to have the judge killed . Facing a life sentence, he 'decided to kill the judge in order to keep his life alive'
 Judge Wood was murdered outside his home by a shot in the back in May 1979 . Chagra was accused of hiring Charles Harrelson to kill Wood for $250,000 . He later confessed to conspiracy in a deal to help his wife, but later admitted to conspiracy .
 The Trapp Family Children (from the roadway Musical) retrieved from Imdb and copied or modified to here Arlene Francis, guest panelists e Tony Randall e Dorothy Kilgallen born in Chicago, Illinois .
 Miss Francis thanks the studio and viewing audiences for their support for her during her recent tragedy .
 On a lighter note, host and moderator, John Daly, wishes Miss Kilgallen a happy birthday .
 Twin sisters are twin sisters from Iowa City, Iowa, who are news photographers .
 Daly says he took his family to see the show and was utterly delighted . Miss Francis would like for them to sing, ‘Do-Re-Mi,” but, Mr Daly says that’s not allowed, but says that's not allowed .
 Time is ; short, but Tony Randall correctly identifies the gentlemen’s’ profession . Time is . short .
 Quench the Stench of a Rat Fink rat fink retrieved from MerriamWebster and copied or modified to here Parker Parker .
 The Sound of Music is a 1965 American musical drama starring Julie Andrews and Christopher Plummer . The film was produced and directed by Robert Wise . It was released in 1965 .
 Dame Julie Andrews DBE is an English actress, singer, and author . She was born Julia Elizabeth Wells; 1 October 1935 in England .
 Robert Adolph Wilton Morley, CBE (26 May 1908 3 JUNE 1992) was an English actor who enjoyed a lengthy career in both Britain and the U.S. Morley died in 1992 .
 This film deals with the conflicts of Michelangelo and Pope Julius IT during the 1508-1512 painting of the Sistine Chapel ceiling .
 Dorothy Kilgallen took an interest in the assassination of John F Kennedy . In her book, Lee Israel gives Pataky the name of “Out-of-Towner” Spartacus-Ediucational Poovoiny Kilgallens .
 Pataky admits a close friendship with Vodka Roulette Seen Kilgallen but flatly denies an Ags Relief Pogsibilit affair, his presence at the Regency that night, or any involvement in her death . Pataky says he was at Regency when she died,
 Dorothy Kilgallen was a beloved mother and talented writer who died too soon . Senator arranged for Jim Koethe to search Ruby's apartmen .
 There are still many fans and friends who miss her and still wonder about her death . There is still a lot of people who still worry about the death .
 Independent investigation started out of the San Diego area in an attempt to find out the truth on how she died . On November 9, 2014 an independent investigation was launched .
 Bill unter was shot dead by Creighton iggins, a oliceman in the ressroom of a ong Beach police station in 1964 .
 2018 is gun fired when Obituary Salem e dropped it and Massachusetts News * ried to pick it up . Wiggins Gtombryan@yahoo.com published it on November 8 .
 Tippit was born in Clarksville, Red River County, Texas, on September 18, 1924 . He died at the age of 92 .
 Tippit was one of the few officers in the Dallas Police Force not to be called to Dealey Plaza to help investigate the assassination . He was the only officer not called to help with the investigation .
 Later, Markham identified Oswald in a police lineup, but this was after she had seen his photograph on television . Later, she identified him in police lineup after seeing him on TV .
 Warren Reynolds did not see the shooting but saw the gunman running from the scene of the crime .
 After he survived an attempt to kill him, he changed his mind and identified Oswald as the man he had seen . Oswald was shot in the head by Oswald in September 1945 . Oswald survived an assassination attempt and was shot by Oswald's widow .
 Tippit was buried in the memorial plot at Laurel Land Memorial Park, Dallas, Dallas .
 Dorothy Mae Kilgallen (JULY 3, 1913, Nov. 8, 1965) She interview Jack Ruby . Coie Kilgallens interview Ruby in 1965 .
 College drop becomes cub reporter, crime reporter, holllywood reporter, back stage gossib to world coronations . gged investigation of the JFK assassination .
 Melvin Belli: King of the Courtroom, The Poison Patriarch: How the Betrayals of Joseph P Kennedy Caused the Assassination of JFK . Belli's latest book: The Reporter Who Knew Too Much .
 Mark Shaw has written for USA Today, Huffington Post and Huffington Post . He co-founded the Aspen Daily News, which he founded .
 Mark formally was a host or correspondent for ABC’s Good Morning America, and CBS's People 1 . He has appeared on the REEZL Channel's program, The Kennedy's .
 The 6th Floor Museum at Dealey Plaza and Distortions of History Affecting Students of All Ages Affecting students of all Ages .
 On December 22, 1960, Daly married Virginia eur lnttle<oF sohat ;| Warren, daughter of then-chief justice Earl he people were Warren in San Francisco . Daly was married to Virginia Warren in 1960 .
 Kilgallen's crowning achievement was her dogged investigation of , the JFK assassination . Her dogged investigation led to her dogged coverage of the assassination .
 She ultimately came in second place in the race, completing her around the world journey in 24 days .
 Asylum exposé Ten Days in a Mad-House is a book by American journalist Nellie Bly . Bly's book was published in 2007 . The book is about the American prison system .
 On J June 5, 1968, presidential candidate Robert F Kennedy was mortally wounded shortly after midnight at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles . From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia .
 Robert F Kennedy lies mortally wounded on the floor immediately after the shooting . The free encyclopedia is the free encyclopedia's free encyclopedia .
 Kneeling beside him is 17-year-old busboy Juan Romero, who was shaking Kennedy’s hand when Sirhan Sirhan fired the shots . Romero was shaken by Kennedy when he was shaking his hand .
 The Cilker family donated some of the original land dedicated to the new hospital, including the plot containing the oak tree . Other acreage was made available for development .
 Auxiliary of Good Samaritan Hospital raised funds for construction, equipment, and a hospital chaplaincy . Dedicated volunteers and the earliest members of the Auxiliary raised funds to build hospital .
 Additional fund-raising and strategic planning between 1968 and 1974 allowed the hospital to double in size . Hospital's growth and expansion began in 1968 and 1973 .
 Batista made a deal with the United States Mafia to create La Nacional United States Mob run Casino resort . Batista's deal was made with the Mafia in order to run the resort .
 RFK and JFK were made by the mob but JFK was being warned off the mob by RFK . RFK warned JFK of the dangers of the mob . JFK was made by mob but RFK was warned off by JFK . JFK and RFK were not mobbed by mob members
 While the Mob and the CIA had it in for Castro an even deeper problem was these were Free Masons like Dupont and others Zapata Oil, the Rockefellers, and diry world busineses of Oil Barrel polics .
 The Lawford Shriver plamn of Februrary 20 1961 and groomed sleeper agents . What was the Lawford . Shriver's plamn? What was Lawford. Shriver’s plamn .
 Robert F Kennedy and John L McClellan attended Teamster hearings . Kennedy was a member of the U.S. Senate Committee of Representatives . Kennedy died at the age of 92 in March 1968 . Kennedy is a former President of the United States .
 THe FBI was in leuge with and not fighting organized crime in this time frame under J Edgar Hoover . Ed Clark was in charge of the FBI during this time period . He says the FBI was not on top of organized crime .
 RFK gained national attention as the chief counsel of the Senate Labor Rackets Committee from 1957 to 1959 . Tip O’neal challenged Teamsters President Jimmy Hoffa over union's corrupt practices .
 William Barr was employed by the Central Intelligence Agency from 1973 to 1977 . Barr worked for the CIA in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Sam Giancana was murdered on June 19, 1975, in Oak Park, Illinois, shortly before he was scheduled to appear before the Church Committee . He was murdered in June 1975 .
 RFK is known for advocating for the civil rights movement, the fight against organized crime and the Mafia, and involvement in U.S. foreign policy related to Cuba . Plan “33’s” from Great Britain is based on Plan ‘33”
 The Mafia had a real opportunity in Labor Racket because being a Bureaucrat of some type allowed power to stop a project or activity, Donegan said . Being a bureaucrat allows you to stop an activity or project .
 Once that power is available the bureaucrat must be appeased and may actually be in position to blackmail . The power of the state can be used to blackmail the bureaucracy .
 With single provider labor agreements if the mob can intimidate either party they are in kingpin position to alter off center deals or siphon from them . The mob is in a position to intimidate either side of the deal .
 Giocana ran Policies, a lottery illegal but profitable in Chicago, Illinois . Giocano ran policies, which is illegal but profitable in Chicago Illinois . The lottery was illegal, but it was profitable and profitable .
 Giecani moved to Palm Springs and Las Vegas running resorts and rackets in mob controlled operations . He ran the Palm Springs, Las Vegas and Palm Springs resorts in mob-controlled operations .
 Meyer Lansky representing the mob from Miami Florida was the Gambling Commmisioner of Las Vegas . Lansky was given the contract via United States puppet Batista in Cuba to run the casinos as an annex of United States operations .
 Jack Ruby was the go between and the FBI CIA was using these mob groups to support Batista including to supres Cuban communist MAFIA MOVIES . RFK was opposing this in the Congress before JFK .
 From 1957 to 1959, he made a name for himself while serving as the chief counsel to the Senate’s McClellan Committee . He served as the Senate's chief counsel under chairman John L McCrellan .
 Kennedy was given authority over testimony scheduling, areas of investigation, and witness questioning by McClellan . Move was made by the chairman to limit attention to himself and allow outrage by organized labor to be directed toward Kennedy .
 Robert F Kennedy was Attorney General of the Department of Justice from January 21, 1961 September 3, 1964 . Kennedy was attorney general of the Justice Department from 1961 to 1964 .
 He was named chairman of the failing . failing |BY-V8l qoy en @hucleltmr-Ve in 1991 in 1991 .
 In 1980, Katzenbach testified in the United States District Court for the defense of W Mark Felt, later revealed to be the “Deep Throat” of the Watergate scandal and later Deputy Director of the FBI . Felt was later found guilty of ordering illegal wiretaps
 Kilgallen's crowning achievement was her dogged investigation of the JFK assassination . She investigated Lee Harvey Oswald, secret project for Cuba . Her work in New Orleans revealed in a shocking video .
 The Zodiac murdered five known victims in the San Francisco Bay Area between December 1968 and October 1969 . Five known victims were killed in the Bay Area .
 I suggest he was CIA NSA contract killer wiping out family lines . Innocent Postcards contained 12/13 and 7/4 calender dates usage signaling to FBI CIA NSA and Mafica .
 New Orleans Democrat District Attorney Jim Garrison prosecuted Clay Shaw on the charge that Shaw and a group of activists, including David Ferrie and Guy Banister, were involved in a conspiracy with elements of the Central Intelligence Agency in the John F Kennedy assassination .
 Russo said that Lee Harvey Oswald, Ferrie, and “Clay Bertrand” had discussed assassinating Kennedy . At the party, Russo said . Ferrie and Bertrand were at the party at the time of the assassination .
 November 7, 1928, Colorado Springs, CO Died by poising: July 31, 2011 . The Troubles were an ethno-nationalist conflict in Northern Ireland that lasted about 30 years .
 The Irish Volunteers, sometimes called the Irish Volunteer Force or Irish Volunteer Army, was a military organisation established in 1913 by Irish nationalists . Joseph Connolly was an ardent nationalist and became a member of the Gaelic League and Gaelic Athletic Association .
 Mary Stults, the daughter of a voice teacher, was born in Evanston, Illinois in 1913 . She was born to an experimental monkey .
 During this period Sherman did ground-breaking research into botanical viruses which lived in soil . During this time he was working on a series of viruses that lived in the soil . Sherman's research was based on his work on soil viruses .
 Robert Francis Kennedy was born outside Boston in Brookline, Massachusetts, on NOVEMBER 20, 1925 . He was born in Cape Cod, Massachusetts .
 Kennedy played a crucial role in the events surrounding the Berlin Crisis of 1961 . Kennedy was one of the president’s closest White House advisers .
 Roddenberry flew 89 combat missions in the Army Air Forces during World War II . He also worked as a commercial pilot after the war .
 The proposals called for the CIA operatives to both stage and actually commit acts of terrorism against American military and Star Trek Original civilian targets . Season 2, Ep. 2, Episode 2 of Star Trek Next Star Trek, will be released on Friday .
 Assignment Earth them on the Cuban government, and using Show the exact value of ‘ * ‘ cosine of 144° using the law it to justify a War of cosines .
 Operation Northwoods was part of the Operation Mongoose program . The U.S. Department of Defense had a number of similar proposals for actions against the Cuban regime of Fidel Castro .
 Senator Edward M Kennedy, age 37, and his cousin, Joseph Gargan, 39, planned to race Kennedy’s sailboat, Victura, in the 1969 Edgartown Yacht Club Regatta . In 1969, she died in a car accident on Chappaquidd
 Mr Anderson’s involvement in the Middle East began 1n 1969 when he began studies at the United States Foreign Service Institute in Beirut, Lebanon .
 By the end of Star Trek’s second eason, it looked as though the how would be canceled . ‘Star Trek Earth’ retrieved from 1 INQUISITR .
 Word pread among cast and crew in the summer of 1967, as episodes of the series were filmed .
 Omega is the final letter in the Greek alphabet . Omega is often used to denote the last, the end, or the ultimate limit of a set . Low atings and network disputes with creator Gene Roddenberry had given NBC reason to pull .
 Consider Russia as Omegans of Europe during the :| Cold War . Consider Russia's role in the Cold War as an Omegan of Europe . consider Russia as an "Omegan" of Europe in the 1950s and '60s . consider it as an 'O
 "Star Trek" was totally unconnected to Star Trek . It had many sci-fi elements, but it had no connection to the show .
 “Gary Seven’s Earth” focused on Gary Seven, a super-skilled Doctor Who-esque i-traveler of sorts . Gary Seven was Gary Seven who went into Earth's present day to ensure history followed its proper i course .
 He is joined by Roberta, a secretary, who learns about his mission and follows him along on his adventures . Roberta follows along with him along with his adventures in the book .
 Seven is accompanied by a shape-shifting cat (a ' humorous foil to his serious-toned character), along with Beta 5, a super-advanced computer who acts as a kind of advisor .
 Ten years before the series is set, Earth barely escaped destruction by the technologically superior Minbari, who sought revenge after an Earth starship unwittingly killed their leader during first contact . The series is based on the story of an encounter between Earth and the Minbahari . The main character is
 Teri Garr was born December 11, 1944 Lakewood, OH as Roberta A Lincoln . She was married to Roberta Lincoln Lincoln in 1959 .
 Heinrich Litibke was elected the second President of West Germany . He was succeeded by Theodor Heuss . Heuss was the second president of the West German state .
 Albert succeeded his brother Baudouin of Belgium as King of Belgium in 1993 . Albert succeeded him in the throne of Belgium . He was King of the Belgians until 1993 .
 A fire at the Pentagon destroyed $30 million worth of computers in the Air Force Statistical Center . 30,000 employees were evacuated after the fire . Firemen required medical treatment .
 First time a Wimbledon champion came from South America . Alex Olmedo of United States won the men’s singles title in 1959 .
 Maria Bueno of Brazil ends a 21-year streak of United States titles . Bueno defeats American Darlene Hard, 64, 63, to win the women’s singles . The next day, Brazil completed the South American sweep and ended the streak of American titles .
 The 49th star was added to the American flag on the first Fourth of July following Alaska’s admission to the Union . The 49-star was added on the U.S. flag on July 4, 1877 .
 President Sukarno of Indonesia dissolved the Konstituante parliament and introduced a totalitarian system, which he called ‘Guided Democracy’ with the assistance of General Abdul Haris Nasution . The system was introduced with the help of General Nasution, who was responsible for the
 A C-124 Globemaster cargo plane, carrying nuclear weapons, crashed on takeoff from Barksdale Air Force Base in Louisiana . The plane was carrying nuclear arms and cargo .
 Richard Vandegeer was one of 18 Americans killed on May 15, 1975, in Mayaguez incident . Richard Vandgeer is the last American to be killed in the incident . He was the last of the 18 Americans to be shot in the area in May 1975 .
 In Kirkuk, Iraq, a rally to celebrate the first anniversary of the 1958 revolution degenerated into a three-day-long massacre of ethnic Turks by the Kurds . The Kurds massacred ethnic Turks in the city of Kirkuk .
 Seconds after liftoff, Juno I rocket and satellite it was carrying were destroyed by ground control . Juno I was carrying a satellite and was headed for central Florida .
 Zinjanthropus is not considered a direct human ancestor, but another Olduvai discovery from 1960, the mandible with teeth of ‘OH 5” , the toolmaking Homo habilis, some 1.75 million years old, is believed to be . The tool
 The Kitchen Debate took place between Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and American Vice-President Richard Nixon . The debate took place at Moscow’s Sokolniki Park where the American National Exhibition was being held .
 On April 25, 1961, he would receive United States Patent 2,981,877 . Jack Kilby, who applied for a patent for the original IC five months earlier, would receive the Nobel Prize in 2000 .
 His was not an unresponsive and staid faith, but the faith of a Catholic Radical . His faith was perhaps the first successful Catholic Radical in American political history .
 She was at the compound, where her grandmother, whose grandmother, ... grandmother, was also there . i | ; Out of the loop one and two.
 Much of what was happening was highly illegal, run by ; British psychiatry or Rockefeller Psychiatry . Rockefeller Psychiatry was tied to keeping British Commonwealth secrets . Much of the time was illegal .
 Rosicrucianism Cabal heralded a ‘universal reformation . of mankind’, through a science allegedly kept secret for decades until the intellectual . climate might receive it . Cabal, the Cabal .
 Allegedly, the i meeting was held to discuss various topics including loansharking, narcotics trafficking, . and gambling, along with dividing the illegal operations controlled by the recently murdered Albert Anastasia .
 A Space Odyssey and the secret mission creates is a worm in HAL . Only about a month into their voyage, there were problems on board . The mission was a secret mission to find out what was happening .
 Louis Patrick Gray II was Acting Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from May 2, 1972 to April 27, 1973 . J Edgar Hoover used Mafia to create Political | assaasins and easily subject to blackmail by Appointee | mob .
 During this time, the FBI was in charge of the initial investigation into the burglaries that sparked the Watergate scandal . The Watergate scandal eventually led to the resignation of President Nixon .
 Gray admitted to destroying documents that had come from convicted Watergate conspirator E Howard Hunt’s safedocuments . He resigned as Acting FBI director on April 27, 1973, after admitting to destroying the documents . The documents were found 11 days after Watergate burglary .
 In December 1951 Gunderson joined the Federal Bureau of Investigation under J Edgar Hoover . Gunderson worked for the FBI under Hoover in the 1950s .
 RFK and Marylin Monroe were silenced just as RFK was headed to ' Chicago . LBJ backed "" activities, including LBJ's involvement in the CIA Mafia .
 Operation 40 Oil Business Mafia and MKULTRA under ranked but out-killed the constrained assassination program RFK oversaw and ran in Florida . RFK's assassination program was constrained by the constraints of the assassination program he oversaw .
 Kathleen Hartington Kennedy Townsend is an American attorney who was the sixth Lieutenant Governor of Maryland from 1995 to 2003 . Townsend served as the sixth Lieutenant Governor of Maryland between 1995 and 2003 .
 Townsend became the chair of the non-profit American Bridge in 2010 . She ran unsuccessfully for Governor of Maryland in 2002 . Townsend is the founder of American Bridge .
 Joseph Patrick Kennedy II is a businessman and Democratic politician . He is a member of the Kennedy family . He was born September 24, 1952 .
 David Anthony Kennedy was the fourth of eleven children of Robert F Kennedy and Ethel Skakel . He was the son of Kennedy and Kennedy's wife Ethel .
 As a child, David was shy, introverted and sensitive, and shared a particularly strong bond with his father . David is shy and introverted, and shares a strong bond .
 A 1973 Jeep accident left Kennedy’s then girlfriend, Pamela Kelley, paralyzed . His father dived under water and rescued him, scraping and bruising his own forehead in the process .
 His oldest brother, Joseph Kennedy II, was charged with reckless driving . Kennedy's oldest brother was driving the Jeep and was charged .
 Kennedy also served as the head of the non-profit organization Citizens Energy . Kennedy was also head of Citizens Energy and served as a member of the board .
 Kennedy died on December 31, 1997, in a skiing accident in Aspen Mountain, Colorado . Kennedy died in a ski accident in December 1997 .
 Mary Kerry Kennedy is an American lawyer, author and human rights activist . She was born September 8, 1959, in New York City . She is also a lawyer and author .
 She is the seventh child and third daughter of Robert F Kennedy and Ethel Skakel . Kennedy is the third daughter and seventh child of the Kennedy family . She is also the daughter of Ethel Kennedy and Robert Kennedy .
 She is the president of Robert F Kennedy Human Rights, a non-profit human rights advocacy organization . She says Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . Kennedy was the first president of the country to be assassinated .
 Christopher George Kennedy is an American businessman and politician . He is the Chair of Joseph P Kennedy Enterprises, Inc. He is also a member of the Board of Governors .
 Douglas Harriman Kennedy is an American journalist . He was born March 24, 1967 . He is also known for his work on television and radio .
 Kennedy attempted to take his infant off the maternity ward for some fresh air, which nurses said was against hospital policy . Two nurses claimed that he physically assaulted them when they tried to stop him from doing so . Nurses said it was against the hospital policy, and that he assaulted them .
 Rory Elizabeth Elizabeth Katherine Kennedy is the youngest child of U.S. Senator Robert F Kennedy and Ethel Skakel . She is a documentary filmmaker and youngest daughter of Senator Robert Kennedy .
 On AUGUST 2, 1999, Kennedy married Mark Bailey in Greece at the ‘mansion of shipping tycoon Vardis Vardinoyiannis’s mansion . Kennedy married Bailey at the mansion of the 'mansion of shipping tyco-founder V
 I John Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr. was an American lawyer, journalist, and ‘magazine publisher . He was often referred to as John-John or JFK Jr. or JFK .
 A Hispanic American assassin loyal to the USA lost many friends to Fidel Castro communists in the eS of Pigs . According to his friend, Ruben Carbajal, in the spring » of 1973, Morales talked about his involvement .
 When it was founded, the Foreign Legion was not unique; other foreign formations existed at the time in France . The Foreign Legion is not unique to France .
 The Foreign Legion fought alongside United States paratroops in Iraq . They secured the west flank of the allied offensive . The French Legion was deployed in Iraq in 2003 .
 The visit proved to be much more controversial than expected than expected . Even in our sleep, pain which cannot forget falls drop by drop upon the heart .
 Pulitzer Prize-winning composer Steven Stucky’s evening-long concert drama, August 4, 1964, was i based on the events of that date: the discovery of the bodies of the three civil rights workers and the reported attack on two American warships in the Gulf of Tonkin
 The bodies of the CORE activists were found only after an informant passed along a tip to federal authorities . Commissioned ; to commemorate the centennial of | the birth of | Lyndon B Johnson .
 Chaney was severely beaten, castrated and shot three times . Chaney, a black man, had been severely beaten and castrated . He was shot by a police officer at the scene of the shooting .
 Two local Native I ; Americans found the smoldering car that evening . The next morning, Proctor learned of the location of the car . The information was communicated to Proctor .
 Former President Bill Clinton joined Humphrey’s sons Skip, : Bob and Doug in unveiling a memorial statue of Humphrey before an audience of 1,000 .
 Humphrey died in 1978, 14 years after engineering the victory of the landmark Gini safeinissyavem which ended segregation and racial discrimination .
 Meeting with Thorkill Kristesnen predating the Nov 18 1963 meeting tied to the upcoming NOV 18 2nd Birthday of CIA created Barack Obama . The meeting may have ; disagreed about global plans .
 Kindelberger began moving North American’s anufacturing operations west in 1935 . The company won its first airplane contract for 2 NA-16 trainers in 1935, and began moving west .
 In 1939, North American had begun developing a twin-engine bomber that eventually evolved into the B-25 Mitchell bomber . The Mitchell bomber was developed by North American .
 A prototype of the proposed new design was rushed into production and i first flew on Oct. 10, 1940 . The prototype flew in October 1940 .
 North American Aviation manufacturing plant in El Segundo, California, was opened in 1942 . The plant was built in the 1950s .
 It formed a separate company, Rocketdyne, in Canoga Park, to produce rocket engines . It formed separate company to make rocket engines and other engines .
 After work on the B-1 Bomber program, another huge defense contract won by i Rockwell, slowed in the late 1980s . The company began reducing its operations at its El . Segundo facilities .
 In December 1996, Rockwell International Corporation’s aerospace and defense ' and Rocketdyne, merged with the Boeing Company and were renamed singly as Boeing North American Inc. Rockwell North American .
 The buildings on the North American site in El Segundo were demolished after i Rockwell left the South Bay so that the land could be sold . The buildings were demolished in favor of the sale of the land .
 Sirhan never became an American citizen, retaining instead his Jordanian citizenship . The manifestos do not elaborate extensively on the matter, but clearly combine references to Kabbalah, Hermeticism, alchemy, and Christian mysticism .
 Ancient Mystical Order of the Rose Cross, commonly known as the Rosicrucians, was founded in the 1920s . The Order is a group of members of the Order of Christ, known as The Roscians .
 In 1971, Sirhan was housed in the Adjustment Center at San Quentin State Prison . He was housed at the prison's Adjustment . In 1971 he was stabbed multiple times .
 Bobby Kennedy killed blonde bombshell Marilyn was hidden in the Los Angeles Police ; Department archives for six decades . Marilyn's killer was kept in the LAPD archives for decades .
 The Night Bobby Kennedy Killed Marilyn Monroe’ to be published on Thursday, JULY 8 . The night Bobby Kennedy killed Marilyn Monroe will be broadcast on July 8 .
 LA cops stole her diary, photo-copied its dynamite contents detailing her affairs with both Kennedys . e Officers from LAPD’s Intelligence division DID cover up the crime . Marilyn Kennedy was plied with a drugged drink and she was dead by the time he left
 OCID also kept secret files on Marilyn’s friend and neighbour, British-born actor Peter Lawford, who was the Kennedys’ brother-in-law .
 John Kennedy died of cancer yesterday at his home in Washington, D.C. He worked for the Kennedy family for 10 years and worked in three Kennedy family campaigns .
 After three years as a consultant in public affairs and telecommunications policy, Mr i Drayne rejoined Sen. Sen. John McCain in 2009 .
 Stationed in Korea, he worked on the Armed Forces Korean i television network . Stationed with the armed forces Korean i network .
 Ferrier wanted to test Jackson’s idea that epilepsy had a cortical origin, as it r was suggested by his clinical observations . He wanted to also test Jackson's idea of epilepsy having an origin in the brain .
 Leo Ryan investigated CIA activities at Jonestown and Folsom Prison tied to Jim Jones and Peoples Temple in San Francisco . Leo Ryan was a Revealer . This book was a book by Leo Ryan, a former CIA operative .
 Two buildings with fascinating history were both destroyed in 1989 . Next to the synagogue was the Scottish Rites Temple ' ‘Building, known as the Alfred Pike Memorial Temple, at 1859 .
 The CIA was the front agency for Scotish Rites DARPA Brain Research conducted in Jonestown in a Family ooperated by Lyndom B Johsson’s Desciples of Christ minister the Reverand Jim Jones . Jim Jones was the minister of the Desciples .
 The creation of the Church Committee was approved on J anuary 27, ; 1975, by a vote of 82 to 4 in the Senate . The creation was approved by the Senate on January 27, 1975, .
 Project MINARET ; involved the accumulation of all telegraphic data that entered or exited i the United States . Project MinARET was the creation of the Minaret project . It involved the collection of all the telegraphy data that was sent to the U.S.
 Intercepted messages were disseminated to the FBI, CIA, Secret I Service, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs, and Department of Defense .
 USSID 18 was the general guideline for handling signal intelligence inadvertently collected on U.S. citizens, without a warrant, prior to the George W Bush Administration . The guidelines were the general guidelines for handling signals collected on United States citizens .
 In their view there were distortions : of ‘important details’ and criticism of Henry Kissinger . Ba’ ath regime in Baghdad” but that in their view were distortions .
 Tri State New England area and navigable waters and docks loading proximity to Toronto and Nova Scotia Canada made Detroit, Boston, and other locations . Bootlegging areas .
 In Love Story, Jacki Kennedy approaches JFK over being Catholic and that identity . Jacki JFK approached JFK over his Catholicism .
 Jackkie asks him to embrace it, as a Catholic and lead equal to the WAPS . Jackkie: "Lead equal to WAPS but as Catholic. As a Catholic."
 She even implies she might even become a Catholic Queem of France someday . Suggests France was a Catholic Franco Pride a rival of England. She even suggests she might become a Queem .
 A Barrack Obama Jr. or others could find a home somewhere on either side of their heritage . The president's family has a long history of political activism .
 SONNY Bono was clubbed to death by hitmen on the orders of drug and weapons dealers, a former FBI agent claims . Former FBI agent says hitmen feared he was going to expose them . Bono, former husband and singing partner of Cher, was killed by hit
 Forensic evidence suggests that Bono was bit in the head, died, and face down loaded into a sled which took him to the tree his body was recovered from . His skip parker was blood stained from his being changed from face down to face up in the sled .
 Michael LeMoyne Kennedy was an American lawyer, businessman, and activist in Massachusetts . He was also a lawyer and businessman . He died in 2003 .
 Cher and Mary Bono filled his seat in the House to be elected to numorous full terms . Cher's wish Cher wished Sonny Bono died after his divorce wish Cher wanted Cher to marry Sonny . Mary was a 22 year old student at the time .
 Tom Donegan offered Ed Donegan a chance to interview at AOL Time Warner for a job in 1998 . Ed donegan was offered a job at AOL time Warner . In this time frame, 1998 Tom donegan offered him an interview for the job .
 Events were surreal and out of control with dopples in both payroll and walking around me . As I called out the odd constant abnormalities they said I was experiencing emotional problems and fired . As he called out constant abnormalities, they said he was experiencing .
 I used leather folios all my life and used the exact same one and a coworker Toni used it . Toni began acting as me in all sorts of ways. He used the same leather folio all his life .
 A different Ed Donegan working for the AOL movie company Sun Productions had a similar salary which was deposited into my checking account . A different version of this story was also deposited into the same checking account my salary was deposited .
 Sonny Bono was murdered and did not die in a skiing accident as we have been told repeatedly . It is now news in Australia that new evidence has turned up that suggests he was murdered . Bono is a former congressman from California .
 The mainstream U.S. press is concerned this news is unworthy of the attention of the people of the United States. Although he was an American whose job was to represent Americans, as far as the mainstream United States press are concerned this .
 Bono was reported to have slammed into a tree at the Heavenly Ski resort in Nevada on January 5, 1998 . This is the same American press, of course, that never breathed the slightest hint of suspicion that there might have been foul play involved .
 There were no witnesses, the autopsy report was not released to the public, and Bono had shown himself to be something of a thorn in the side of official Washington .
 His father was a Methodist, later United Methodist, minister . John traveled wherever his father was named by the denominational conference to pastor a church .
 His research was presented in his thesis, The Conservative Worker in Britain . His research has been presented in a thesis titled The Conservative Workers in Britain.
 Tower established his core political relationships with Pierce Langford III, a key figure in the financing of the British offshore pirate radio stations created between 1964 and 1967 by Don Pierson of Eastland, Texas . During his time in Wichita Falls, Tower established relationships with Langford .
 Tower appeared at the offices of Swinging Radio England on Curzon Street . Tower was at the London School of Economics at the time .
 Lyndon B Johnson, the incumbent Texas senator and famous nationwide as the Senate Majority Leader, won the election against Tower .
 As John F Kennedy’s running mate, Johnson was also seeking the vice presidency in the same election . Johnson was seeking vice presidency as JFK's running mate in the 1960s .
 Tower became the liaison for Robert Maxwell, a British publishing mogul and super-agent for Mossad, to the White House and to U.S. government operations . Tower became a liaison for Maxwell, who was also Mossad’s super agent . Tower was the liaison to Maxwell
 Tower told Tower that his fee as a consultant would be $200,000 . Tower's relationship with Tower began in 1984 . Tower told Maxwell that he would be a personal consultant .
 Tower took Maxwell’s request for American help in arming Iran, and relayed it to President Reagan as a means to trade for American hostages held in Lebanon . Tower took the request to the White House as a trade deal for hostages .
 Tower retired from the Senate after nearly twenty-four years in office . Tower was elected to the Senate in 1996 . Tower retired after nearly 24 years of service .
 Tower was named chief U.S. negotiator at the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks in Geneva, Switzerland . Tower has been named chief United States negotiator in Geneva .
 President Reagan asked Tower to chair the President’s Special Review Board to study the action of the National Security Council and its staff during the Iran-Contra Affair . He became a consultant with Tower, Eggers, and Greene Consulting from 1987 until his death in 1991 .
 The Tower Commission issued its report on February 26, 1987 . The board became known as the Tower Commission in 1987 .
 The report was highly critical of the Reagan administration and of the National Security Council’s dealings with both Iran and the Nicaraguan Contras . The report also criticized the administration's dealings with Iran and Nicaragua .
 Tower was himself a former Senate colleague . The Senate rejected his nomination in a stunning move .
 Tower’s personal life, including allegations of alcohol abuse and womanizing, has been scrutinized . Tower was accused of being an alcoholic, womanizing and having an affair with a woman . Tower is accused of abusing alcohol and having a personal life .
 After Tower's defeat, he was named chairman of the President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board . He is also chairman of an intelligence advisory board .
 Dick Cheney, then a Representative from Wyoming and the House Minority Whip, was later confirmed as Secretary of Defense whose nomination was successful . Cheney was then a Rep. from Wyoming . Cheney's nomination was later successful .
 Tower was aboard Atlantic Southeast Airlines Flight 2311 when it crashed while on approach for landing at Brunswick, Georgia . Tower was on board when the plane crashed on April 5, 1991 . Tower died in the crash .
 The crash instantly killed everyone on board, including Tower and his middle daughter, Marian, the astronaut Sonny Carter, and twenty others . Tower's middle daughter Marian died in the crash .
 An investigation determined that the crash resulted from failure of the plane’s propeller control unit . The plane was carrying passengers and crew members on board .
 Manley Lanier "Sonny" Carter Jr., M.D. was an American chemist, physician (Flight Surgeon), professional soccer player, naval officer and aviator, test pilot, and NASA astronaut who flew on STS-33 .
 Atlantic Southeast Airlines Flight 2311 was a regularly scheduled commuter flight from Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport to Glynco Jetport in Brunswick, Georgia on April 5, 1991 . Carter was a brother in the Alpha Tau Omega fraternity at Emory University .
 The National Transportation Safety Board determines that, the probable cause of this accident was the loss of control in flight as a result of a malfunction of the left engine propeller control unit, which allowed the propeller blade angle to go below the flight idle position .
 Federal Aviation Administration approved the design of the propeller control unit by Hamilton Standard . Hamilton Standard's design was deficient and the approval of the design was approved by the FAA .
 The design did not correctly evaluate the failure mode that occurred during this flight, which resulted in an uncommanded and uncorrectable movement of the blades of the airplane’s left propeller below the flight idle position . The design failed to evaluate failure mode, resulting in the uncom
 Witnesses say the plane rolled to the left until the wings were perpendicular to the ground . The aircraft then descended in a nose-down attitude and disappeared from sight behind trees .
 Paul David Wellstone was an American academic, author, and politician . He represented Minnesota in the United States Senate from 1991 until 2002 . He was killed in a plane crash in Eveleth, Minnesota .
 In 1999, Wellstone formed an exploratory committee to run for President of the U.S. in 2000 . Wellstone is a former Senator from Minnesota .
 He announced he would not seek the presidency because of chronic physical limitations from a college wrestling injury . After campaigning in the early primary states, he announced he wouldn't run for president .
 As senator, Wellstone authored the Wellstone Amendment for the Bipartisan Campaign Reform Act of 2002 . Wellstone is a former senator from Minnesota . The amendment was part of the 2002 campaign reform .
 His efforts toward campaign finance reform were overturned in 2010 by the United States Supreme Court in Citizens United Federal Election Commission .
 Wellstone died in a plane crash in Eveleth, Minnesota, 11 days before the 2002 U.S. Senate election .
 Wellstone’s sons, David and Mark, were not on the flight, and until 2018 co-chaired the Wellstone Action nonprofit organization in honor of their parents .
 On October 25, 2002, Wellstone, along with seven others, died in a plane crash in eastern Minnesota . Wellstone died in an airplane crash .
 The other victims were his wife, Sheila; one of his three children, Marcia; the two pilots; and campaign staffers Mary McEvoy, Tom Lapic and Will McLaughlin . The victims include his wife Sheila, his children and two campaign staffers .
 Wellstone was to attend the funeral of Martin Rukavina, a steelworker whose son served in the Minnesota House of Representatives . The plane was en route to Eveleth, Minnesota, where Wellstone attended the funeral .
 Martin ‘Benny’’ Rukavina, 85, of Virginia died Monday, Oct., 2002, at the Virginia Convalescent Center . Wellstone decided to go to the funeral instead of a Minneapolis rally and fundraiser attended by Mondale and Kennedy .
 He graduated from Virginia Roosevelt High School . He attended Virginia and Mesabi Community College . He graduated high school and community college .
 Bob Fletcher is a retired investigative researcher who conducted a probe into the CIA’s involvement in the U.S. drug trade . Fletcher talks about the return of Planet X and how money has been secretly siphoned out of budgets to prepare for it, and the coming global cataclysm
 Planet X was first discovered in 1983 by infrared telescopes and appeared to be on an inbound trajectory . According to his information, Planet X first discovered by infrared telescope in 1983 . Planet X is believed to be headed for an asteroid on Earth .
 Underground facilities will be offered as a survival option to only an elite few, he says . Since then, the United States has built numerous underground facilities .
 China reportedly has reportedly completed the construction of underground facilities . China has reportedly also reportedly also completed the . underground facilities in China .
 Operation Jade Helm 15, a military-law enforcement exercise coming later this year, is a dry run for “martial law,” says Fletcher . The exercise is being conducted as a test for how to deal with the public when they learn about Nibiru’s impending
 For Americans, the new revelations can be found buried away-and ignored by “respectable people”-in the United States supermarket tabloid, Globe, of April 14 .
 Rep. Ruben Navarrette says he feels "partly responsible" for what happened to Rep. Vanarrette . He also feels partially responsible for what has happened to the California congressman .
 Before Bono’s death, Fletcher had been probing the activities of high ranking U.S. military and government officials he claims were raking in millions from arms and drug deals in Central America .
 He says he sent his shocking findings of corruption, including videotaped evidence, to Bono . Bono says the singer sent the shocking findings to him . The U.S. government has been accused of corruption .
 The new evidence is the long-suppressed autopsy report, itself, which Fletcher obtained and furnished to Globe . Fletcher obtained the autopsy report and furnished it with a copy of the report .
 It's nonsense for anyone to now try to suggest that Bono died after crashing into a tree . It’s nonsense that anyone now tries to . try to . suggest that . Bono crashed into a . tree, he says. It's not the case.
 "There’s zero evidence in this autopsy report or any of these official documents to show such an accident happened," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Bono did not die after hitting a tree on a Nevada ski slope in 1998 as everyone believed . Ted Gunderson, now a private investigator, has told the U.S. Globe tabloid that Bono, who served as mayor of Palm Springs for four years, didn't die .
 All three images have the first sentence in bold . All three are identical .
 Bono, an experienced skier, was ambushed on the slopes by hired hitmen . They beat him to death and then staged a tree collision, Mr Gunderson said . Bono was killed by hitmen who beat him and then hit a tree, he said .
 He called for authorities to dig up Bono’s remains and open a homicide investigation . Bono's remains have not been found, he said .
 Forensics experts fear Nevada authorities were too quick to call the death a skiing accident . Top forensics experts are reportedly backing the claims, which have reportedly been backed by forensics .
 There’s no doubt in my mind Sonny was murdered by someone who needed him silenced,” says Fletcher .
 Yahoo is as compliant toward corrupt U.S. authorities as it is toward their counterparts in China . Yahoo says it is cooperating with the Chinese government to comply with the law .
 Other injuries included a black eye, swollen lips, bloody nose, bruised jaw, and two upper teeth knocked out, all on the right side of the head .
 Fletcher consulted a panel of experts and performed a re-creation to determine how these wounds were caused . Fletcher consulted experts and re-created the wounds to determine the cause .
 Fletcher thinks the murder weapon was a pistol, but experts tell GLOBE that a gun barrel would have left distinguishable marks . Fletcher thinks a pistol was a gun, but other experts say it would have been a pistol barrel .
 Fletcher insists the lack of damage to the back of Bono’s brain, known as ‘contra-coup’ injuries, is proof that he was beaten to death . Fletcher insists that the damage to his brain is proof he was killed .
 He says people who hit objects face-first normally have brain injuries caused when the organ rebounds off the back of their skull . He says brain injuries are caused by hitting an object face first .
 An entire brain moving to a frontal impact collapses into the impact then rebounds back, he says . And other physical evidence doesn't add up, either, he adds .
 A blow to the front a brain not in motion damges the brain only at point of impact . A blow into the front of a brain is not enough to damage the brain . The brain is only damaged at the point of the impact .
 Bono had no smashed ribs, broken knees, neck trauma or neck trauma, Fletcher says . He says he had no broken bones or broken knees or neck injuries .
 The investigator says signs that he actually hit the tree are missing, including bark impressions on his face and plant debris on his clothes . And signs of the hit tree are also missing, investigator says .
 The ski goggles weren't smashed as they likely would have been in a collision, expert says . And his ski goggles were not smashed, according to the expert . The expert says ski goggles aren't smashed .
 Back of Bono’s clothes were soaked with blood—but he had no back wounds . Fletcher also notes that Bono had blood on the back of his clothes . Fletcher: Bono also had blood in his clothes, but no wounds on his back .
 The autopsy also mentions a small L-shaped tear on the back of Bono’s black and purple Fila ski jacket . Bono was found dead at the age of 31 .
 Gunderson believes the new evidence raises the specter of murder and warrants a new investigation . Gunderson says Fletcher's death raises the possibility of a new murder investigation .
 Cher, Bono’s wife when they became famous together, Cher, will call for a new investigation . Fletcher believes that Cher, who was married to Bono, will be calling for an investigation . Cher is Cher's ex-husband and mother-of-three .
 Little hope is held out, apparently, that she will be joined by Mary Bono, Sonny’s wife at the time of his death . Little hope also held out that Mary will join him in the funeral procession .
 Mary, who succeeded Sonny in Congress and has remarried, suggested publicly that his errant skiing was caused by taking too many prescription painkillers . Mary suggested that Sonny had taken too many pills .
 A previously-released toxicology report had already been contradicted by a previous report, the Globe reported .
 Sonny's fourth marriage was said to have been troubled at the time of his death . Their marriage, which was Sonny’s fourth marriage, was reportedly said to be troubled . Sonny's death was the first of his four children .
 Sonny’s mother, Jean, believed all along that he was murdered . Jean believed her son was murdered, but Sonny's mother did not believe her .
 She died in 2005, but not before demanding “a much more thorough investigation” into his death, Globe reports . She later demanded ‘much more thorough’ investigation .
 Bono was likely to have been killed because of what he might have uncovered, Gunderson says . Gunderson agrees with Fletcher that the 62-year-old Bono had already uncovered about illegal drug and arms dealing by officials .
 Reno had not conducted a more exhaustive study of CS before making a decision . Reno said he had not done an extensive study before deciding on the decision .
 He challenged her claim that she had done all she could to investigate the attributes and hazards of the substance . The U.S. Army Chemical Research and Development Center had confirmed that it knew of no laboratory studies of CS in which the subjects were children .
 Pulmonary edema is caused when the mucous membrane is irritated, it secretes mucous which in children and infants plugs up the bronchi . In infants, it can also be caused by mucous secretions in the throat .
 What we see here on display is an independence of mind that is both refreshing and dangerous for an American member of Congress, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Waco Holocaust Electronic Museum concludes that the whole episode was even more vicious and barbaric than almost anyone suspects . Bono looked even further into the Waco outrage and found the museum's findings .
 Attorney General says death of Paul Wilcher offers too many questions and inconsistencies to be ignored . Attorney General: "I feel the death of Mr. Wilcher is too much of a mystery to ignore"
 Both were investigating possible government involvement in illegal activities . Both were probing possible involvement of the government .
 Each was acting on his own, with dogged persistence, over a long time period . "Each was acting with his own," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Casolaro and Wilcher expressed fears, shortly before their deaths, that their lives were in danger because their investigations had led into sensitive territory . Wilcher: "I'm not going to be able to talk to the media about my work, but my life is in danger" Cas
 Wilcher told at least one other person at the end of May that he feared he’d become a “danger signal” because his information on government malfeasance had gone beyond Casolaro’s . Wilcher said he feared the information had become a "
 In both cases, rapid alterations were made to the corpse making further forensic study difficult or impossible . In both of the cases, the bodies were found to have been altered by rapid alterations .
 Casolaro was embalmed shortly after death without family consent; Wilcher was cremated without fingerprint or other evidential identification of the body . Wilcher's cremation was without forensic examination to determine cause of death, as remarked above, and without fingerprint identification of body .
 The apartment was sealed off for the rest of ' the day, except for official personnel . The apartment is sealed off until the end of the day .
 He joined FBI agents in the Wilcher apartment during the 4:30 to 7:30 time period . He joined the FBI agents during the time period.
 Lidell says NBC camera crew was prevented from entering his apartment . He says he returned to his own apartment and didn't keep track of who entered .
 Aside from firemen, medical personnel to remove the body and the above ° ; Government agents, no one was allowed in the apartment for the entire day no ; ; reporters, friends, media crews, etc. were allowed in .
 Sonny Bono tries to persuade his manager to let him abandon the shock tactics that made him famous and let his music speak for itself . Cyrano de Bricker murders on the High Seas . The Tabloid Cover-up is Operation Sounds of Silence .
 He becomes even more determined to establish some credibility after he falls for a deaf friend of Julie's . He becomes more determined after falling for Julie's deaf friend .
 Everyone initially believes that he is just caught up in the murder mystery that he has been reading, but the captain and Gopher soon begin to share his suspicions . PZ soon begins to a PZ and the captain begin to suspect that he may have been murdered .
 One can hardly argue that the American press has done the proper job of a free press in a free society because these new revelations have, at least, been published .
 There is hardly any better way to discredit a serious story than to have it published in a tabloid, and only in a tabloid . The story was published in the New York Times, the Washington Post said .
 This Globe story is similar to the National Enquirer story about the dubious ‘suicide’ of Enron executive, Cliff Baxter, or the Star story about a Yale fraternity branding pledges with hot coat hangers .
 Bob Fletcher made a serious effort to get the story covered by “more respectable” news outlets, but was rebuffed . One can bet that Bob Fletcher tried to get coverage of the incident covered by more respectable news outlets .
 The same “respectable’s news organs are now continuing to cover up for the controlling criminal elite by blacking out what Globe has published . The same "respectable" news organs continue to cover .
 "What is really impressive is how thoroughgoing and monolithic the whole operation is," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 The country is full of reporters who buy groceries in supermarkets just as I do, says CNN.com's John Sutter . He says the country's reporters buy groceries just as they do .
 Sonny Bono would have been able to prevail upon his or her editor to follow up on the story . One would think that one of them, in one corner or other of this vast country, would recognize the importance of the story, and would be able to follow it up on it
 The odds are very long that not one peep about these Sonny Bono autopsy revelations will be heard anywhere from the U.S. mainstream press . For now it’s much bigger news in Australia than it is here, and the odds are that it won’t be
 The same sort of blackout occurred when the former lead investigator for Kenneth Starr, Miquel Rodriguez, spilled the beans about the cover-up of Vincent Foster’s murder . It happened when the official investigation of the ‘suicide’ of James Forrestal was made public
 The writer of the Globe article is Bob Burns, email bobburns@Globefl.com Cher, Farah, and Vegas Throat CZ 7 Cher On Her Own Health & What Saved Farrah Fawcett .
 Cher said she is fine during a recent visit to Access Hollywood . Reports suggested the legend was suffering with everything from severe abdominal problems to cancer were untrue .
 Cher told 1 Access’ Billy Bush: “If I had cancer, everyone would know it” Cher said, “I’m not afraid of cancer. If I’ve cancer, I'm sure it’s not cancer,” she said
 Bush is cousin of President George W Bush and Florida governor Jeb Bush . Jeb Bush is the son of George W. Bush and cousin of Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, Jeb Bush.
 Cher says she has an allergy to wind . Cher says there's a wind thing that blows there sometimes in different months, and I have an allergy . Cher: "You know there’s a wind that blows sometimes sometimes . in different . months" Cher said .
 Each sphincter is associated with the lumen ow that feels. it is surrounding . Cher’s good friend arrah Fawcett knows exactly . Cher's good friend, arrah, knows exactly what happened to Cher .
 Cher is the "trongest woman I have ever ever seen," Cher told Billy . Cher said she's the "the trongest" woman I've ever seen . Cher's body is "opening the lumen and known"
 The rectum connects the colon to the anus, which is the opening where stool exits the body . Rectum connects colon to anus and anus, and the opening of the anus is anus .
 The internal and external anal sphincters are rings of muscle at the opening of the anus . They are the inner and external spharens of muscle . The spharners are also known as the internal and outer sphannes of the penis .
 The former “Charlie’s ngels’ star has traveled to and from ermany for cancer treatment or Over a year .
 The lower oesophageal sphincter, which resides at the top of the stomach, is closed most of the time . It is closed to keep acids and other stomach contents from pushing up and into the oeesophagus, but opens .
 The esophageal sphincter guards the entrance to the entrance into the esophagus . It is located at the lower end of pharynx and guards entrance to esophagagagagus .
 Farrah’s Story, Farrah's Story, aired in the early hours of yesterday morning . ‘This is what cancer is’, a tearful Stewart recounts .
 There are hopeful moments in the film and Fawcett shows incredible resilience . Even as she vows to fight on, the tale becomes progressively bleaker .
 The 62-year-old is shown most recently in bed at home, barely conscious under a heap of bedclothes . O’Neal said she had ‘pretty much’ stopped receiving treatment after she stopped receiving it .
 Fawcett is seen late in the film with her hair falling out in clumps . Her doctor Lawrence Piro called her hair “the most famous hair in the world” after many treatments .
 She shaves most of it off, then shows her head to the camera, balding but for a remaining blond fringe . She shows off the hairstyle with her hair on the camera .
 John Marley as Phil Cavilleri Italian Catholic father of Jennifer "Jenny" becomes Oliver Barrett IV’s Cahtolic Mafia . Oliver rejects his too WASPY English Royalty connected father, who, btw was close with the Queen of England and presented Rosemay
 The book profiles senators who defied the opinions of their party and constituents to do what they felt was right . The book also profiles those who suffered severe criticism and losses in popularity because of their actions .
 Edmund Burke on the courage of Charles James Fox in his 1783 attack upon the tyranny of the East India Company in the House of Commons . It begins with a quote from Edmund Burke .
 Theodore Chaikin Sorensen was an American lawyer, writer, and presidential adviser . He was a lawyer, author, and adviser to President George W. Bush .
 He was a speechwriter for President John F Kennedy, as well as one of his closest advisers .
 He was generally regarded as the author of Profiles in Courage, a claim he addresses in his 2008 memoir . Most notably, he addresses the claim in a memoir .
 Sorensen helped draft the Kennedy’s inaugural address and was also the primary author of Kennedy's 1962 “We choose to go to the Moon” speech . He also wrote Kennedy's "We choose the moon" speech .
 Jacqueline started her first job in the fall of 1951 as the “Inquiring Camera Girl” for the Washington Times-Herald newspaper . Jacqueline worked for the newspaper for more than 50 years .
 Roving around the city, she took pictures of people she encountered, asked them questions on the issues of the day, and wove their answers into her newspaper column . She asked them their answers to her column .
 During this time, Jacqueline met John F Kennedy, who was a congressman and soon to be elected senator from Massachusetts . Jacqueline was married to the late Senator Kennedy .
 Four months after the coronatio of QEII on September 12, 1953, FJK and Jackie married at St. Mary's Hospital in New York .
 Kennedy met his future wife, Jacqueline Lee “Jackie” Bouvier, when he was a congressman . He met her at St. Mary’s Church in Newport, Rhode .
 Charles L Bartlett, a journalist, introduced the pair at a dinner party . Charles Bartlett introduced them to each other by a journalist .
 The couple were married a year after he was elected senator, on September 12, 1953 . They were married in 1953 .
 Caroline was born in 1957 and is the only surviving member of JFK's immediate family . After suffering a miscarriage in 1955 and a stillbirth in 1956, their daughter Arabella was born .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy Jr. was born in late November 1960, 17 days after his father was elected . He was nicknamed ‘JohnJohn’ by the press as a child .
 In 1963, months before JFK’s assassination, Jackie gave birth to a son, Patrick . Patrick was born in 1963 .
 1985 was a heavy time of turmoil in the Belfast Troubles . Delta Delta Delta sorority was founded in 1985 . The sorority is the largest in Northern Ireland .
 Farrah Fawcett was born in Texas and Roman Catholic and would have been 38 years old at that time . Farrah would be 38 when she was born .
 A close friend has described her being ‘fearless’ at the moment thanks to her faith . Close friend has 'described her being . ‘Fearless' at the time thanks to the faith .
 Catholic priest 'reportly administered her the Last Rites in a Los Angeles Hospital' The priest 'administered her the last Rites'
 Christopher Pyle is a Revealer . What has been done to the watched families was illegal and involuntary . Their DNA used without permission including Glorian and Jim Donegan DNA .
 Free Mason Deep State. Irregular Warfare Plant of ""33""5 Sleeper Agents . Kennedys Pelletiers Spears Donegans and many others .
 Christopher H Pyle (born 1939) is a journalist and America needs a 21st century Church Professor of Politics at Mount Committee olyoke College in South adley, Massachusetts . Pyle was born in 1939 and is now a professor at the college .
 15 members and staffers from 1975 investigation testified to Congress about the revelations . NSA revelations demand congressional se of military intelligence action against civilians .
 In 1975 the public learned that the National Security Agency had been collecting and analyzing international telegrams of United States citizens since the 1940s under secret agreements with all the major telegram companies .
 Such congressional action is urgently needed to restore the faith of citizens in the intelligence community and in our federal government, says Rep. Tom Coburn .
 The actions uncovered by the Church Committee in the 1970s bear striking similarities to the actions Congressional reports on ilitary intelligence and constitutional rights . Church Committee has estified numerous times before he United States Congress on issues of deportation and extradition .
 In the 1960s while an Army captain in intelligence, Pyle eamed that “Army intelligence ad 1,500 plainclothes agents atching every demonstration of 20 people or more throughout the U.S.” as part of a road-based program of domestic spying .
 In January and uly 1970, Pyle disclosed the rmy's spying in articles that appeared in a new publication, ashington Monthly .
 Ervin continued to investigate government activities . Together ith the Church Committee inquiries, these Congressional studies led to drafting of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act .
 Hillman Prize for nond-ominominational, residential, research liberal arts investigative journalism college for women that is gender diverse and welcomes applications from female, transgender students . 1971: Polk Award for and non-binary students . 1970s Polk Award was Polk Award, Polk Award .
 The oldest of the Seven Sister itle,” Choice, for Extradition, colleges, is a noted leader in liberal arts Politics and Human Rights education . College is "grounded in the conviction that women can and should make a difference in the world"
 Luther Knight Mcnair Award from ACLU Massachusetts for contributions as “teacher, scholar, and model citizen activist activist e 2007: Distinguished teaching award from Mt. Mt. Mary's College of Medicine, Massachusetts . Luther Knight . Award was presented to ACLU Massachusetts in 2007 .
 He never doubted these were mafia international black opps assassinations. "He never doubted [the] assassinations," he said . He said .
 He asserted he was being poisoned and I believe on many basis. His own murder was his own murder . He asserted himself being poisoned .
 Hungarian is in the CIA Masonic Familes . Familes watch certain family lines over time, but keep that activity secret .
 Asinger tries to persuade his manager to let him abandon the shock tactics that made him famous and let his music speak for itself . That is also though though secret beacuse of the Sounds of Silence / Cyrano de Bricker / Mt Seas wel GuestCast GuestCast .
 Everyone initially believes that he is just too caught up in the murder mystery that he has been reading, but the captain and Gopher soon begin to share his suspicions .
 CIA TSS Overthrow Including Irregular Warfare Plant o naan Sleeper Agents 33 Hnald Barr Jen Moore ed Gunderson United States Gov. authorized )_,Regime Changes not Op 40 or Business Plot La Cosa Nostra Chicago + Mexican Mafia .
 In highly visible Sovereign heads of state the FOXP2 must not be recognized else the family lines will be recognized and the sleepers exposed . The Lawford Shriver Peace Corps plan , amongst others, The California Narcotics Authority by appointment of Governor , Jerry Brown, The 1984 Los Angeles
 Previous to his work as a private investigator I spent nearly three decades in the F.B.L. Between 1951 and 1960 I was an F'B.'L Special Agent .
 Colin Luther Powell is an American politician, diplomat and retired four-star general . He served as the 1 65th United States Secretary of State from 2001 to 2005 .
 As aresult, I checked the fe SSNVS for the SSN Obama BolT 2 SEES TONN newer fovouny used for registering with the Selective Service .
 SF an ee pai: "Let me be direct i have not agreed with many of your tactics in this endeavor. Let me be . i have . not agreed to many of the tactics in your endeavor. SF an . ee .
 I have continued to follow your efforts to see where there may be synergy and this is one of them . However, I've continued to watch your efforts, and I'm not sure if there is synergy .
 Gregory S Hollister, Colonel, USAF, Retired, President, Hollister Enterprises, LLC2 A Colorado Springs “birther,” retired Air Force Col. Col. Greg Hollister .
 Gunderson said his father worked on high-profile cases such as the death of Marilyn Monroe, the assassination of President John Kennedy, and the Mc Martin child abuse case of Manhattan Beach, California, with odd CIA activities .
 USNORTHCOW’s specific mission: United States Northern Command Defends Our Homeland Deters, detects, and defeats threats to the United States, conducts security cooperation activities with allies and partners, and supports civil authorities .
 North American Aerospace Defense Command F-22 fighter aircraft intercepted two Russian maritime patrol aircraft that entered the Alaskan Air Defense Identification Zone late last night . North American aerospace defense forces intercepted three groups of two Tu-142 maritime patrols .
 Miller said he began to see reports of these mysterious symptoms as a higher priority in December . Miller: “I was like this is actually for real,” Miller said .
 William Burns vowed during his confirmation hearings to review the evidence on the alleged attacks on CIA personnel overseas . The attacks have long been publicly reported, but have been linked to the CIA .
 Glorian Donegan also born in 1926 . Queen of England on October 29, 1956 P while attending the Royal Command of the : River Plate .
 Marilyn Monroe was born in 1926 . Marilyn Monroe is an American actress . She died in 1953 .
 Evelyn EUGENE Tumer was an American pinup model, motion picture actress, and film producer . She was senior the pilot who had logged more than 11,000 hours in the cockpit . Tumer died in 1977 .
 The Netherlands KLM Netherlands Member of the OECD Development Assistance Committee since 1961 killed in the Tenerife airport disaster in 1977 . The Netherlands was a member of the ODI since 1961 .
 Julian Assange born July 3 turned his July names 1971 hair white . Mitechond wiped by xray tube Julian Assange wiped by Xray tube . Many Julius Julian Julian Julius or Born July 3 .
 NSA GCHQ faked case prisoner . Born in 1926, perhaps Three pene . Born 1926, Norma Jean Normal Genes cot aaah .
 Kristen Jean MacDonald was killed by Clone of Feb 17 CIA, killed by clone of February 17 CIA . Like Norma Jean, she was murdered by the Clone of the CIA . She was killed in her hometown of Chicago .
 Bono left his family to ski alone on the afternoon of January 5 1998 . The accident occurred when Bono was skiing alone . Bono died in a skiing accident in 1998 .
 He was reported missing several hours later, and his body was found that evening . The body of the missing man was found later that night .
 Police said Bono had skied into a wooded area and hit a tree; the cause of death was massive head injuries . Bono's death was caused by head injuries, police said . Police said the singer was killed after hitting a tree in a ski accident .
 Bono attended Inglewood High School, but did not graduate, opting to drop out so he could begin to pursue a career . Bono was married four times and had four children .
 Brit Hume American journalist Brit graduated Sotts Heritage, | Sandy Hume St. . Sandy Hume was a journalist . Brittany Murphy died December 20. 2009 .
 February 20 might have oe decided he could be used as an asset inside the system for a long term goal Barrack Obama Jr Named changed from BHO for . Wears I think Feb some possible reason Aristocrats 20 Nov 18 clothing on Dec 13, claim November 19 . claim November
 Antony Blinken born on April 16, 1962, in Is son of Jewish Poles . Madelyn Lee Payne Payne Dunham Blinken was born in 1962 . Blinken died in 2011 .
 Neilia Hunter Biden was the first wife of Joe Biden, the 46th and current president of the United States . She was an American teacher and the wife of Vice President Joe Biden . She died in 1972 .
 Colette is best known for her 1944 novella Gigi, which was the basis for the 1958 film and the 1973 stage production of the same name . Colette died at the age of 92 on December 18, 2009 .
 The ‘Gadget’ was the implosion plutonium device detonated in the Trinity Test in July 1945 . The Trinity Test was the first nuclear bomb to be detonated in 1945 .
 Wilbur Crane Eveland was an Aug 4 Creates intelligence agent known for his work . Crane, July 4, CIA Overthrows, Obama for with with with the Central Intelligence Agency Tadonesis . Crane was an August 4 creator of the CIA . Eveland .
 In 1940, Eveland joined the U.S. Army, where he was recruited as an agent for the Counter Intelligence Corps . He was born in Spokane, Washington, in 1918, in Indonesia .
 From 1959 to 1961, Eveland was on CIA assignment to Rome, Italy, under cover as a Vinnell Corporation engineering company executive in charge of petroleum related construction, maintenance, and training projects in the Middle East and Africa .
 Britney Spears filed court documents on Tuesday, June 29, asking Judge Brenda Penny to open an investigation . Britney’s father Jamie filed court papers asking for an investigation into his daughter's allegations .
 Spears wanted her IUD removed so she could have more children, but was not permitted to do so . Spears said she felt like she had her personal liberty taken away i and wanted to have more . Spears wanted to remove the IUD so she was able to have a more child .
 Britney Spears claims she has been receiving threats of violence and death since Britney’s explosive ' court statement in June . Spears said she has received death threats since the singer's release .
 Jamie “is very concerned” about the “dangerous rhetoric” and “increasing number of threatening communications and social media posts” directed at people involved in Britney’s case . Jodi asked for 24/7 security to be paid for by the
 The Conservatorship Estate says the request for 24/7 live security services for herself at a cost of over $50,000 per month for an indefinite period of time.” justify such an expense,” the estate says .
 Barrack Obama Jr. too, the exprimental money Donald Barr is holding in a white house photo three days later . Also my bith Edward Paul Donegan to James and Glorian Donegan .
 Marilyn Monroe performed at JFK’s 45 birthday was one of her last major public appearances before her death less than three months later on AUGUST 4, 1962 .
 JFK may have disliked the CIA FBI because he knew about the killing of Marylin Monroe because she knew about this little scene above in Santa Monica . JFK also knew about her killing of JFK .
 Kennedy chose to confide immediately after the Chappaquiddick automobile accident which killed Mary Jo Kopechne . Kennedy confided about the accident immediately after it happened . Mary Jo was killed in the accident .
 Your web host, Kevin Fisher, with Ron Wyatt in 1997, Nashville, Tennessee . The pastor there had i roomed with Ron at Highland Academy as a teenager, and had arranged for Ron to speak .
 Miracles after miracles were found in Ron’s life, all evidence of the Lord working with him . Only the High Priest that went into the Most Holy Place once each year to sprinkle blood on the Ark of the Covenant .
 ' Only Ron Wyatt entered the Most Holy Place, that cave, to take a sample of the blood of the Messiah and have it analyzed for the world to see the lab report when ' the Ten Commandments come out of the cave, along with the video .
 The people believed the man that was proven to be a man of the Lord. Ron was on the level of a High Priest in my opinion. Ron . i i i. i i . i | i i I I i I i i]
 He was not a prophet, but a Holy man who was not prophet, who was a holy man . My name is and I am from Germany. I am German . He was German .
 Louis J Freeh, FBI Director September 1, 1993 June 25, 2001 is a Revealer Black Budgetes, CIA Slush Funds . Funds from illegal operations in defiance of United States and other laws fund the Shadow Government with up to 3 Trillion dollars .
 This #operation40O escapes participant liabilities by cover terror and espionage for selfish motives, threatens global peace . #Operation40O is a global effort to stop the spread of terrorism and espionage in the U.S.
 Thomas Crane Wales and Loius J Freeh will lay out lay advice to populations including the poor not to fall to temptations they will be subjected to . Freeh and Crane Wales will advise the poor to avoid temptations .
 As youngsters in Park Ridge, Illinois, he and Tony Rodham were jocks . Hillary Rodham was a bookworm, while Tony Rodham was bookworm . As youngsters, he was jocks, while Hillary was bookworms, he says .
 There was heavy security on the island, where the secret criminal order took root centuries ago and has claimed many lives . Heavy security was in place, with heavy security in place .
 In early 1980, Falcone joined the ‘Office of Instruction’ (Ufficio istruzione), the investigative branch of the Prosecution Office of Palermo . Falcone was a member of the 'Office of instruction' in the 1980s .
 Costa signed indictments after virtually all of the other prosecutors in his office had declined to do so . Costa signed the indictments, a fact that leaked out of the office and eventually cost him his life . Costa was the only person to sign indictments in Costa's office .
 Director Freeh served as the federal government’s principal courtroom attormey in the 14-month trial . He won the conviction of 16 of 17 co-defendants in the case .
 After extensive investigation, a suspect was apprehended, prosecuted, and convicted . i | i | r. r. ee ee . ee  eee eee, eee  eee eee . eeee ea eee - eee! ee
 Opus Dei apparently 'failed spectacularly' in the case of Robert Hanssen, the FBI agent accused of spying for the Russians . Hanssen is a former FBI agent who worked for the CIA .
 Louis Freeh led the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 1993 to 2001, through some of the most tumultuous times in its long history . Bringing Down the Mafia, Investigating Bill Clinton, and Fighting the War on Terror Hardcover October 11, 2005. Hardcover .
 This is the definitive account of American law enforcement in the run-up to September 11 . This is a look at the FBI's role in the lead up to 9/11 .
 Freeh is clear-eyed, frank, the ultimate realist, and he offers resolute vision for the struggles ahead . Freeh's vision is a vision for America's struggles ahead, he says .
 While serving in this _ {for the Fifth Circuit position he was nominated to be the Director of the [being vacated by FBI by Bubba on July 20, 1993 . He was nominated for the position in 1993 .
 Walter Pettus was confirmed by the Senate on August 6, 1993 and was swom in |Gewin . He was confirmed to the Senate in August 1993 . Judge Pettus is a federal judge who was confirmed in 1993 .
 Vance was as Director on September 1, 1993 . confirmed by the nited States ' Senate on » December 15, 1977, and received his commission the same day . Vance was confirmed in 1977 .
 The jurisdiction of the Fifth Circuit at that time included six Southern states, including Alabama . Alabama was one of the six states that was part of the court's jurisdiction .
 Chelsea Victoria Clinton is an American writer and global health advocate . She is also a global advocate for global health .
 An Arknasas lawyer rises, and she also has a Chicago Mob Chicao : Boys connected brother Tony Rodham . Friary Clinton cattle futures controversy retrieved from Wikipedia .
 In 1978 and 1979, lawyer and First Lady of Arkansas Hillary Rodham Clinton engaged in a series of trades of cattle futures contracts . Clinton traded futures contracts in the early '70s and '80s . I | I
 Initial $1,000 investment had generated nearly $100,000 when she stopped trading after ten months . Her ; initial $1000 investment generated $356,579.55 in 2020 .
 In 1965, Hillary Rodham enrolled at Wellesley College, where she majored in political science . In 1968, she ran for the College's Government President, which she later won . Hillary Rodham won the presidential election in 1968 .
 The report lists four action items completed by the Pentagon since April . The report also lists three recommendations moving forward . The Pentagon says it has completed some of the action items .
 It includes a broadened definition of extremist activities, which now accounts for social media and other online behavior . It includes better training for service members leaving the military .
 The forms will notify recruits that any involvement in criminal gangs or extremist organizations is forbidden . Recruits will be warned of any involvement with criminal gangs, extremist organizations .
 Recruiters and the Military Criminal Criminal Investigative Organizations also now have access to an FBI portal with “information on local gangs, white-supremacy and nationalist groups, gang signs, and extremist symbols and tattoos, the report states .
 If a recruit attests to being a member of an extremist organization or has a tattoo flagged by the FBI, senior leadership will have to issue what’s known as a “Morals Eligibility Determination” that allows them to move forward in the application process .
 A surviellanc nuetralize, compete with, share space with, or prepare for a threat from the survilled party . Able to anticipate, study, and prepare for the survill party .
 In conjunction with discrediting the assets of the surveilled organizations, a smear campaign can complete the leapfrog or gains over the surveilled party . A smear campaign is a campaign that discredits the organization of a surveilled organization .
 Survey is to inspect, or take a view of; to view with attention, as from a high place; to overlook; as, to stand on a hill, and survey the surrounding country . As verbs the difference between surveil and survey is that surveil is to keep someone or
 Espionage, spying or intelligence gathering is the act of obtaining secret or confidential information from non-disclosed sources or divulging of the same without the permission of the holder of the information for a tangible benefit . Survey is a general view, as from above .
 Any individual or spy ring can commit espionage . Spy ring is in the service of a government, company, criminal organization, or independent .
 In some circumstances, it may be a legal tool of law enforcement and in others, it might be illegal and punishable by law . In some cases, it is a tool that may be used by law enforcement .
 Espionage is often part of an institutional effort by a government or commercial concern . Espionage can be part of a government effort by an organization or a commercial enterprise .
 The term tends to be associated with state spying on potential or actual enemies for military purposes . However, the term is often associated with the use of spies on potential enemies or enemies .
 One of the most effective ways to gather data and information about a targeted organization is by infiltrating its ranks . The most effective way to gather information is to infiltrate the organization's ranks .
 Spies return information such as the size and strength of enemy forces . Spies can then return information about the size of the enemy forces to their spies .
 They can influence dissidents within the organization and influence them to provide further information or defect . They can also find dissidents in the organization, influence them with further information .
 In times of crisis, spies steal technology and sabotage the enemy in various ways . Spies steal technology in times of crises and sabotage enemy's enemies .
 Counterintelligence is the practice of thwarting enemy espionage and intelligence-gathering . Counterintelligence aims to thwart enemy espionage, intelligence gathering .
 Almost all nations have strict laws concerning espionage and the penalty for being caught is often severe . Almost all of the world's countries have strict espionage laws .
 The benefits of espionage are often so great that most governments and many large corporations make use of it . However, the benefits gained through espionage often are often great . Most governments and large corporations use it .
 In the 20th century, at the height of World War I, all great powers except the United States had elaborate civilian espionage systems . All national military establishments had intelligence units .
 Congress passed the Espionage Act of 1917 to protect the U.S. from foreign agents . The act was passed by Congress in 1917 to prevent espionage in the United States from happening .
 Mata Hari was the most noted espionage agent of World War I . She obtained information for Germany by seducing French officials . Germany and Imperial Japan established elaborate espionage nets prior to World War II .
 Numerous resistance groups such as the Austrian Maier-Messner Group, the French Resistance and the Polish Home Army provided information that was very important for the Allied war effort .
 To discredit someone or something means to cause them to lose people's respect or trust . A secret unit within the company that had been set up to discredit its major rival was set up .
 It is mostly British leaning and Kennedys, donegans, others, victims . Mostly it is British leaning, Kennedy, Donegans and others .
 Keeping publicity, reach of voice, and sympathy from me has allowed the progresive destruction and co-option of the entire Donegan family ethnic achievement by hostile Blue Blood the Boston Brahmins .
 FBI assisted mafia creating a cartel of genome racketeering based on manufacture of fake pretexts for an trust fund depletion . The Donegans and Kennedy's have in common mafia can easilty get rid of us, in my case .
 "My entire family has been GangStalked and I have not been able to stop it," says mother-of-one .
 My elderly father attacked with abusive phone calls and planted hostile neighbors . He had a brain injury later from a hit to the head. He had to be hit by the head in the head .
 I am resisting getting into a fight because I know the battle against police sent snitches is a losing fight . I know I'm not going to get in a fight, but I know it's a losing battle . I'm resisting getting in a battle against sending police snitches .
 As for what the GangStalk is I cite the movie The Day The Fish Came Out a late 1960 movie in which espionage teams in fake clothes from the U.S. Military go to an island of Greece called Koros to pretend to think about a hotel resort development but secretly and
 The Mafia acting under cover is allowed to blame me for being a harm to my neighborhood and a tenant who is a problem for management companies and thus I is hard for me to get housing in normal life areas . The Mafia acted under cover, according to the author .
 This is not that different from when the FBI sent the gambling mafia after Castro, allowing mafia profits in mafia business that could also take out Castro and profit from doing so . This is similar to when the Mafia sent the FBI after Castro .
 Underground railroads from Nazi Germany especially of Minimal Brain Dysfunction under watch by Vienna scientist, the CIA, and British Government led to secret family genealogy being concealed now by elites .
 Bush led the USA into Targeted Killings by the FBI, CIA, NSA, U.S. Marshalls, United States PHS Psychological Warfare unit, LEIUs aks Law Enforcement Intelligence Units Blackwater, and other Domestic Contract CIA assets .
 Richard Cheney along with Boeing general Counsel led the program at least up until recently . Bush, Boeing, Cheney and others at 21st Century Expo Seattle WA USA with the Kennedy’s Windsors and Obamas .
 My book representing 8 years of round the clock research has no interest . My book represents 8 years . of round-clock research . I have no interest in this book .
 All JFK assassination researchers know this is a day in the life, and likely a short life . I am sad to say there is nothing abnormal, and all JFK assassination researches know that this is likely a day of life .
 North Carolina then South Carolina, used for Obama . Before that was DuPont and 1926 Glorian and Harold Gainey i North Carolina .
 Robert Mueller II was on the board of DuPont and his uncle Harold Gainey worked for DuPont . Robert Mueller Jr. was a member of the DuPont board of directors . Bob Mueller II served on the company's board .
 Activity in-bound towards a Targeted Atheist like myself or other people who are Targeted utilize people including actors reading lines of a play to make Targeteds a chess pawn in a play that will be re-played .
 Targeted are foils for a play acted out in our vicinity, inbound to us either makes statements to us OR makes our own acts altered by an altered context such as placing a tot between me an an tourist attraction I am photographing .
 'Humiliating me in public especially as a retarded Atheist in an attack on my family of James and Glorian in cultural violence' 'Hilarious' attack on me and my family . Humiliating him in public is a public humiliation, he said .
 Joan Mellen he became an assistant district attorney . Deutsch, Kerrigan & Stiles from 1954 to 1958, when YouTube Cheney Mike FBI .
 Garrison was a colorful, well-known figure in New Orleans . Garrison lost a 1959 election for criminal court judge . Garrison was unsuccessful in his run for public office .
 In 1961 he ran for district attorney, winning against incumbent Richard Dowling by 6,000 votes in a five-man Democratic primary . In 1961, he ran against Dowling in a 5-man primary . He was elected to office in 1961 .
 His performance in a televised debate and last minute television commercials are credited with his victory . Despite lack of major political backing, his performance is credited with winning the election .
 Clay Shaw’s defense team says witnesses claimed to have been bribed and threatened with perjury and contempt of court charges by Garrison in order to make his case against Shaw . Shaw's defense team claims Garrison threatened perjury and perjury charges .
 Walter Sheridan threatens to take Garrison Garrison out and take him with him, says Garrison . "Walter Sheridan tells me and threatens me that he’s gonna take Garrison out," Garrison says . Garrison: "I’m not scared of it, but I’ve been
 A nation that is afraid to let the people judge the truth anda falsehood in an open market is a nation [national government] afraid of its own people. A Nation that is . afraid of . letting the people . judge the . truth and a falsehood in a . marketplace is a
 NBC received 30,000 calls in On John Barbour | three hours.% said the CIA did it.%.% of those calls were made by the CIA . NBC says the CIA was responsible for the decision .
 The pooint is wether the question of him along or being with anybody he has nothing to do with the assassination . So the pooint was wether of whether he was with anybody or not with anybody, the assassination is not a mystery .
 Richard Jay Belzer is an American retired actor, On In-depth well known stand-up comedian, conspiracy theorist, YouTube Investigation | and author .
 After all, events don’t “consult the odds” prior to happening; they simply happen . After all the odds, events simply happen, and they don't ‘consult’ with experts .
 "The odds of it happening were. Then someone comes along later and figures out what the odds were," she says . "Someone comes along . Then someone else figures out later and says it's OK."
 Some of the deaths seemed purely coincidental; heart attacks, hunting accidents . Some of them were heart attacks or hunting accidents. Others were hunting accidents or heart attacks .
 Witnesses who seemed to know something and did seem to die mysteriously died mysteriously . Others clearly seemed noteworthy . Others seemed noteworthy; witnesses seemed to seem to know more . Others died mysteriously, others were mysteriously mysteriously .
 Hit List is a fair examination of the evidence of each case, leading to different conclusions . Hit List will examine the evidence leading to the conclusion of each verdict .
 The impeccable research and writing of Richard Belzer and David Wayne show that if the government is trying to hide anything, they’re the duo who will uncover it . The duo will uncover the government’s attempts to cover anything .
 Calaveras County Coroner Kevin Raggio said he determined Philip Clan Marshall and his two children were all killed by a gunshot wound to the head, after performing an autopsy Tuesday morning . Marshall has studied and written 30-years worth of covert peer government special activities and nine the revolving
 Myself and this book, my famiily in danger ad death threats for Publication of this book . My famil attempting to write THIS, all my famil already dead. Whol Myself . My family already dead .
 Clear “stimulus This about CIA FBI Sleepers | other response” corelation withe me getting warmer as to why I have been bask and infiltration . Deep lifelo assaulted to them trying to silence me and key parts of my story . Clear ‘stimulus’
 In — State hindered by FBI |COI> particular Kings Speech and Sound of Music stories . The FBI was involved in the investigation into the deaths of John Lennon and Michael Jackson .
 Mocked, existing, or former or now Conspiracy Theorists . WHen I say exhibits I mean items manifested inside the HTML based book I wrote .
 Former FBI agent and Orleans Parish LA USA prosecutor expertly built the case a deep state CIA led killed JFK and blamed then killed Lee Harvey Oswald . this is the case as Joan Mellen changed history .
 In California while Stalked by Espionage in the USA I was writing a book on Espionage violence against me and others . I was in California during the U.S. during the time I was being stalked by espionage .
 On Google Drive have folder called “Highlights” of planned teasers from my book . On Google drive have folder ‘Highlight’ of teasers .
 Most audio notes taped “Jack Flash’s storage of mp3 narratives, records contemporaneous. Most of the notes are recorded in audio notes . Most notes taped "Jack Flash" storage of m3 narratives .
 I have open death threats if I write the book naming Deep State, #JenMoore also told she would die if she continued to talk yet she did . #Jen Moore: "#JenMoore was told she'd die if ... she would continue to talk. Yet she did. I
 The Donegan genome truth and Manhattan Project history of atomic testing, the cold war, and how British conspiracy was largely rejected by Roman Catholics which explains #WETDIVISION concentration of kils against Roman Catholics .
 Roman Catholics are spiritually unyielding in ideas of reproductive rights of unborn and resentful of Great Britain in Ireland or India (Profiles in Courage, JFK, East India Tea Company).
 "I consider myself and the attempts on my life and Jen Moore’s life comparable to the attempts to stop my own book. I consider myself . I consider . myself and . Jen Moore's life . similar to the Marshall family and the attempt to stop . my book .
 The Saudis are well documented participants in Kingdoms based system of expanding royal families including in Mafia controlled Middle East North Africa . Barrack Obaam Jr. used Malcom X as father and Glorian Donegan and her genome past as the MKULTRA egg source .
 Richard Belzer and David Wayne are back to set the record straight after Dead Wrong . This time they’re going to uncover the truth about the many witness deaths tied to JFK assassination .
 Joan Mellen revisits the investigation of New Orleans district attorney Jim Garrison . Garrison was the only public official to have indicted, in 1969, a suspect in President John F Kennedy’s murder . Mellen works with thousands of previously unreleased documents and drawing on more than one thousand
 Garrison began exposing the contradictions in the Warren Report, which concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald was an unstable pro-Castro Marxist who acted alone in killing Kennedy . Garrison: The Warren Report concluded that Oswald was unstable, but acted alone .
 A Farewell to Justice reveals that Oswald, no Marxist, was in fact working with both the FBI and the CIA . The attempts to sabotage Garrison’s investigation reached the highest levels of the U.S. government .
 Garrison’s suspects included CIA-sponsored soldiers of fortune enlisted in assassination attempts against Fidel Castro, an anti-Castro Cuban asset, and a young runner for the conspirators . Garrison's suspects included .
 Mellen uncovers decisive new evidence and clearly establishes the intelligence agencies’ roles in both a president’s assassination and its cover-up . Mellen: The intelligence agencies' roles in the assassination and cover-ups are clear .
 In this revised edition, the author reveals new sources and recently uncovered documents confirming in greater detail just how involved the CIA was in the events of November 22, 1963 . The revised edition is published in time for the fiftieth anniversary of the president's assassination .
 "Running the World" is the title of a new book by President Barack Obama . Obama's book, "Running The World," was published in 2009 .
 Oliver Stone telling the story of Mr Garrisons attempt to convict the Shadow Government he discovered as acting in the assasination of JFK .
 Ted Gunderson sees the deeper underbelly of shadow gov at work in Martin Luther King, JFK, Marilyn Monroe, and other deaths . Gunderson: "Shadow gov" is at play in the deaths of JFK, MLK, JFK and others .
 A detailed overview of the modern United States deep state which names names, the most prominent of which, George H W Bush, is exposed as the kingpin of the U.S. Deep state . Bush is likely to be a key mover behind the 9/11 plot .
 James Paul Donegan held deep love for Jews including Zionist Justice Brandies, while also worrying about the boundaries violated by Israeli tactics such as Attack on the Liberty United States spy ship watching Israel .
 Robert F Kennedy worked for STOPPING organized crime . He died living into his 80s in a long term fight against the NWO Shadow Government and his allegations .
 Cameron style psychological warfare violence as social control is correct . Cameron style warfare violence is correct. Cameron style of 'social control' is correct, he says .
 The NWO exist and did kill Marilyn Monroe, the family of Jeffery MCdonald, and others . After leaving the FBI he continued his law practice, private investigations, and political speech against the NWO until his death .
 Along with Along with Mockingbird Program revealor Jim DiEugenio of KennedysandKing.com I add other victims to the list Ted Gunderson had . I add myself and family to the Beharioal Resarch/Warfare victims, and also explain the assassination
 Our Goal To stop the global use of Directed Energy Weapons against civilians, including illegal surveillance, and organized stalking, is to stop the use of such weapons against civilians . Our Goal is to prevent the global . use of directed energy weapons against civilian civilians .
 Ted Gunderson and others like myself have been attacked by war crimes type Espionage including raw source radiation and D-E-W radiation . Medical devices misused to be carcinogens in CIA and FBI conducted murder operations .
 The infiltrator OF criminal justice are able to use insider access to the Criminal Justice system to obstruct it from within, defeating Due Process, etc., and creating COINTELPRO false arrests and detentions . As usual the United States Media asserts Russia is behind the attacks though I watch
 I like most Targeted Individuals also believe the NWO is covering up the JFK murder and oil business NWO operations by destroying the lives of those who were victimized . The Kennedy family and Donegan family included as victims as victims . Most Targeted individuals believe the . NWO . is
 Psychological Warfare, assasination, Abuse of Psychiatry, and attack including attempts to destroy or alter cognition by destructive caustics has been useful in Behavioral Psychology . Psychological Warfare is useful in gaining reflexive emotional control over large populations of people .
 Anton “Tony” Chaitkin is an author, historian, and a former political activist with the LaRouche movement . Anton "Tony’s Tony” is a historian, author, and former activist . He says he is disappointed by the outcome of the
 Chaitkin’s father was the legal counsel and strategist for the boycott against Nazi Germany carried on by the American Jewish Congress in the 1930s . The boycott was carried out by the Jewish Congress .
 My argument remains my responses are valid response to stimuli and only seem abnormal IF the threat which I identify is in fact a delusion held by my unbalanced mind . My argument is that my reactions are valid responses to stimuli .
 Use of harassment with Doples and Gang Stalks I could not prove to Psychiatry as led to my spending most of my lifespan institutionalized as delusional, racist, etc., These authors have written widely ignored histories of British Psychiatry and OSS CIA operations conducted by the Bush family .
 This is the Espionage Deep State in Psychiatry war machine Ted Gunderson and I have been a victim of and a war machine that eradicates its victims, witness to Free Mason misconduct . This is an Espionage War Machine in Psychiatry War Machine . Free Mason has been accused of misconduct by
 Bush groomed Sleeper Agents in the U.S. Press corps is apparatchik of it, says CNN's John Avlon .
 The clever young man who recently made it to the White House is a very fine hypnotist . Race together with gender and even class can be very seductive tools of propaganda for what are so often overlooked .
 George Bush’s inner circle from the State Department to the Supreme Court was perhaps the most multiracial in presidential history it was PC par excellence think Condoleezza Rice Colin Powell Colin Powell . Colin Powell. George Bush .
 Obama’s very presence in the white house appears to reaffirm the moral nation . He's a marketing dream but like Calvin Klein or Benetton is a brand that promises something special something exciting almost risque as if he might be radical .
 In his book Dreams from My Father Obama refers to the job he took after he graduated from Columbia in 1983 . Obama describes his employer as an “a consulting house from multinational corporations” unquote. unquote .
 Business International Corporation has a long history of providing cover for the CIA with covert action and infiltrating unions on the Left . For some reason he doesn't say who his employer was .
 Obama doesn't say what he did at busines. I know this because it was especially active in my own country Australia . Obama doesn’t say what else he did .
 Former NSA employee analyzed detailed top secret files on Barrack Obama Jr . The former NSA employee believes the U.S. and English ongoing East India Tea Company involvement around the world, including as peace and international front organizations .
 Just a partial list of the large number that has recently met a demise in suspicious circumstances, with ties to the Clintons . Read the following, just a few of the list of people who have recently died with suspicious circumstances .
 The mere suggestion destroys credibility, even when documented evidence offers proof . Even when the mere suggestion is made, it destroys credibility .
 No one can tell us what we can and cannot publish, because no one controls us, we say . We will not be able to be censored or censored in the future, but we will be allowed to publish freely .
 "Nothing works against the success of a conspiracy as much as the wish to make it wholly secure and certain to succeed," says the author of the book . "It is impossible to doubt that a conspiracy will succeed"
 "Such an attempt requires many men, much time, and very favorable conditions," says President Obama . "It is a very difficult task to undertake," says Obama .
 The primary purpose for this web site is to provide unbiased voter information in helping to assure elections are won by patriotic and honorable candidates that are not traitors to the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution .
 In other words, I hope my fellow Americans will support patriotic candidates so that the core principles of our founding fathers become, once again, the foundation upon which America stands . I hope that patriotic candidates will be patriotic candidates .
 Eric Pearson is registered owner and chief administrator of www.patriotortraitor.com . Pearson is a registered owner of the website . Pearson: "I'm glad to have this opportunity to make a difference in my life"
 He launched his first newspaper at Sydney High School . He later completed a four year cadetship with Australian Consolidated Press . He has since launched his own newspaper .
 It taught me to admire writing that was spare, precise and free of cliches, that didn’t retreat into the passive voice and used adjectives only when absolutely necessary .
 Pilger and two colleagues left for Europe in the early 1960s . Pilger was one of his generation to move to Europe . He was born in Sydney, Australia, in 1961 .
 They set up an ill-fated freelance ‘agency’ in Italy and quickly went broke . The pair set up a freelance 'agency' in Italy but went broke in 2007 .
 Pilger freelanced, then joined Reuters, then moved to the London Daily Mirror, which was then changing to a serious tabloid . Pilger moved to Britain's biggest selling newspaper, the Daily Mirror .
 He became chief foreign correspondent and reported from all over the world, covering numerous wars, notably Vietnam . He covered Vietnam, Vietnam and Afghanistan .
 He became the youngest journalist to receive Britain’s highest award for journalism, Journalist of the Year, in his twenties . He was the first to win the award twice and was the youngest to win it twice .
 He reported the upheavals there in the late 1960s and 1970s . Moving to the U.S. in the 1970s, he moved to the United States .
 He marched with America’s poor from Alabama to Washington, following the assassination of Martin Luther King . He marched in memory of the civil rights leader .
 He was in the same room when Robert Kennedy, the presidential candidate, was assassinated in June 1968 . He was also in the room when Kennedy was assassinated .
 His work in South East Asia produced an iconic issue of the London Mirror, devoted almost entirely to his world exclusive dispatches from Cambodia in the aftermath of Pol Pot's reign .
 His 1994 documentary and dispatches report from East Timor, where he travelled under cover, helped galvanise support for the East Timorese, then occupied by Indonesia . Similarly, his 1994 documentary, which he covered for him, also galvanised support for East Timors .
 His four-year investigation on behalf of a group of children damaged at birth by the drug Thalidomide resulted in a special settlement . In Britain, his investigation on . behalf of the group of . children left out of the settlement with the drugs company, resulted in . a special
 His numerous documentaries on Australia, notably The Secret Country, The Last Dream and Welcome to Australia and Utopia all celebrated and revealed much of his own country’s ‘forgotten past’, especially its indigenous past and present .
 John Pilger’s Eyewitness Photographers are a tribute to the great black-and-white photographers he has worked with . Pilger's Eyewitness Photographer Collection is available on Amazon.com/accessory .
 In 2009, he was awarded Australia’s human rights prize, the Sydney Peace Prize . He was awarded the award in 2009 for his human rights work .
 He has received honorary doctorates from universities in the UK and abroad .
 In 2017, the British Library announced a John Pilger Archive of all his written and filmed work . Pilger's work will be included in a new archive of his work .
 The British Library is the national library of the United Kingdom . It is one of the largest libraries in the world and is the largest in the country .
 James DiEugenio first became interested in history while at film school . He became fascinated with history in the early years of his career .
 His first book, Destiny Betrayed, took a close look at the Jim Garrison investigation of the assassination of John F Kennedy . Garrison's first book took a look at Garrison's investigation into the assassination .
 In 1993, he became a co-founder of Citizens for Truth about the Kennedy Assassination . In 1993 he was a founding member of Citizens For Truth about Kennedy's assassination .
 DiEugenio is coeditor of The Assassinations, a book that covers the deaths of John F Kennedy, Martin Luther King, Robert Kennedy, and Malcolm X . COPA’s site is now archived for historical and research purposes .
 The Coalition on Political Assassinations ended with the passing of John Judge in April 2014 . John Judge was the leader of the coalition on political assassinations .
 Wayne Madson (Lulu 2012) ISBN 9781300011385, JADED TASKS—BRASS PLATES, BLACK OPS & BIG OIL: THE BLOOD POLITICS OF BUSH & CO. AMERICA’S NIGHTMARE: The PRESIDENCY
 Madsen was born in Ridley Park, Pennsylvania on April 28, 1954 to an American mother and a Danish mariner . He was fired but continued contracting work elsewhere .
 His grandmother emigrated to the U.S. with his father after World War II . His grandmother, Victoria Madsen, was a Danish communist party official . She emigrated with her father after WWII .
 In early 1982 he was stationed at the Coos Head Naval Facility . The facility had an allowance of twelve officers, ninety-five enlisted and 15 civilians .
 In 1984, Madsen reports that he was loaned to the National Security Agency by the Navy . Madsen: "I'm not sure what happened to me, but I'm sure it was a good thing"
 He resigned from the Navy in 1985 as a lieutenant, having been passed over for promotion . He resigned in 1985 after being passed over by the Navy .
 Later he worked for the Navy’s Naval Data Automation Command as a civilian employee . He also worked as a Navy data analyst .
 Madsen briefly established his own consulting firm, then worked for the National Bureau of Standards, and later for the State Department . Madsen worked for a consulting firm before working for the government .
 He has been described as an ‘odd individual’ devoted to writing in an area that “teeters on a slippery slope” which leads to skepticism .
 His articles have appeared in publications such as CorpWatch, CounterPunch, In These Times, Multinational Monitor, The American Conservative, The Progressive and The Village Voice .
 His columns have appeared in the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, Columbus Dispatch, Houston Chronicle, Philadelphia Inquirer, Miami Herald and Miami Herald .
 The Observer realized that the story’s author, Jamie Doward, failed to conduct even the most perfunctory Google search on Madsen .
 According to Forbes magazine, The Observer likely took the story down as it was concerned with the reliability of the source rather than the content . Forbes magazine says the story seems to be largely true and has been a matter of public record for some years .
 On July 5, 2013 the Guardian responded to the controversy saying that the documentary evidence for the story was based on a number of sources, but it was wrong to connect Wayne Madsen with this story .
 In 2002 he suggested to The Guardian newspaper that the U.S. Navy had aided in an attempted overthrow of Venezuelan president, Hugo Chavez .
 In 2003 he said that he had uncovered information in a classified congressional report that he claimed contained information linking the September 11 attacks to the government of Saudi Arabia and the Bush administration .
 The Saudi Foreign Minister demanded the report be declassified so it could respond, however, the Bush administration refused . The Bush administration claimed that to do so would compromise intelligence sources and methods .
 Madsen has asserted that hundreds of Iraqi scientists who had been assassinated or died in accidents after the invasion in 2003 were actually murdered by Mossad hit teams operating in Iraq .
 In 2005, he wrote that an unidentified former CIA agent claimed that the USS Cole was actually hit by a Popeye cruise missile launched from an Israeli Dolphin-class submarine .
 In 2005 he said that the pro-Israel lobby, the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, had pressured U.S. politicians to stay away from protests against Iraq War .
 He has asserted that members of AIPAC and Israel’s Mossad dominate CNN management . He has urged readers to boycott CNN and its advertisers until they are fired .
 On June 9, 2008 he reported that unnamed “GOP dirty tricks operatives” had found a Kenyan birth certificate registering the birth of Barack Obama, Jr. on August 4, 1961 .
 Madsen reported that some UN World Health Organization officials and scientists believed the 2009 new H1N1 strain of swine flu virus appeared to be the product of United States military sponsored gene splicing, as opposed to natural processes .
 The most plausible explanation is that the virus is the result of modern farming techniques . While it can not be ruled out that it was created in a research laboratory or vaccine factory, the most plausible is that it is a result from modern farming methods .
 This subtype of the H1N2 was also a reassortment of swine, human and avian strains . The subtype was also reassorted of human and swine strains .
 In 2010, Madsen reported in the Pakistan Daily that unnamed sources suggested that Blackwater, had been conducting false-flag operations in Pakistan that were blamed on the Tehrik-iTaliban Pakistan . Madsen: "Unnamed sources" suggested that the company formerly known as Black
 The book states it is an expose of Barack Obama’s rise in American politics . The book is titled 'An expose of the CIA's role in his attaining the Presidency' The book was released in October 2013 .
 Dunham met and married Lolo Soetoro, Obama’s stepfather, at the East-West Center in 1965 . Dunham met Obama's stepfather at the center in 1965 and married him in 1966 .
 Soetoro was recalled to Indonesia in 1965 to serve as a senior army officer and assist General Suharto and the CIA in the overthrow of President Sukarno . He was sent to the country in 1965 and joined the CIA .
 CIA files indicate that Mboya was an important Laan @)esueitses for the CIA, not only in Kenya but in all of Africa . CIA files show that M Boya was a key figure in the CIA .
 Mboya received a $100,000 grant for the airlift from the Kennedy Foundation after he turned down the same offer from the U.S. State Department . Pro-Communist Kenyan politicians suspected Mboye of having CIA ties .
 Mafia payoffs to willing conspirators and murder of unwilling conspirators incapacitate Law enforcement and the #MSM capacity against crime . No recourse except flight from the USA if that is at all possible .
 As a general rule a criminal will be caught unless the criminal takes the job of cop in which case the criminal is both more dangerous and unstopable with defaming yourself as a criminal yourself . The criminal is more dangerous than defaming himself as a police officer .
 Many of the tactics used in COINTELPRO are alleged to have seen continued use including; discrediting targets through psychological warfare; smearing individuals and groups using forged documents and by planting false reports in the media .
 I have watched so many poeple die, planes go down, and criminals in plane clothes and State badges kill before my eyes or range of hearing, and at leat fifty people I have known in 35 years or so tied to Gangstalk dying . I have a deep and
 She was a whistleblower who was silenced by murder but was never forget and never ignore . She knew the secrets of the Donegan family as I do, she said . She was silenced but never forget .
 A list of Whistleblowers and then go into the CIA killing machine that has victimized my family, Organized Stalks, Espionage tactics denied but CIA systems or organizing plausibly deniable CIA murders .
 MKULTRA Organized Stalk activities of COINTELPRO OSS methods of Dr. Cameron . Dr Cameron's methods were used in his book, "Cameron's OSS"
 Street gangs, arson, assassination of families of journalists, death threats, threats to journalists . Street gangs and murder of journalists among reasons for murder .
 Organized Stalks use racial and sexual violence campaigns carried out by First Responders . Organized stalking campaigns are often carried out in response to racial or sexual violence against first responders . Stalkers use racial, sexual violence campaign to target First responders .
 In the eyes of the CIA Reinhard Gehlen was an “asset” of staggering potential . Gehlen’s potential was a “staggering potential” for the CIA .
 He was a professional violent spymaster, violently anti-Communist, and best of all, the controller of a vast underground network still in place inside Russian frontiers . He was best known for his role in the Soviet-era KGB .
 Gehlen principle is misdeeds while in costume, basically CIA or CIA assets at police, fire, medical, etc. etc., doing what is called “dirty deeds with clean hands.” CIA assets . Gehlen: “Dirty deeds with dirty hands with clean
 In the movie Dream Catcher aliens are discovered but the U.S. Military covers up the presence of them . The movie is about the discovery of aliens in the United States .
 Colonel Abraham Curtis an unhinged military official at one point kills a patient with a lethal serum in a hospital . Curtis is responsible for kills of other witnesses as well as those of others .
 Jen Moore, Tom Dunham and myself Edward Paul Donegan know all about this though not one of us ever spoke to each other I am pretty sure . Jen Moore and Tom Dunham were all involved in the creation of the Internet generation .
 What Tom Dunham called “Badge bunnys’ were planting suggestive evidence outside his doorstep, a key under a rock that did NOT go to his apartment that might access, etc., as police acts . Dunham: "Badge bunnyys" planted suggestive evidence, arranged actual
 Joan Mellon speaks of Deep State COINTELPRO which btw is run out of Fusion Centers as espionage operations by the FBI . Richard Belzer talks of a long list of deaths, often violent, of witnesses to the JFK murder . Joan Mellon also talks of the deaths of JFK witnesses
 CIA informants either comit the murders OR fail to solve the murders, or sometimes as Ghehlen asset types do both . I believe either Gehlen asset type CIA informants comit or fail to find the killer .
 Gehlen pioneered the setting up of dummy fronts and cover companies to support his farflung covert operations . Gehlen set up dummy fronts in order to support operations in the U.S.
 A major project was to form Eastern European emigre groups in the U.S. that could be used against the Soviets . The group was formed in the United States to fight the Soviet Union .
 Lee and Marina Oswald were befriended by some three dozen White Russians in the Dallas-Ft. Dallas, Texas, area in 1962 . Oswald's wife, Marina Oswald, was a White Russian in the Soviet Union .
 Many had identifiable nazi links; others had oil and defense industries . Others were in the oil, defense industries. Others had identifiable links to the Nazis .
 Russian defector to the U.S.R. and his wife from Minsk, Belarus, was in the middle of an unlikely social set . The defector's wife was also in the midst of a scandalous relationship with the United States .
 Organized Stalk victims tell you the landlord, local press corps, utilities companies, pharmacies, transportation, all are willing to and do co-operate with CIA and FBI operations as Front Companies .
 Jew has defected from the scheme or been important in researching it, blowing the whistle on it, and characterizing its evil . Because this is mostly White European Christian Christian Red State conspirator based mostly Protestant or Disciples of Christ .
 Many of the tactics used in COINTELPRO are alleged to have seen continued use including; discrediting targets through psychological warfare; smearing individuals and groups using forged documents and by planting false reports in the media .
 The use of Glorian Donegan DNA, daughter of Maria August Kutschera and Prince Edward of Wales was used to groom Sleepers . Sleepers have infiltrated Governor, POTUS, Judiciary, DHS, FBI, and other spots as planned .
 MKULTRA DNA kiting for using in sleeper agents to infiltrate USA and other governments while conducting life outcome research on brain genes . Bush, Bush, and others tied to in MKULTra DNA kited for using sleeper agents .
 Murdered Journalist Jen Moore was trying to out the evil of the FBI and it being infiltrated by large scale billions if not trillions of dollars of international corruption .
 Free Masonry is a Ponzi . slept well after releasing so much of 1966 Scheme of top level Deashe Bank and trying to this, | think ICE HSPI unit is the place hairs deciinbelionie kee Epstein out of jail to go . He
 The Traditions of J Edgar Hoover were the large scale FBI why tephra Senne planting child porn in law abiding operation to disband them . The top FBI are blackmailed or assets after Use because his racket and him is involved .
 By being poverty) and others trafficked his son as well as other the Deep State FBI killer run the views of WASP oppression children . By being poor, he was victim of poverty by being poverty .
 Stockhlder in Crime renewed his SC and his contract ,,.,, Organized criminal unit called the FBI which resulted from British policies . Organized crime unit called FBI . The FBI was created by the British government .
 Robert Mueller II in particular was part of DuPont and the plan which used Glorian Gainey and Harold Gainey of then Sourth Carolina as DNA source for Barrack Obama jr. and others . Mueller II was part in DuPont's plan to use the two Gainey brothers
 Barr is groomed from the outset, many grow up in politicians families, etc., but act of terror to cover it up is where people like Donald Barr and William Barr find themselves . Many of the major GOP families or free masons find themselves in the GOP families .
 Jaime Jorge Zapata was an ; Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Homeland Security ; Investigations Special Agent who was ambushed and murdered by ; the Mexican criminal group Los Zetas in San Luis Potosi, Mexico .
 Camarena was an undercover DEA agent who was tortured and murdered by the former Guadalajara Cartel . He was a member of the former cartel who was killed and tortured by the cartel .
 Two weapons found at the murder scene were traced back to Texas . One was purchased in August 2010 near Houston on behalf of accused drug dealer Manuel Gomez Barba . The other was purchased by a Dallas trafficking ring that included Otilio Osorio and his brother Ranferi .
 ATF officials in Texas later denied that any gunwalking happened in their state . Much like Fast and Furious, both groups had been under surveillance for many months .
 Senator John Cornyn has pressed Eric Holder and DOJ for details on any gunwalking in Texas . Senator Cornyn says he wants to know if gunwalking is illegal in Texas. Cornyn: Gunwalking is legal in Texas, but it's illegal .
 The Department of Homeland Security, ICE and the Department of Justice have long denied that the case of Jaime Zapata had anything to do with Fast and Furious . The case of Zapata has been ruled out of any connection to the case . Zapata was found dead at a federal prison in
 The discovery of this ROI by Zapata, “puts the lie to that by Napolitano and Holder,” according to a source who spoke with this reporter on conditions of absolute anonymity .
 Multiple sources including current and former employees of the Department of Justice and Department of Homeland Security have confirmed this explosive new revelation in the Fast & Furious investigation . Multiple sources of this information have confirmed it .
 One source indicated his frustration that neither DHS nor the FBI have come under scrutiny for what they know about gunwalking operations and the murders of Agent Zapata and Border Patrol BORTAC member Brian Terry .
 By 1910, United States Steel had almost succeeded in driving all unions out of its plants . The steel plant was almost completely eliminated from all American plants .
 He was known as “America’s Sherlock Holmes” and eamed fame for having conducted private investigations into a number of notable incidents . He cleared Leo Frank of the 1913 murder of Mary Phagan, and investigated the deadly 1910 Los Angeles Times bombing .
 Various criminals, such as Frank Costello, have boasted they worked with Kennedy in mysterious bootlegging operations .
 The most recent and most thorough biographer [David Nasaw asserts that no credible evidence has been found to link Kennedy to bootlegging activities .
 Vincent Gigante is the richest richest man in the world . He is one of the richest men in the United States .
 Kennedy in persuaded Costello to relinquish power to Genovese the $200400 million group and retire . Costello relinquished control of the group in 1957 . Kennedy was one of the richest men in the world .
 Burns’s son Raymond and police officers from the Detroit and Chicago police departments arrested Jim McNamara and associate Ortie McManigal on April 14, 1911, in Detroit . In 1957, Costello survived an assassination attempt ordered by Vito Genovese and carried out .
 Burns was considered well qualified to direct the Bureau of Investigation . Burns was friends with President Warren Harding’s Attorney General Harry M Daugherty . Burns is best known for his work in the FBI .
 Richard Miller was the first FBI agent indicted and convicted of espionage . Miller was an American FBI agent . He was convicted of spying on behalf of the CIA .
 After his arrest, a fuller portrait emerged of Miller . Miller was an ordinary every day guy who could pass as an undercover asset anywhere . Miller: "I'm not afraid to say I'm a good guy, but I'm not scared to say anything"
 This cell in the NSA was cleverly put together, and the NSA director is disavows any direct knowledge of operations, so it is never under Congressional oversight . Lame Cherry is a Revealor .
 Eric Holder was the hatchet man in the Clinton Administration who under Janet Reno ran the Waco operations that murdered the Branch Davidians and bumed their children alive for political effect . Holder was brought into the Obama regime for the beginning in order to run this cell, as it was Holder
 The surviving flight attendent on ground after the crash was murdered as she wandered around ground zero . Ron Brown was executed with an ice pellet bullet when he was executed .
 FBI Director Robert Swan Mueller II son of Cartel Grand Master Mason Piere Dupont board member Robert Mueller IT) is aware of this NSA cell, but he is not a part of it . Mueller IT is a board member of the cartel .
 Rod Rosenstein is closely tied to Eric Holder and operations asserted to have killed Branch Davidians, , and many others . Rod Rosenstein has worked closely with Eric Holder in the Department of Justice .
 Bush, Cuban and Meyorkas, DuPonts, Boeing, Latin Christopher Wray, British Pilgrim American George W Bush, Society, Councilon | deomocratic .
 Before I was contacted Tom Donegan and Glorian DOnegan had already been contacted by Rosestein and Mueller, both were working my case across USA and even international locations I was contacting .
 This also seems to have led to a meeting with Time Kaine during the detention in Tom Donegan’s home .
 Tim Kaine was under consideration for Obama VP but Joseph Biden JR was selected instead from the shor-list . Joe Biden was selected from the list of VP candidates .
 After I was arrested private conferences with Magistrate Day and the prosecutors were setup, my lawywer was changed out, and I was not in any of the conference held which were pretrial but Tom Donegan and Mark Wierness were i those conferences .
 Jen Moore calls the Rosenstein familial group the FOIA Blockers, harassing FOIA on behalf of Government clients . Jen Moore: The group harasses government clients with FOIA requests . Moore says the group is harassing FOIA requests for government clients .
 Rod Rosenstein has a history of a complex and bungled prosecution of me, Hillary Clinton says . Hillary Clinton: Rod Rosenstein 'has a history' of bungling prosecution . Clinton: "Rod Rosenstein has history" of bungled prosecutions .
 "It could have been prosecuted as felony of me threatening the FBI in which I put up a defense of they had illegally initiated a threat situation with me I could not prevent," he says .
 Anti White Hate, a Jewish political interest in studying and disrupting the Alt-Right, I am in and also as an Eric Holder Barrack Obama Jr. designated protector MKULTRA Level secrets . Seth Rich is said without authorization the thugs hit Seth Rich without going to far .
 Rosenstein was born in 1965 to an Ashkenazi Jewish family in Philadelphia . He was born to a Jewish family . Rosenstein is married to a married Jewish woman .
 His mother, Gerri Rosenstein, was a bookkeeper and local school board president . His father, Robert, ran a small business, while his mother, » Gerri, was bookkeeper .
 Centers for Disease : ontrol and Prevention . Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases at the CDC .
 Rosenstein worked for Ken Starr on the Whitewater investigation ‘ into President Bill Clinton . Rosenstein then worked in the United States Office of the » Independent Counsel under Ken Starr . He worked for the U.S. Attorney General in the 1990s .
 I Edward Donegan was a class below Stephen Heyman and knew him fairly well. I knew him very well. He was the class below Heyman. He knew him a bit better than Stephen . He was an excellent broadcaster, says Donegan .
 Stephen Heyman wants to be the U.S. Attorney for Massachusetts during the Boston Bombing . His brother Stephen was in the same class as Stephen's .
 Rod Rosenstein represented the National Institute of Health against me as U.S. Attorney for Maryland . Rod Rosenstein was Rod Rosenstein who represented the NIH against me, he says . He says Rod Rosenstein is Rod Rosenstein's attorney general .
 After graduating from Penn, Rosenstein attended Harvard Law School where he was an editor of the Harvard Law Review . Rosenstein graduated from Penn with a law degree from Harvard University .
 While at Harvard, Rosenstein landed an internship with then acting U.S. Attorney for the District of Massachusetts Robert Mueller . Rosenstein landed internship with Mueller while at Harvard .
 She’s well known for basically leading the Ukrainian coup when the Americans our country got involved in the election of their country . So she's the last person I want to hear about with regarding election integrity or about Russia in general .
 I’m actually sick of hearing Russia Russia Russia talking bad about POTUS and his decisions regarding the g7 in his mentioning of wanting Russia to be there .
 Victoria Nuland admitted that she first saw the dossier in July of 2016 . The State Department said that Christopher Steele came to the U.S. State Department to brief who knows who in October of 2016. The dossier was done by Christopher Steele and was released by the State Department in
 Senator Warner said he left because he couldn't put up with the same questions over and over again . Warner said the social media companies need to police the social networks even more because of ‘Russia’s interference’
 Tt ASP unit is the place to go, The top FBI are blackmailedor | involved . Tt. ASP unit was the place for the top FBI to go .
 Mother & children interviewed in 2015. Has TS clearance. isn’t even all of them . Mother and children interviewedin 2015. has TS clearance clearance.
 She’s actually representing the United States of government are representing the FBI against Judicial Watch . Judicial Watch is constantly trying to get FOIA releases on the Clinton investigation and the different government cases .
 Every American should forget everything they were taught or felt about integrity, honesty, guilt or innocence within the FBI and other divisions of the United States Department of Justice . CLICK HERE to read how the FBI operates like a Gestapo Secret Police Force. e CLICK HERE for a short history lesson on
 The sleeper agents plan would win military and industrial relationships for the West via puppet governments . Working with OECD and Scottish Rites the sleeper agent plan is to win military, industrial relationships with the West .
 Glorian Donegan DNA was considered a good candidate for use, unknown but coming from established world events figures family lines . What the assassinations are hiding is that Glorian donegan DNA .
 THe string of Scotish Rites acts with grooming and Eugenics created POTUS figures like Obama, Bush, and Biden, while killing RFK, JFK, JFK almost TK, and others .
 Once again another Lame Cherry exclusive in matter and anti EMIT ooo. The Smedinghoff Murder retrieved from link .
 David Plouffe is an American political strategist best known as the campaign manager for Barack Obama’s successful 2008 presidential campaign . He is best known for his role in the 2008 election campaign .
 In January, Emanuel joined the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative to lead policy and advocacy efforts of the he depths to what initiative . Emanuel: "In January [Rahm Emanuel 2017, he joined] in January to ever quite knew lead the policy ... in the policy .
 In 1994 Plouffe managed Delaware Attorney General Charles Monroe Oberly III United States ') Attorney for the District of Delaware from 2010 to hitaker 1)
 The reason from Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Smedinghoff was erminated was her knowledge in being the ‘cancer courier’ who provided the wafer to the priest who fed this bio toxin to Hugo Chavez .
 Ambassador Stevens, the SEALS loaded into one helo and murdered and Hugo Chavez . Ambassador Stevens was killed in the attack on Chavez in Chavez's home country .
 Director: This cell was behind the setting up of the fake bin Laden compound in : Pakistan for a future political event . Director. : This cell, was behind setting up . the . setting up the fake . bin Laden . compound in . Pakistan . Director: The cell is behind the
 Assessment report that was seen as derogatory oordinator for towards armed forces veterans . The assessment report is seen as an attempt to smear veterans .
 The report focused on potential threats from the radical right . Eric is Eric's cell is Eric .
 Radicalization and Recruitment was made public in jregime for April 2009 . Current Economic and _ he was brought Political Climate Fueling Resurgence in into into the Obama .
 The report suggested several factors, beginning in order including the election of the first black or mixed o run this cell . Holder was the hatchet man in the Clinton Administration who under Janet Reno ran the Waco operations that murdered the Branch Davidians .
 His cover is 1 Attorney General, but in working the NSA cell, he never answers to i Congress as they would never inquire to him about NSA matters . As he is not overtly in control of the NSA, as this all falls under Janet Napolitano’s arena .
 FBI Director Robert Mueller is aware of this NSA cell, but he is not a part of it . FBI director Robert Mueller says he's aware of the cell but not a i part of the operation .
 This NSA group scares the CIA and FBI, as those finding the tracks of , their operations, know this is all sanctioned and protected at the highest levels, and those matters are not to be spoken of . Those finding tracks of their operations know their operations are all sanctioned .
 The “cell’s” was involved with Sandy Hook, the Colorado Joker and Gabrielle Giffords . It was involved in the same pattern operations as Colorado Joker, the Joker and later Justice Scalia .
 Homeland Director Janet Naps Napolitano knows this NSA cell is run by Eric Holder, but has been informed it is “hands off” and she knows to keep distance from it .
 The cell was behind the set up of CIA Director David Patreaus . The cell is believed to have been involved in the CIA set-up .
 It was the Committee to Re Elect Obama at all costs and remove all political competitors to Obama . The Committee was created to re-elect Obama and remove any political competitors from Obama .
 Vice President Joe Biden knows that Eric Holder is the “hatchet man’s” for the Obama regime . Biden knows Holder is a key figure in the Obama administration .
 Eric Holder's specialty has been since the Clinton era and why he is so heavily protected from any investigations . That is what Eric Holders has been doing since Clinton .
 The machinations of what would become Gun Runner and Fast and Furious, were run out of this NSA cell operating out of the White House . Gun Runner was run by the NSA cell .
 The current high profile assassination target for this cell is Kim Jong Un of North Korea . The cell is targeting the North Korean leader .
 Philip Marshall is a veteran airline captain and former government “special activities” contract pilot . Marshall has authored three books on Top Secret America, a group conducting business as the United States Intelligence Community .
 Marshall has studied and written 30-years worth of covert government special activities and the revolving door of Wall Street tricksters, media moguls, and their well funded politicians . Marshall was a Learjet captain as part of a Drug Enforcement Administration sting on Pablo Escobar .
 David Plouffe: Combatting destructive disinformation with factual and compelling information is the major front in the battle to save our Democracy . He says it's important to combat destructive disinformation .
 Good Information Inc. aims to fund and scale businesses that cut through echo chambers with fact-based information . Good Information is funded by Good Information, a non-profit that focuses on information-driven businesses .
 ACRONYM invested in for-profit companies that built media and technology solutions for progressive causes . ACRonym invested in tech and media companies that build media solutions to progressive causes.
 It ran one of the largest digital campaigns to defeat President Trump in the 2020 election, totaling $100 million . It ran a digital campaign to defeat him in the presidential election . The president's 2020 election campaign will be the first of its kind .
 Napolitano was born in 1930 in Oakland, CA, one of three children and the only son of Italian immigrants . He was born to a three-decade career in the United States .
 He became interim Dean of the medical school in 1972 and was named permanent Dean the following year . He served in that capacity until his retirement in 1994, serving in that role until 1994 .
 Napolitano presided over the dramatic expansion of the medical care system . The system has been expanded in the past decade .
 Independent fact-checkers reviewed a similar photo and said it was false . Dec 22, 2021 Independent Fact-Checkers said it's false .
 Did JFK Plan Th To Expose A Plot To su ‘Enslave Every Man, pr oman And Child’ Before Jo #% _PolitiFact? UNM is a health sciences complex on the North campus of UNM .
 He was a highly effective advocate for the medical school at the legislature in Santa Fe, New Mexico . He was an effective advocate at the state legislature .
 The medical school and the associated health sciences campus became one of New Mexico’s chief assets . Due to these efforts, the medical school has become one of the state's chief assets, the state says .
 Napolitano received the medical school’s first Living Legend award in 2009 . The former secretary of state of state received the award for her role in the country's first time .
 The legal mind behind the White House’s war on » terror retrieved from by Jane Mayer June 25, 2006 The Newyorker .
 Powell was referring to David S Addington, Vice; President Cheney’s chief of staff and his longtime principal legal adviser . Addington is Cheney's longtime principal Legal Adviser .
 Addington's former top aide, Lawrence Wilkerson, confirms that he and Powell shared this opinion of Addington . Addington and Powell were both men in the late 1980s .
 As a teen-age, Addington told a friend he hoped to live in Washington . himself when he grew up .
 David attended public high school in ; Albuquerque, New Mexico, and his father began a second career teaching middle-school math . David attended high school .
 On the firing of U.S. Attorneys, George W. Bush writes: "The conspiracy theorist in me cannot leave unmentioned the possibility that someone at the Bush White House-let’s call him “David Addington”-does nothing all day but mark
 White House figured out with a little Wite-Out and distractions of the Christmas season, the president could remove both the federal judiciary and the Congress from the United States attorney appointments process .
 He helped launch the Progressive Change Campaign Committee in 2009 to learn more about effective online activism .
 He founded the online group Demand Progress, known for its campaign against the Stop Online Piracy Act . He is also known for his campaign against Stop Online piracy .
 Swartz declined a plea bargain under which he would have served six months in federal prison . Swartz also declined to accept a plea deal under federal law .
 Swartz was found dead by suicide in his Brooklyn apartment . Two days after the prosecution rejected a counter-offer by the prosecution, he was found by suicide . The prosecution rejected his counter offer .
 In 2013, Swartz was inducted posthumously into the Internet Hall of Fame . Swartz died in 2011 .
 Carmen Milagros Ortiz is an attorney, college instructor, and former U.S. Attorney for the District of Massachusetts . Ortiz is a college instructor and a former United States Attorney for Massachusetts. Ortiz is also an attorney and college instructor .
 Ortiz was both the first woman and the first Hispanic to serve as U.S. Attorney for Massachusetts . Ortiz was elected to the post in 1994 . Ortiz served as both a woman and a Hispanic in Massachusetts .
 Ortiz succeeded Michael Sullivan in that position . Michael J Loucks served as the interim United States Attorney between Sullivan’s resignation and Ortiz's confirmation . Ortiz was confirmed as the new U.S. Attorney General .
 Noteworthy prosecutions by her office include those of Whitey Bulger, Tarek 1 Mehanna, and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev . Aaron Swartz's suicide resulted in his suicide after being charged with a crime .
 In 1991, he declared the government had been investigating the Bank of Credit and Commerce International since 1986 in more-than-usual media exposure .
 In 1991, he was elected a fellow of the American College of Trial Lawyers . He was also elected a Fellow of the College of Lawyers in 1991 .
 In 1993, Mueller became a partner at Boston’s Hale and Dorr, specializing in white-collar crime litigation . Mueller is now a partner with Boston's Hale & Dorr law firm .
 The confirmation hearings for Mueller before the Senate Judiciary ; Committee were quickly set for July 30, only three days before his prostate cancer surgery . Webb both pulled out from consideration around mid-June .
 George James Terwilliger III is an American lawyer and public official . He is also a lawyer and a public official in the United States . He has been married to two women; they have been married for three decades .
 Former U.S. Deputy Attorney General and acting Attorney » General . He is a former deputy attorney general and acting United States Attorney General .
 Bush to be Deputy Attorney General at the ' United States Department of Justice . Bush was appointed by President George W. Bush to serve as Attorney General .
 FBI director was FBI director on September 4, 2001, one week before the September 11 attacks . He had previously served as acting deputy attorney general of the U.S. Department of Justice .
 This DNA came by way of Glorian Donegan used in a half twin of Edward Paul Donegan, Obamaa Jr. This DNA was used in the DNA of a half-twin of the same twin .
 President Barack Obama asked Mueller to continue at the helm of the FBI for two additional years beyond his normal 10-year term . Mueller's term would have expired on September 4, 2011, if he had been allowed to continue .
 In June 2013, Mueller defended NSA surveillance programs in testimony before a House Judiciary Committee hearing . Mueller also testified before the committee in 2013 .
 He said surveillance programs could have “derailed’t’dail’s September 11 attacks . He said the September 11 terrorist attacks could have been prevented by surveillance .
 Director Robert S. Mueller III has guided the bureau through the resurrection of many long , discredited practices from its COINTELPRO era . Appointed mere days before the 9/11 attacks, Director Mueller III was appointed days before that attack . He has been in charge of the FBI since
 Years later, Congress discovered that Hoover presided over severe abuses for decades . Many of the techniques used would be intolerable in a democratic society, but COINTELPRO went far beyond that .
 Later in life and after his death, J Edgar Hoover became a controversial figure as evidence of his secretive abuses of power began to surface .
 He was found to have exceeded the jurisdiction of the FBI, and to have used the FBI to harass political dissenters and activists, to amass secret files on political leaders, to collect evidence using illegal methods .
 Hoover amassed a great deal of power and was in a position to intimidate and threaten others, including multiple sitting presidents of the U.S. Hoover amassed great power . Hoover was able to threaten and intimidate others, such as sitting presidents .
 GLorian and Harold were moved to South Carolina Route 1 Bishopville after the death of Festus Gainey when my mother was 9 years old . GLorian was moved to Bishopville, South Carolina, after death of Gainey .
 Pieres DuPont were huge DOD nuclear and gun powder United States DOD Defense contractors and also Master Masons . They were also master masons .
 Robert Swan Mueller is one of the most violent FBI terrorist in a long history of FBI illegal acts which simply cover up for big name politicians . He, Robert Swan . Mueller is a former FBI agent who has been charged with numerous felonies .
 J Brien Comey, 89, of Allendale, died peacefully on Tuesday, Tuesday, March 24, 2020 . He died peacefully at age 89 .
 Brien moved to ; Allendale 49 years ago . Born and raised in Yonkers, NY, he moved to Allendale in 1964 .
 He was a 1953 graduate of Manhattan College and received an MBA degree from Fairleigh Dickenson . He was also a graduate of FairleighDickenson .
 Brien then took a job as Vice President and Director of Corporate Real Estate for the Curtiss-Wright Corporation managing the company’s extensive real estate portfolio . He retired in 1992 and began a second career as a Certified Financial Planner . Brien is a Certified Certified Financial
 This » » » was the largest single order for airplanes by the U.S. military up to that ; time . The largest single purchase of planes by the United States military was the Air Force One .
 First production model was the P-40 Warhawk, armed with two "" .50-caliber machine guns . The first production model of the Warhawk was the first production .
 There was only one P-40A variant which was a P40 modified as a camera aircraft . The P40A was a modified P40 aircraft modified to be a camera-equipped P40 .
 The definitive model was the P-40B Warhawk, which retained the two .50-caliber guns of the P.40 and added two Browning M2 .30-caliber machine guns to each of the I wings . The definitive version of the Warhawk was the the P
 The Order of Friars Minor Capuchin is a Catholic order of friars minor Capuchin . The Order is based in the United States and Canada .
 Capuchins arose in 1525 with the purpose of returning to a stricter : observance of the rule established by Francis of Assisi in 1209 . The Capuchines were originally intended to return to the original rule of the 1209.
 By the end of World War II it was the largest aircraft manufacturer in the United States, supplying whole aircraft in large numbers to the U.S. Armed Forces . Wright, and various supplier companies, were among the manufacturers .
 It also is a supplier to commercial nuclear , power, nuclear navy systems, industrial vehicles and to . ; the oil and gas industries .
 Joan Comey, age 79 of Allendale, died peacefully surrounded by her family on Sunday, August 19, 2012 .
 Joan moved to Allendale 41 years ago . Joan was born and raised in Yonkers, NY, . Joan is a proud member of the Allendale, NY family .
 She was a 1954 graduate of the College of New Rochelle and received her Master’s degree in computer ; science from Iona College . She was also a graduate of Iona and a Master of computer science .
 She then became a substitute teacher in the * Allendale School System, followed by a career in computer education with the Girl Scouts of America . She then worked as a computer education teacher with Girl Scouts .
 She served as a Eucharistic Minister and director of Religious Education at Allendale Church in Allendale, Michigan .
 She was a volunteer at the Valley Hospital and with Friends of the Allendale Library . She was also a member of Friends of a Library and Valley Hospital .
 Joan also enjoyed the time she spent at Arcola Country Club where she was an active member of the women’s golf program . Joan was a member of a women's golf program at the club .
 Engineers experimented with nt placement for the coolant radiator, oil coolers and the engine ke. The engine keel was placed in the correct position for the cooling system . Engineers also experimented with placing coolant coolants on the radiator and oil cooler .
 The Air Corps project officer, Lieutenant Benjamin Scovill, had the prototype sent to the National Advisory Committee for iutics Research Center at Langley Field, Virginia, where -size airplane was placed inside a wind tunnel . The radiator was moved forward under the engine and the oil ; utilized
 The P-40 had no serious vices and was a pleasant aircraft to fly . When flown by an experienced pilot who was fully aware of its strengths and weaknesses, the aircraft was able to give a good account of itself .
 The P-40 continued in production long after later and more modern types were readily available . Numbers reached the third highest total of American World War II fighters, after Republic P-47 and North American P-51 .
 The origin of the P-40 can be traced back to the Curtiss P-36 fighter, which was powered by a radial, air-cooled engine . The P-38 was the first aircraft from Curtiss to fly in the U.S.
 XP37 was a step in the direction toward what was eventually to emerge as the P-40 was the XP37 . The XP37 design was reworked to incorporate the Allison V1710 liquid cooled V-type engine . The P-36 design was later reworked into the P
 James Brien Comey Jr. is an American lawyer who was the 7th director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2013 until his dismissal in May 2017 . He was fired from the FBI in May .
 "I was a nerd, so I was home working on ; a piece for a literary magazine," she says . "And — I was ... a nerd," she writes . "I'm a nerd. And — I'm a writer. And I was working on a book. And
 I was in my room when a gunman kicked in the front door of the house . And I | | | . . . The gunman was in his room when he was killed . He was in the house when the gunman struck .
 FBI conducted a sophisticated vigilante operation aimed at preventing the exercise of First Amendment rights of speech and association . Many of the techniques used would be intolerable in a democratic society even if all of the targets were involved in violent activity .
 Sen. Chuck Grassley agreed that the proposed extension would be “a risky precedent to set” Grassley said it was a “risky precedent” to set .
 Mueller’s father served in World War II in the United States Navy . Mueller's father also served in the U.S. Navy .
 Mueller has four sisters, Susan Timchak, Sandra M Dick, Joan B Mueller; and Patricia H Mueller . Mueller's obituary also lists four sisters .
 Anne Smedinghoff was an American diplomat who last worked for the U.S. Embassy in Kabul, Afghanistan . She last worked at the United States Embassy .
 Smedinghoff was born in 1987 in River Forest, Illinois, a suburb about 10 miles west of Chicago . He grew up in the suburb of River Forest .
 His cover is » Attorney General, but in working the NSA cell, he never answers to Congress as they would never inquire to him about NSA matters . He is often in s the dark about operations being run in the high profile, and that includes the murder of Hugo Chavez .
 The “cell’s” was involved with Sandy Hook, the Colorado Joker and Gabrielle Giffords in the same pattern operations . The ‘cell” is involved with the shootings of Sandy Hook and Colorado Joker . The "cell" was involved in the Colorado
 Homeland Director Janet Naps Napolitano knows this NSA cell is run by Eric Holder, but has been informed it is “hands off” and she knows to keep distance from it .
 This is Assassination Incorporated, and it fields the entire scope of ational and international assassins both American and foreign terrorist to progress the Obama regimes feudal agenda for the world order .
 Bob was on the borough of varsity football, hockey, and lacrosse teams . Bob was a member of Cap and Gown Club. Bob was also on varsity hockey, lacrosse and hockey teams .
 Bob Truesdale is survived by his son, Robert S III 66, the current FBI director; four daughters, Susan M officer in the Timchak, Sandra M Dick, Joan B and Patricia; and four great-grandchildren . His 0”’s 0�
 Mueller grew up in Princeton, New Jersey, where he attended Princeton Country Day School, now known as Princeton Day School . Mueller is an FBI CEE and smiles .
 Robert Mueller was inducted into the Ranger Hall of Fame in 2004 . Mueller is a decorated veteran who served in the U.S. Army .
 Mueller stood up, raised his glass, and said, “I toast Tom Wilner.” Wilner . Mueller was a member of the university of "Niversity of ""|"
 When Bush confronted Mueller to ask him to, Sutro in San Francisco until 1976 . Sutro was a federal law enforcement officer until 1976. Pillsbury, Madison .
 Mueller responded, “If they don’t commit a crime, it would be difficult to identify and isolate” them . He then served for 12 years to round up more terrorists in the U.S.
 Vice President Dick Cheney objected by in the United States saying, “That’s just not good enough.” Vice President Cheney objected . Cheney said, ‘That” was “just not ‘good enough”
 In 1989, he served in the U.S. Department of Justice as an assistant to Attorney General Dick ; Lhornburgh and as acting Deputy Attorney General .
 President George W Bush nominated Mueller for the position of FBI director on July 5, 2001 . Mueller was nominated by President Bush for FBI director in 2001 .
 The current two and a half story Georgian Revival clubhouse was ; designed by Charles Follem McKim of McKim, Mead and White in 1903 and built in 1906 .
 A few of the FBI pages on Robert Maxwell point to an ; East and West German nexus, which could easily tie together old Nazis, East German Stasi agents, Soviet KGB agents, former U.S. OSS agents, CIA agents, and black-market criminals-mafia
 FBI file: FBI file appears that he may have done so for monetary gain . FBI file shows that he did so for money .
 The head of Nord Stream is a former Stasi agent, friend of Putin, Matthias Warnig . Warnig is the head of the company, which is close to Russia .
 William Barr’s father, Donald Barr, was also in Germany after the War . Donald Barr reportedly worked in ‘denazification’ of businesses . William Barr's father was in Germany during the War, reportedly working in “denazified” businesses .
 East Coast INS and U.S. Customs lookout lookout placed for subject and Wallersteiner . East coast INS and . United States Customs lookout . lookout .
 British Pilgrim Society and Council on Foreign Relations plot a strategy on industrial world might . British Pilgrim society and Council of Foreign Relations plan on industrial might .
 Z American automobile industry in the 1950s matter retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here . 1957 Chevrolet Bel Air convertible, one of the most iconic autos of the era .
 The post-World War II era brought a wide range of new technologies to the utomobile consumer, and a host of problems for the independent manufacturers . Post-WWII era has brought a variety of new technology to the consumer, including new technologies .
 The industry was maturing in an era of rapid technological change . Mass production and the benefits from economies of scale led to innovative designs and greater profits .
 The age of small independent automakers was nearly over, as most of them either consolidated or went out of business . Most of the small independent car companies were either consolidating or closing down .
 The horsepower race had begun, laying the foundation for the muscle car era . It was the horsepower race that paved the way for muscle car cars .
 The 1950s were the pinnacle of American automotive manufacturing and helped shape the U.S. into an economic superpower . It helped shape * the United States .
 Sir Cecil Wray, 13th Baronet, was a landowner and politician . He was one of the Wray baronets . He is believed to be a member of the WASP .
 Cecil Wray is on the right, portrayed as Judas Iscariot, for his apparent betrayal of his fellow whig Fox in this election . Christopher Asher Wray III is an American attorney who is serving as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation .
 Cecil Wray, Cecil was born on NOVEMBER 19, 1934 in Memphis, Tennessee, United States. He is a lawyer and mother of Christopher Wray . He was born in November 1934 .
 Cecil Wray is American lawyer, specializing in the field of Corporate Law . He is also a lawyer specializing in Corporate Financing Law, Securities Regulation Law, Mergers and Acquisitions Law .
 The Order of the Coif /'ko1f/ is an honor society for law school graduates . The Order is a United States law school honor society . It was founded by law school students .
 The name is a reference to the ancient English order of ; advocates, the serjeants-at-law . The name means "Serjeants at-law" and "Advocates at law"
 Relations., Ausable Club, Union Club, Century ' Club, Order of Coif, Phi Beta Kappa. Relations. Relations., Union Club .
 Victoria Weaver was born in 1949 to a Community of Christ Mormon family . She married United States Army Green Berets soldier Randy Weaver in rural Iowa .
 Vicki raised the children without television or other ‘graven images’ and homeschooled them . Vicki says she homeschools the children and raised them without TV or other 'graven' images .
 She and her husband attended Aryan Nations gatherings with the goal of making friends . The couple adopted their white supremacist views, and adopted their views .
 In 1992, her husband was ordered to court for sawing off shotguns for the Aryan Nations . When he refused, federal agents were sent to arrest him on 21 August .
 The agents killed the family dog when it alerted the family to their presence . They were forced to kill the family’s 14-year-old son Samuel Weaver when he shot at them in revenge .
 The next day, federal agents fired on Randy Weaver as he walked to the shed where he kept his son’s body . Vicki and the others ran out to check on Randy after he was shot .
 FBI sniper shot and killed Vicki as they prepared to head back into the cabin on the porch . Vicki was the last person to be shot by an FBI sniper .
 For days, the agents were unaware that Vicki was dead, and used a bullhorn to call out for Vicki to send her children to have pancakes with the agents . Vicki's children were able to find her at the scene .
 The family believed this to be taunts, hardening Randy’s resolve for the next eight days of the siege . Randy's family believed it was taunts . Randy was determined to hold on for eight days before he was killed .
 James Bovard is an American libertarian author and lecturer . His political commentary targets examples of waste, failures, corruption, cronyism and abuses of power in government .
 His books have been translated into Spanish, Arabic, Japanese, Korean, and Korean .
 FBI director Louis Freeh said that I “grossly mischaracterized” the details of Vicki Weaver’s killing . Following is an article I wrote on this back in 1995, followed by the response from Freeh, which he said was a response from FBI director
 FBI Director Louis Freeh last week announced that no FBI agents would be fired or severely punished for their role in the 1992 attack on Idaho white separatist Randy Weaver and his family in 1992 . The attack led to the death of Mr Weaver’s son and wife .
 A court official sent Mr Weaver a notice to appear in court on the wrong day; after Mr Weaver did not show up on the correct date, a Justice Department attorney got a warrant for his arrest . A Justice Dept. attorney (who knew of the error) got a . warrant for
 On Aug. 1992, six heavily armed, camouflaged United States marshals neaked onto Mr Weaver’s property .
 U.S. marshals killed one of the dogs after dogs started barking at a family friend . The dogs were barking at the man's 14-year-old son and a friend .
 Randy Weaver came out and hollered for his son to come ack to the cabin . Randy Weaver's son was in the cabin at the time of the incident . Randy and Randy Weaver have been married for more than 20 years .
 Sammy yelled, “I’m coming, Dad,” and was running ack to the cabin when a federal marshal shot him in the back and killed im . Sammy yelled "I'm coming, dad," before he was shot in the head .
 Kevin Harris responded to Sammy’s shooting by fatally shooting a United States marshal . Kevin Harris fatally shot a U.S. marshal in response to Sammy's shooting .
 After the death of the United States marshal, the commander of the FBI’s Hostage Rescue Team was called in, and ordered federal agents to shoot . any armed adult outside the Weaver cabin, regardless of whether that person was doing anything to threaten or . menace federal agents .
 Federal officials now claim that the killing of Vicki Weaver was an accident . The FBI used microphones to taunt the family of the slain woman .
 Edward Lodge condemned the FBI and issued a lengthy list detailing the Justice Department's and FBI’s misconduct, fabrication of evidence, and ; refusals to obey court orders . Lodge: The Justice Department, FBI, Justice Department and FBI are misconduct . Lodge also issued a list detailing
 Deval Patrick, assistant ttorney general for civil rights, rejected the findings last month . He concluded that the federal agents had not used excessive force .
 Eric Hold Sharon Holder, Jeh Johnson Barrack and Michell Obama Holder Machen Jr. This book is based on a book written by Eric Holder, Sharon Holder .
 The geneology of Barrack Obama, both real and imagined, from around the world in world wide Sleeper Cells operations . Featuring the Obama Family themselves continuing Eugenics works likely with Glorian Donegan .
 The are the product of Eugenics which for a while included Spinn-Off Nazi Germany . The idea of an “alternative social system”, known as “Technocracy” started to garner serious consideration among the learned men of academia, government and industry .
 Technocracy is the scientific answer to America’s social problems and technocracy is a new design for social operation that based on upon science . Technocracy would be the scientific solution to America's social problems .
 As the idea of a technocratic world gained followers, investments in science became even more necessary as well as collaboration . Investing in science is even more important as it becomes more important for the future of the world .
 Dr. Jeh Johnson’s family legacy . Gensrayor Mastor of tie a pseudo-civilized personalities stumping for 'baby-killing' Mastor .
 Johnson, it turns out, comes from a line of feticide-supporters and practitioners . Johnson, who has a long line of supporters, is a pro-feticide advocate .
 Kenneth Edelin was at the center of a famous court case over his gruesome 1973 ; slaughter of a baby boy during his 24th week of development . Edelin killed the baby during his first 24 weeks of development in order to survive .
 The injections were unsuccessful, so Edelin performed a ‘hysterotomy’ in which he made an incision in the womb . He reached in, reached in and by hand separated the baby i from the placental wall .
 A doctor who witnessed the operation testified that Dr. Edelin’s operation was botched . Edelin died at the age of 92 .
 Such compassion to be willing to take a baby whom he hadn’t successfully slaughtered to a nursery, he said . Such compassion would be such compassion, he was willing to go to the nursery .
 Edelin, who became a hero to feticide fanatics, was convicted of manslaughter and sentenced to a year’s probation . Edelin was sentenced to one year's probation after being found guilty .
 Edelin went on to become chairman of the board at Planned Parenthood Federation of America . Edelin is a member of the organization's board of directors .
 The pro-child-death regime seems to be kicking into high gear . Higgins 09.20.16 retrieved from IIliniosfamily.org and copied or modified to here .
 It’s unclear whether they fear a rising tide of opposition to womb-killing or ' if they smell the blood swirling in the miasmic waters that envelop the world'
 The Internet devours children in its black hole of child porn ; sewage ; sewage . The Internet is a black hole in child porn; sewage .
 And baby-killing profiteers can taste the blood of children, ; and it tastes like money . Baby-killing profiteers taste the blood, and it tastes like money, they say .
 Laurie’s always easy prey for uncivilized peoples, are perhaps at perhaps at least at least . Let's take a metaphorical boat-ride around these bloody waters. Let's go for a literal boat ride around the bloody waters .
 The number of abortions worldwide has risen from 50. million to 56. million every year between 1990-94 . Feticide enthusiasts cite the increase in the number of annual abortions worldwide as the reason for the day .
 Feticide enthusiasts want to ensure that the ghastly number of baby-killings each year won’t adversely affect the health of the babies’ mothers . The number of babies killed each year in the U.S. each year is estimated to be the highest in
 The baby-killing machine, euphemistically named Planned Parenthood, colludes with the perverse “Shout Your Abortion” crowd to celebrate the so-called “right” of mothers to kill their unborn babies .
 Planned Parenthood gets $300 million from the government . Several fundraising events planned at Empty Bottle in Chicago to make money for Planned Parenthood .
 Planned Parenthood death squad. Planned Parenthood.org.org . Planned Parenthood is a nonprofit that supports Planned Parenthood and other Planned Parenthood affiliates .
 There's nothing less likely to foster good relations in a community than forcing community members to be complicit in killing developing humans in the womb . There’s nothing more likely to be a good neighbor than a community member who kills developing humans .
 I can think of few things less ‘righteous’ than requiring citizens to fund feticide-well, except for feteticide itself . I'm not sure if this is true, but I'm sure it's not true .
 Catholics for Choice says public funding for abortion is a Catholic value . It's a bald-faced lie, since the Catholic Church opposes abortion, it's a lie .
 An unsavory family drama is unfolding in Luke Skywalker's family . Luke Skywalker’s family is under the influence of Luke Skywalker .
 The Hamill story exposes the myth that women are freely choosing to kill their offspring . Hamill is the latest example in a series of stories from the world's leading women .
 The truth is that often parents, boyfriends, and husbands pressure women to kill their children . "The truth is often that often . often parents and boyfriends pressure women," she says .
 The product of conception between two humans is a human, and no human has a moral right to end the life of another . No human has the right to kill a person who has a right to take his own life, says the doctor .
 Lack of full physical maturation on the part of one human doesn’t give other more developed humans the right to kill him or her . Lack of maturation does not give other humans the rights to kill someone who is not fully developed .
 Neither does a human’s imperfections, geographic location, dependency status, nor “unwantedness” grant more developed humans a right to kill him or her . Neither does the imperfections of human imperfections or dependency status give more developed people a right .
 In researching the barbarous activities of the pseudo-civilized personalities stumping for baby-killing, I learned the sordid story of Dr. JEH JOHNSON’s family legacy . Dr. Johnson's family is one of the world's most notorious killers .
 Kenneth Edelin was the uncle of Jeh Johnson, President Barack Obama’s secretary of Homeland Security . Edelin died in 2014 . He was a member of the Edelin family who died in 2012 .
 The 17-year-old mother’s womb had been injected with a saline solution which ordinarily burns and poisons the baby . The saline solution initiates uterine contractions that lead to the expulsion of the baby, Edelin said .
 Edelin performed a ‘hysterotomy’ in which he made an incision in the womb (as in a Caesarean section), reached in, and by hand separated the baby from the placental wall . The injections were unsuccessful .
 IFI is a Christian ministry that provides Christian ministry in the United States . Please pray for the support of IFI in the U.S. and the world .
 He preferred to work collaboratively with liberal 1 white groups in the South, quietly as a “sideline activist,” to get practical results .
 Johnson was born in 1893 in Bristol, Virginia, to well-educated parents . Johnson died in 1946 at the age of 92 .
 His father was a respected ; Baptist minister, and his mother was educated in public school . His father is a respected Baptist minister .
 Johnson yearned to return to the South, not only to study race relations 1 but to change them . When he was appointed director of research and investigation of the National Urban League, the couple moved to New York City .
 In 1929 an American missionary in Liberia reported that Liberian . Officials were using soldiers to gather tribal people who were shipped to 'the island of Fernando Po as forced laborers .
 The result of the inquiries 1 was an outspoken report submitted in September 1930 . 1 was the result of an outspoken inquiry into the assassination of Julius Caesar .
 In 1930 Johnson was awarded the Harmon Prize for Science, for his work The Negro in American Civilization . Johnson's work was published in 1930 .
 He attracted outstanding faculty, including the author Arna Bontemps, James Weldon Johnson, Aaron Douglas and others .
 The Brown Board of Education ruled that racial segregation in the public schools was unconstitutional . Brown Board was the result of a Supreme Court ruling in Brown's decision .
 He played a key role in the effort to implement the decision in the face of “massive resistance” in the South, he says .
 His work contributed to passage of federal civil rights legislation of the mid-1960s . His work and that of his peers also contributed to the passage of civil rights reform .
 Dr. Dr. Holder is the first African American to lead the country’s Justice Department . She is married to Holder's 20-year-old wife of 20 years .
 A mother of two teens and one preteen, she says she is delighted to see a Black president in the White House . She says she's delighted that she is a mother .
 She has worked in health care over the past 20 years and in research for the last 10 of those years . She has also worked in research in the past 10 years .
 As a PCORI Ambassador, she has enjoyed fostering . dialogues that promote mental health and substance use awareness and ‘ work . toward eradicating the stigma and discrimination surrounding mental illness, mental health issues, and . substance use treatment through ‘research . research .
 She became motivated by PCORI’s mission to make health ‘care more patient centered and wipe out mental health stigma . She became a member of the organization to help people with mental health issues .
 Vincent Raymond Stewart is a retired Jamaican American lieutenant general in the U.S. Marine Corps . He most recently served as Deputy Commander at United States Cyber Command .
 He then received orders as a ; Platoon Leader to 1st Tank Battalion at Las Flores, 41 Area, Camp * Pendleton, California . He was then sent to Camp Pendleton .
 In 1984, he became the Executive Officer of Headquarters Company, 1st Tank Battalion . In 1984 he was the Executive . Officer of "" Headquarters Company of 1st . Tank Battalion. He was also Executive Officer .
 LtGen Stewart retired from the U.S. Marine Corps at the Marine Barracks Washington on APRIL 5, 2019 . LtGen. Stewart retired .
 Barrack Obama fired General Flynn from the DIA just before leaving office . Vince Stewart replace Flynn as General Flynn replaces Flynn as DIA chief .
 Donald J Trump hired Flynn for his administration before Mike Pence and Rod Roenstein drove Flynn and Flynn Jr. out of the administration . Mike Pence was the driving force behind Flynn Jr.'s departure .
 Walk Corbett’s documentary, Why Big into the Gibson Island Club, was published by James A Rockefeller, a Morgan, and a Rothschild . Corbett's documentary, 'Why Big into a Gibson Island club'
 The meeting was convened by Professor Neil E Gordon, a member of the chemistry faculty at the University of Cambridge .
 Gordon’s interest was to bring together a group of scientists working at the frontier of research of a particular area to discuss, in depth, all aspects of the most recent advances in the field .
 The 1932 and 1933 conferences were also held at Johns Hopkins, before moving to Gibson Island in 1934 . The conference was held at Gibson Island, then moved to Johns Hopkins .
 The GRC also became affiliated with American Association for the Advancement of Science . During the late 30’s and early 1940s the conferences were held in the Gibson Island Club House .
 Gordon secured funds from AAAS and some thirty-three corporations to purchase a property on the island, known as the Symington House . The property was purchased by Gordon after the Gibson Island Club .
 The last year the GRC was held at Gibson Island was 1946 . Conferences were held on the house porch as well as at the Gibson Island Club .
 A number of factors contributed to the change in venue, including changes in management and less than ideal dining facilities, say organisers .
 The committee also faced tensions with Gibson Island residents regarding conference growth and the participation of African American scientists .
 Percy Julian initially was not permitted to enter the Gibson Island Club to participate in the 1943 hormone conference . In a notorious incident, Percy Julian was not allowed to attend the conference .
 Gregory Pincus chaired a meeting on hormone research at Mont Tremblant, Quebec, which grew into the annual Laurentian Hormone Conference series . Among the protesters was Gregory Pinchus .
 The GRC put Gibson Island on the map where scientists could meet; presumably occasionally in secret . Other scientific conferences used Gibson Island as an attendee venue over the years .
 The early conferences were composed of different scientists from different disciplines . The conference was formed by scientists from various disciplines .
 You might have a chemist, nuclear physicist and a biologist all eating at the same lunch table . You might even have a nuclear physicist, a biologist and a chemist eating together .
 As the conferences became more popular and better funded, the different scientific disciplines were split . So their would be a chemistry conference for a few days, then an atomic science conference, and then a biology conference after that .
 By 1944, eleven conferences were scheduled for the Summer, beginning June 12 and ending August 21 . The Summer of 1944 was scheduled to last until August 21, 1944 .
 Eugenics was considered a serious scientific discipline until the Nazis gave it a bad name in the 1940s . It was considered serious scientific science until the Nazi era .
 Instead of shelving eugenics as a scientific discipline, it was re-branded and divided into different scientific disciplines .
 We would argue that that Eugenics was a political point of view and not a science, all along. We would . argue that . Eugenic was a . political point-of-view, not a . science, and all along, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Prior to WWII, Eugenics was politically correct, after the example of the Nazis, it was not politically correct . The Nazis' example of Nazi Eugenism was not political correct . Eugenic was politically incorrect prior to WWII .
 Although Eugenics lost its status as a legitimate science, any number of other legitimate scientific disciplines could be used to carry out the plans for the re-branded Eugenicists . In other words, actual scientific discoveries could lead to practical applications to advance the political plans of the Eugen
 Actual scientific findings presented at the Vitamins and/or Cancer conferences may have eventually lead to a better understanding of how to get rid of certain populations more quickly . For example, in the 1944 Conference referenced above, scientific findings .
 Gibson Island combined the wealth of promoters of political eugenics with the knowledge of how to carry out their eugenic dreams . As the title of this section suggests, this is Gibson Island . Gibson Island was the brainchild of a group of scientists who had knowledge of the eug
 The scientists that practiced in disciplines that may have had direct eugenics applications didn’t necessarily know that their findings might be used in evil ways .
 The decision to move the conferences was based in part on those types of factors . Perhaps the decision was based on those factors .
 Prior to WWII, one could mention the “benefits’ of Eugenics without be called a Nazi . Prior to World War II, the only thing that could be said to be a Nazi was mention of the benefits of the "benefits" of the ‘benef
 John D Rockefeller, Jr. was one of the more virulent promoters . Rockefeller was the wealthiest person on the planet . Rockefeller is now the richest man in the world .
 The Rockefeller Foundation, Carnegie Foundation, the Ford Foundation and any number of other foundations, trusts, and wealthy individuals and families provided the funding . Government lobbying efforts and university departments promoted Eugenics .
 Post WWII, promotion of Eugenics focused on how actual science could positively affect long-term plans and re-branding, to avoid the Nazi taint . Post WWII post-war, the promotion of the science was focused on .
 It might have been perfectly fine to discuss sterilization efforts of African Americans living in North Carolina in polite company in the 1920s and 1930s . By the early 1940’s it was not “fine”; not that sterilization of Black people stopped . Not that steril
 Gordon Research Conferences on Gibson Island did seem to have a significant “Family Planning” component . The Gordon Research . Conferences were held on the island .
 Gregory Goodwin Pincus moved the Gibson Island Hormone Conference to Quebec . Gregory Goodwin pincus made the move .
 Pincus was an early pioneer in the science of mammalian reproductive systems . He was also an early proponent of the reproductive systems of mammals .
 Pincus began studying hormonal biology and steroidal hormones early in his career . He studied hormonal biology early in the career and is now a professional golfer .
 He was interested in the way that hormones affected mammals’ reproductive systems . He was also interested in how hormones affected the reproductive systems of mammals .
 McCormick and Sanger met with Pincus in 1953 to dramatically expand the scope of the research with 50-fold increase in funding from McCormick . McCormick also met with Sanger in 1953 and expanded the scope .
 Pincus was fascinated by Sanger because she revealed what life was like for women living in poverty who endured many pregnancies . Sanger revealed what it was like to live in poverty for many women .
 Sanger indirectly influenced Sanger to create a successful contraceptive to prevent unwanted pregnancies . Sanger influenced him to create the contraceptive .
 Pincus was some committed Eugenicist like his primary ‘influencer” Margaret Sanger . His earlier work as a Gibson Island conference attendee certainly became applicable to Sanger and her minions .
 Percy Lavon Julian was a pioneer in the industrial large-scale chemical synthesis of the human hormones progesterone and testosterone from plant sterols such as stigmasterol and sitosterol . Julian was the co-conference attendee .
 His work laid the foundation for the steroid drug industry’s production of cortisone, other corticosteroids, and birth control pills . The drug industry is now the world's biggest source of steroids .
 Another important “player’s” in the medical sciences with potential eugenics applications, and conference attendee, was Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter attended the conference .
 Parran was an attendee at the Gibson Island Vitamin Conference of 1941 and possibly later and earlier conferences . Parran attended the conference in 1941 .
 University is grappling with whether to strip his name from the building . Students say Parran's role in these experiments shows his disregard for human lives . He helped found the university after decades of public service .
 His work or stewardship on the effects of syphilis is alleged to have included experiments on Guatemalan citizens which also involved Dr. Dr. Guillaillais . His work was alleged to include experiments on Guatemala citizens . Dr Guillais is accused of experimenting with syphilis on Guatem
 Some of the Island’s residents saw some opportunities to promote their own bad ideas (ie. depopulating the planet) by co-opting the legitimate work of visiting scientists like Pincus and Julian .
 Gibson Island was developed as a Summer getaway for the wealthy and powerful beginning in the 1920s . Gibson Island has been a popular getaway in the past .
 The Baltimore Bourgeoisie were composed of a mix of wealthy heirs and professionals and from nearby Baltimore . They included the Symington Family, the Hydes, the Orricks, and many others . The Symington family, the Baltimore branch of the Hyde, the . Oricks,
 A number of Baltimore doctors made Gibson Island their summer home . Among those doctors were several pioneers in the field of reproductive medicine .
 Another Gibson Island resident and scientist/gynecologist was also the inventor of one of the more infamous birth control devices . The invention of the birth control device was also made by a local scientist .
 The Dalkon Shield would eventually be taken off the market for causing severe infections that lead in some cases to infertility, “septic abortions”, other complications and even some fatalities . The Shield was eventually removed from the market .
 The Jones’ conducted the first successful in-vitro fertilization in the U.S. in the United States . The Jones' conducted the . first successful fertilization .
 Georgeanna Georgeanna was elected President of the American Fertility Society in 1970 . She was the first woman to reach that position . Georgeanna is the founder and president of the society .
 Her presidency was notable for her thoughtful discussions on the impact of reproductive technologies on society . She also discussed the implications of advances in fertility control on women and their future .
 We hope to take a closer look at the cancer connection given the significant amount of cancer research that was presented at the conferences over the years .
 Edward T Haslam is the author of “How the Unsolved Murder of a Doctor, a Secret Laboratory in New Orleans and Cancer-Causing Monkey Viruses are linked to Lee Harvey Oswald, the JFK Assassination and Emerging Global Epidemics” as well as the recent
 We have highlighted Gibson Island in several previous osts and were always finding new names with interesting biographies . For more background about Gibson Island, please see a collection of posts that 1 mention Gibson Island .
 The Gang includes relatives of a number of famous politicians, industrialists and banking families . The Gang on Gibson Island includes the relatives of several famous politicians .
 The CIA also figures prominently with names like Bagley, Asher, Amoss and Amoss .
 Given the CIA names on Gibson, and the Johns Hopkins psychiatrists, we are interested in researching connections to |Vii< Ultra and related “mind control” program associations .
 Names in S\uc: Psychiatrists & MDs affiliated with Johns Hopkins . Names in Red: Interesting names that need a closer look. Written about or mentioned in previous posts. e
 LP Gise, his grandfather was instrumental in mass producing the U.S. nuclear arsenal . His grandfather was also a major producer of the United States' nuclear arsenal. LPGise was instrumental to mass production of the American arsenal .
 Before the JFK Assassination, these connected conspirators cooked up a sighting . When your congressman leaves town for a vacation with the family, so should you before the assassination?
 Maybe Allen Dulles and the Young ‘Turks’ Connects the CIA to Epstein Island via a Luciferian Cult founded by Sabetai Zevi in the 1600s . The cult is believed to be connected to the CIA and the CIA .
 The FBI tweeted out the Protocols of the Elders of Zion last week . Maybe that is why the FBI tweeted it out last week?
 The entire quote though provides some context as to why the head of the FBI might say that .
 Recently elected former VP seemed to like the place too . For the symbolism, the former Vice President seemed to enjoy it .
 A Rockefeller, a Morgan, and a Rothschild walk into the Gibson Island Club . The club was founded in 1903 .
 Lee Harvey “defected to Russia” in October 1959 and ‘ ' to the USSR, means for getting there and back, and what he did when he was there . Lee Harvey "defected" to Russia in 1959 .
 When you stole that cow, and your friend tried to make it with the cow, the cow . The cow was stolen from a friend's house, and the cow was taken away .
 If the CIA’s involvement was restricted to i some rogue elements, now mostly all dead, with antiquated ideas about the dangers of Communism, or an attempt to take back the Cuban sugar fields and/or Mafia Casinos seized by Castro, then coming clean would give the CIA
 No one now will blame anyone in the CIA today for what some long dead operatives did in 1963 . That is, no one now, is going to blame anyone . for what they did .
 He has been the go-to-guy for whenever the MSM needs a pithy comment of the expert opinion of someone who worked for The Company . He has also been a frequent contributor to the mainstream media .
 One can surmise that he has the approval of the CIA given his professional successes as a writer and TV show host . He has also had success as a host and writer .
 His biography on Wikipedia ‘ and other approved web sites is nicely consistent, with details about his professional ‘ successes, but there is limited information about his family background .
 Privacy of relatives of public figures deserves to be respected . Generally, family information is not important or relevant and the privacy of relatives is respected .
 His bio said he was born in Los Angeles, so maybe he is a Getty or a Hearst . His bio says he is from Los Angeles .
 Perhaps he is related to General Charles 'P Cabell of Bay of Pigs fame . Perhaps he's related to general Charles ' P Cabell .
 General Cabell's grand father and uncle on his mother’s side both use the family name “Baer”, as in Major Charles Baer Pearre, Sr. ; the grandfather . The grandfather and uncle use the name "Baer" on their mother's
 The mother’s maiden name on the birth index screen shot is not all that helpful either . The mother's maiden name is also not helpful .
 As a supposed ‘heiress’, the name Eisele should show up in duckduckgo and newspaper archive searches, but we have not had much luck yet .
 Dresser Industries was also a Bush Family company, so there is another CIA connection . Dresser is a Bush-owned company .
 Wirt branch of the Cabell family tree is a look at the Wirt family tree . Cabell is a descendent of the famous writer and author .
 In “Evidence for Informed Trading on the Attacks of September 11” he examines an FBI briefing document from 2003 that was declassified in 2009 . The document was released by the FBI in 2009 and declassified .
 FBI investigation into two of the pre-9/11 trades that the Bureau had identified as suspicious . FBI had identified the purchase of 56,000 shares of Stratesec in the days prior to 9/11 .
 Stratesec provided security systems to airports including Dulles Airport and the World Trade Center . The company saw its share price almost double when markets re-opened on September 17th, 2001 .
 Wirt D Walker III is a distant relative of the Bush family . He is a business partner of Marvin Bush, the president’s brother, Marvin Bush . The president's brother is Marvin Bush's brother .
 This characterization is provably false, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "In addition to begging the question, this is provable false"
 Wirt Dexter Walker at Stratesec hired several people from The Carlyle Group . Bin-Laden family members were investors in the firm .
 Mansoor Ijaz claimed to be able to contact Osama Bin-Laden on mulitple occasions . Wirt Walkers fellow director James Abrahamson was a close friend of aman .
 It is not clear if Baer and Ryan are talking about the same ‘insider’ traders, who appear to have foreknowledge about the events of September 11th . i As noted in the transcript though, “Wirt D Walker III” was a distant relative
 Wirt is definitely an unusual first name, which probably 1 Means it is a family name . Wirt means 'Wirt' or 'Willy' means 'willy' and 'William' .
 There are some Wirts in the Bush/Walker family tree . Cabell family tree also includes some of the Cabell and Bush family trees .
 Gaghan's screenplay is loosely adapted from ex CIA operative 1 Robert Baer’s memoir See No Evil . The film is based on Baer's memoir, "See No Evil," by ex-CIA operative .
 This book PsyClops and the Storyh of How Malcom X was much like Catholics The policy difference. PsyClop is a study of the CIA and the White House .
 Sleeper Agents by CIA, others, of FOXP2 Secretive DNA Research under Sidney Gottlieb which, if taken illegallly from the lab, could take good track-record DNA for groomed leaders .
 Families volunteer for Minnesota Twins Studies eugenics research volunteer themselves . Families find out the program isn’t just medical research it is for far reaching Commonwealth expansionism . Mafia groomed leaders moved into locations all around the globe; for instance Cuba where the mafia will have gambling and prostitution
 The Lawford Shriver Peace Corps plan ”™ is more extensive than approved . Certain families and Malcom X being one of them were approached that speech defect research was being conducted . Some twins or mix parents brothers or sisters with common mothers or fathers were being studied which carried certain attributes
 Establishment Class feared Donald J Trump because he was a threat to the status quo . Establishment Class did not just prefer a Hillary Clinton over a Mitt Romney or a John McCain because of surface level “R” and “D” policy disagreements, they feared Trump because of his
 Wikipedia leaves out important parts of a person’s biography, such as the name of their parents, or who other famous relatives are, because the Deep State does not want you know . The Robert Swan Mueller III Family Helped Found the Deep state .
 The George Webb crowd made it a priority to write the real biography of Bob Mueller . Bob Mueller's biography will be published by CNN.com/Heritage .
 Mueller family was related to the Genera Charles Cabell and Richard Bissell, who were both fired by JFK over the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion . The Mueller family has a history of political intrigue .
 Robert S. Mueller II, the special counsels father, worked for du Pont and seems to be connected to some incidents involving the transfer of nuclear technology and material . Robert S Mueller II worked for Du Pont and seemed to be involved in some incidents .
 The Muellers summered on Gibson Island for decades with the Rockefellers, du Ponts, Walkers, Symingtons, and a host of other coup plotters, false flag planners and general Robber Baron types of the 20th century .
 JFK Assassination of course occurred a long time ago . Probably Not a Coincidence .
 More time has passed between the Trump Coup Era and the JFK Assassination than the time that passed between WWI and the end of WWI or maybe a Wilson coup, as some of have considered .
 His father Muelelr II was a World War II Navy veteran and an executive at DuPont . His father was a WWII Navy veteran .
 He was nominated as FBI director by President George W Bush . He was unanimously confirmed by the Senate .
 Glorian Donegan was placed in a DuPont workers family in South Carolina after Festus died in North Carolina, Greensborough area . It was the DuPonts that “rescued” the Von Trapps and placed Glorian donegan in a South Carolina family .
 Trump wants the CIA to cooperate with Russia. Russia always ruins it. The Washington Post WAPO .
 The Trump wing of the GOP tend to like Europe United including East, Central, Western, and the Three Crowns, and Latim America . Trump wing tends to favor Europe United .
 The British and Oil Money collective want Middle Eastern interference and overthrow as foreign policy and that does not sit well with many . The UK and oil money collective want Mideast interference and overthrowing as foreign .
 Many European countries have close ties to North Africa across the Med . Many African and North African countries bitterly resent the USA and align with Russia for the same reasons Cuba chose to .
 THe Bush wing of the party is at odds with these mavericks from Cartel CIA activities . Cartel members of the Bush-led party are at odds at odds .
 Billy Bush grandson of Prescott Bush went after Trump and finaly got Mike Pence onto the ticket as some sort of likable Minister to the ailing and failing Donald J Trump bringing Evangelicals in . Michelle Field part black Christian and Billy Bush part black .
 William Hall Bush is the Grandson of Prescott Bush . He is an American radio and television host . He has hosted a radio show on CNN .
 He later served as Chief of Staff of the U.S. Air Force from 1961 to 1965 . He was the first Air Force chief of staff of the Air Force .
 He commanded the 305th Operations Group from October 1942 until September 1943, and the 3rd Air Division in the European theatre of World War IT until August 1944, when he was transferred to the China Burma India Theater .
 Edward Lansdale was born in Detroit, Michigan, on 6th February, » 1908 . He was born on February 6th, 1908 . Lansdale is one of the most famous soldiers in the world .
 During the Second World War Lansdale was a member of the » Office of Strategic Services . He was given the "" responsible for espionage and for helping the resistance movement in * Europe . Lansdale served in the Army during World War II .
 Lansdale was sent by General Charles 1 Willoughby to the Philippines after the war . According to Sterling Seagrave, Lansdale served in the Philippines during World War II .
 Cuba, particularly those with middle-class professions, had opposed Fulgencio Batista . They had then become disillusioned with Fidel Castro because of his betrayal of the democratic process . Cuba's middle class had opposed the Batista regime .
 Allen W Dulles, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency, initiated talks with two leading figures of the Mafia, Johnny Roselli and Sam Giancana .
 Robert Maheu, a veteran of CIA counter-espionage activities, was nstructed to offer the Mafia $150,000 to kill Fidel Castro . He was a CIA counterintelligence veteran .
 The Mafia provided CIA with a credible cover story . The dvantage of employing the Mafia for this work is that it provided CIA . CIA used Mafia to provide cover story. The Mafia was used to provide CIA with credibility .
 If the assassins were killed or captured the media would accept that the Mafia were working on their own . oOo The Federal Bureau of Investigation had to be brought into this plan as part of the deal involved protection against investigations against the » Mafia in the United States .
 Government officials, spies, and operatives tend not to be sufficiently competent to pull off the murder of a president and then mount a subsequent cover-up . But as I spent more time investigating and reporting national security matters, I came to the realization that .
 Still, I’ve resisted getting drawn too far into the Kennedy conspiracy debates-a true black hole . Still, he’s resisting getting drawn into the JFK conspiracy debates .
 Rudy2s blog is a Archstone of for Pillars of Truth . I find myself agreeing with something I heard in a DVD of lectures in philosophy when I think of Rudy2’s blog, and the constraint the brevity of life places on my learning .
 Richard Lighthouse has FOXP2 Minimal Brain Disorder gene . My personal experience and research is that | carry the FOXP12 . gene .
 Our brain line is used in a quality Watchlist ‘ iyvialonctrhas Gangstalking, Aeinging Dente to Targeted Indivivaty control factory line . This program exists to hide who the CIA created as sleepers to be secret Windsor twins .
 Jeffery slept in the kitchen because his daughter had wet the bed in his own bed . Jeffery had to sleep in his kitchen because of his daughter's wet bed . The mother and daugher were struck after days of surveillance .
 With FOXP2 child’s development expressions, things like bed wetting or sucking thumb lat in life as well as dry throat are problems . Bed wetting is among the most common reasons for bed wetness .
 President John F Kennedy was born in Inglewood, California, in 1961 . Secret Service Agent Gerald ""Jerry" Behnand Presidential Assistant Dave Powers Fitzgerald Kennedy @JFK.35TH.
 This is why it was necessary to translate them into other languages (mainly in Spanish, in French, in German, in Italian and sometimes in Greek) so that they can be read by the greatest number of people worldwide . This is where they were translated into Spanish, French, German
 Dieser Blog hat das Publikum iiber Stalking durch organisierte Banden durch Organisation Banden . Angriffe aus der Ferne mit elektromagnetischen und neurologischen Energiewaffen gerichteten E
 Das ist der Grund, dass man sie auf andere Sprachen tibersetzen sollte (hauptsachlich in Spanisch, Franzosisch, Deutsch, Italienisch und manchmal in Griechisch)
 Este blog tiene como objetivo informar y sensibilizar al ptblico sobre el acoso organizado . Sobre las agresiones a distancia por armas electromagnéticas y neuroldgicas por
 In 2001, Director Christopher Wray III (FBI Director AUGUST 2, 2017 Present upon him replacing James Comey and William Pellham Barr replacing Jeff Sessions) joined the Office of the Deputy Attorney General, where he served as associate deputy attorney general .
 This matches the time when bizarre and strange harassment of me began on the streets, the seeming impression I was imagining it all, and a bizzare component of race baiting fights with high intensity coming at me (or sexually abusive poses or activities near me) People groping themselves,
 I have always been suspicious of Sociology, some weird ghosting of all my work by the FBI or State Dept, of Barrack Obama and bizarre ghosting by him . Lefist racily collectivist transhumanism social justice applications of concepts I research and argued .
 In fact, the discussion of these techniques occurs in the context of using them in lieu of ‘traditional law enforcement” against people suspected of ordinary crimes or, more broadly still, ‘hacktivism” .
 This is a copy of a signed and notarized letter from "Tara Potter" from the United States Special Forces . The U.S. Special Forces were involved in the death of “Tara’s” death . This is the first time the U.
 It is my belief that the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency succeeded in its stated purpose, , of creating a pathogen deadly primarily to people of color .
 Based on e-mails Hastings sent out shortly before he died about working on a “big story” and needing to go “off the radar,” it has become clear that he was wotried too .
 He retired on October 31, 2001, after more than 30 years with the agency .
 He was a critic of his former employers during the George W Bush administration . Later criticized the 1 NSA’s data-collection policies during the Barack Obama 1 administration . Known for Cryptography, SIGINT analysis, whistleblowing .
 He said he volunteered for the Army during the Vietnam era in order to select work that would interest him rather than be drafted and have no input . He said that he volunteered to do so to avoid being drafted .
 He was found to have strong aptitudes for mathematics, analysis, and code breaking . He served from 1965 to 1969 in the Army Security Agency before going to the NSA in 1970 .
 founded a unit on automating signals intelligence with NSA research chief John Taggart . They are becoming a are hit with painful microwave geopolitical world attacks every day .
 Binney’s NSA career culminated as Technical Leader for intelligence in 1 2001 . Binney's NSA career ended in 2001 .
 In September 2002, he asked the U.S. Defense Department Inspector General to investigate the NSA for allegedly wasting “millions and millions of "" dollars” on Trailblazer, a system intended to analyze mass collection of ' data carried on communications networks such as the Internet .
 FBI confiscated desktop computer, disks, and personal and business records . The FBI confiscated a desktop computer and disks .
 FBI raided the homes of ; Wiebe and Loomis, as well as House Intelligence Committee staffer . Diane Roark, the same morning, was also raided . The FBI raided Roark's home .
 In 2012, Binney and his co; plaintiffs went to federal court to retrieve the confiscated items . Binney's co-petitionants went to court in 2012 to retrieve items .
 Binney is known for making the claim that the NSA collects and stores information about every U.S. communication .
 Binney was invited as a witness by the NSA commission of the German Bundestag . Binney has been invited to testify by the German parliament .
 Der Spiegel wrote, he said that the NSA wanted to have © information about everything . On July 3, » 2014 Der Spiegel . Der Spiegel said that NSA . wanted to . have © . information about . everything about everything.
 In Binney’s view this is a totalitarian 1 approach, which had previously been seen only in dictatorships . Binney's view is that this approach is totalitarian 1.1 .
 He said it is possible in principle to monitor the whole population, abroad and in the U.S., which in his view contradicts the United States * Constitution . Meanwhile, he said that it was possible in . principle to . monitor the entire population . abroad . and in . the U
 The “intelligence” seems to be of the same dubious, politically “fixed” kind used 12 years ago to “justify” the U.S.-led attack on Iraq .
 More than 200,000 ae Targeted Individual s in the U.S., are being tracked and attacked with HighPowered Microwav e weapons, from satellites and cell towers .
 These weapons are controlled from Schriever Air Force Base in Colorado . The weapons were controlled by the Air Force .
 Most people in the world are being precisely tracked by microwave pulses using Lockheed GPS satellites, operated by the United States Space Force, Squadron 2, at Schriever Air Force Base Colorado Springs .
 Targeted Justice points 2 and 3 and 4 sound somewhat paranoid but do seem to be true so they are only summarized here . They include points 2, 3, 4 and 4 that seem to seem to contradict each other's beliefs .
 It is said including by people who spoke to me some sort of electrochemical brain activity sensitive listening system can scan brain activity and by sonically inducing phonics into available anatomical structures or tissue .
 The public will have to speculate, drink beer with Iodine in it or least with deep rich color texture and keep tinfoil on our head .
 Morrison, a shipyard electrician, and Violet Stitt Morrison, who had been a singer and tap dancer in her youth . Morrison was married to an electrician and had a daughter .
 The previous occupant of the s house was the writer Lee Child's father .
 Morrison attended Orangefield Boys Secondary School, leaving in July ; 1960 with no qualifications . Morrison attended the school in Orangefield, West Australia .
 He had been developing his musical interests from an early age and continued playing with the Monarchs part-time . He continued to play part time with the team .
 Young Morrison also played with the Harry Mack Showband, the Great Eight, with his older workplace friend, Geordie Sproule, whom he later named as one of his biggest influences . Young Morrison played with Geordy Spoule in his early career .
 At age 17, Morrison toured Europe for the first time with the Monarchs, now calling themselves the International Monarchs . At age 18, Morrison was in Europe touring with the team .
 This was Morrison's first recording, taking place in November 1963 at Ariola Studios in Cologne with Morrison on saxophone . It made the lower reaches of the German charts .
 72a 'U' released two albums and ten singles, with two more singles released after Morrison departed the band .
 Roseanne Barr was born on November 3, 1952, in Salt Lake City, Utah, to a "" Jewish family . She was born in 1952 .
 She is the oldest of four children born to Helen (née "" Davis), a bookkeeper and cashier, and Jerome Hershel ""Jerry"" Barr, who worked as a salesman .
 Her father's family were Jewish emigrants from Russia, and her maternal grandparents were Jewish . Her maternal grandparents also emigrated from 1 Austria-Hungary and Lithuania .
 Her paternal grandfather changed his 1 surname from ""Borisofsky"" to ""Barr"" upon entering the United States . Her paternal grandmother changed her surname from "Boris ofsky" to "Barr" She is one of the world's most famous women .
 When Barr was three years old, she got Bell's palsy on the left side of her face . Barr was diagnosed with the disease when she was three .
 Barr said, "" my mother called ina ,; rabbi to pray , for me, but » nothing » happened happened . Barr said: "My mother called . ina,; rabbi, to pray, for me. But » nothing . happened happened. Barr said .
 At six, she discovered her first public stage by lecturing at LDS churches around Utah . At six years old, she was elected president of a Mormon youth group .
 At 16 about 1970, Barr was hit by a car; the incident left her with a traumatic brain injury . Barr was struck by the car at 16; she was left with traumatic brain injuries . Barr is best known for her role in the 1980s television series "American Horror Horror Horror
 Her behavior changed so radically that she was institutionalized for eight months at Utah State Hospital . Her behavior was so erratic that she had to be hospitalized .
 Barr told her parents she was going to visit a friend in Colorado for two weeks, but never returned . Barr was 18 when she moved out of her parents' home in 1970 . Barr moved out when she was 18 .
 This book George W Bush Cheney ticket are Traitors to the USA . The book is very beneficial to my theory as being a Pox on the GOP house next to the Obama Jr. House .
 Ginevra King Pirie was an American socialite, debutante and heiress . In 1915, a 16-year-old King met the future novelist F Scott .
 American novelist F Scott Fitzgerald wrote The Great Gatsby . The novel is about the character of Daisy Buchanan, Daisy Buchanan in the novel .
 Fitzgerald became her most persistent gentleman caller . He would later use the courtship as a model for Gatsby’s youthful pursuit of Daisy . Fitzgerald became the most persistent man caller .
 The rule that officers had to wear uniforms at all times, even while socialising, meant that he could disguise the extent of his threadbare poverty from Zelda .
 Goerge W Bush has no Divinci Code like birth month and day but Justice Roberts is married to Jane Sullivan whose birthday is AUGUST 3, 1958 . Barrack Obama Jr. has as well .
 In the Illuminati Spaced Out Aliens blog of Illuminati Shadow Government Linda Newkirk describes the Shadow Government an Allied led anti Russia hemispheric confederation . The Rockefellers landed the Illuminati in Littlke Rock Arkansas, with Camp Pike (Free Mason) and Fort R
 George H. W Bush fell in love with Barbara Pierce after meeting her at a country club dance in 1941 .
 Alberto Gonzales as a profile matter fits the agenda of Lyndon B Johnson, teach of under performing Hispanic children in the Hill Country Texas . e Michael B Mukasey was Attorney General then and although I am pro Jewish and luke war to any Isreal outside of the 1967 boundaries,
 I see the death of White Race nationalists, his and his and my empathizes are with the murdered by the Nazi regime. I empathizes with the murder of White race nationalists. His and his . empathizes . with the . murdered by Nazis .
 After we destroyed their lives, slandered them, planted child porn, got them thrown out of apartment complexes, smeared them, used FBI CIONTELPRO they amounted to nothing . “These two related tribes of people gradually dissimilated over time” “
 The origin and evolution of the list of attorneys to be dismissed remained unclear . It is unclear how many attorneys were dismissed .
 She was the principal deputy director of public affairs for the U.S. Department of Justice . She served under Attorneys General John Ashcroft and Alberto Gonzales .
 As a young man, Sampson served a mission for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints anong Hmong refugees who had emigrated from Laos to Minnesota . Sampson is a member of the Hmong Hmong community in Minnesota .
 Kevin V Ryan is a former U.S. Attorney for the Northern District of California . In 2006 a purge of United States Attorneys at the DOJ 4 ‘N Kevin V . Ryan & J wr. In 2006 the purge of US Attorneys was part of a purge .
 While working with the District Attorney’s Office, he handled a variety of cases including homicides and violent gang prosecutions . While working for the D.A. He handled a number of cases, including homicides .
 Lin Jianhua is a former U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of California . He was born in China in 1959 .
 Southern District of California was Chief of the Major Frauds 1 Section from 1997 to 2000 . He served in the U.S. Southern District from 1997-2000 .
 Lam, a healthcare fraud specialist, had branded herself a champion of these high-impact corporate and public corruption cases . ZWithout Lam, United States Attorney’s Office takes different tack .
 It was obvious 1 to Hewitt’s troops, the defense community and her counterparts at other . federal agencies that priorities were about to shift .
 Tenet Healthcare Corp. announced plans last week to close Daniel Freeman Marina Hospital in Marina del Rey . Tenet plans to close hospital .
 The health system acquired the 166bed hospital last December from Carondelet Health System, a St. Louis-based hospital .
 Ramin Bahrani is an American director and screenwriter . He is the son of Robert F Kennedy Jr. and Cae Bahranis . He has appeared in films such as "Marmo Ramini" and "Ramin's"
 Monica raises the same question on the floor she is still on and Phoebe is in the shadow . Monica raises that same question again on the same floor she was still on . Monica also raises the question in the same spot .
 Leprechaun made in 1993 was #PostConditioning #Propoganda piece that like #AssignmentEarth used goring back into history to examine what was NECCESARY to do . #AssignedEarth used to examine the past and present .
 In the 1981 Irish hunger strike, ten republican prisoners (seven from the Provisional IRA and three from the INLA) died of starvation . George H.W Bush is vice President to Ronald Reagn who a March 1980 assassination attempt survived an assassination attempt .
 Leprechaun set in 1983 is released with Jennifer Aniston help cure retarded Ozzie’s brain with the protection of Sheriff Tripet . The film was released in 1983 and is set to be released in 2015 .
 Justin Paul Theroux is an American i actor, director, producer and screenwriter . He later reconciled his belief in spirituality . Theroux was an early adopter .
 A man and his teenage daughter rent the O’Grady farmhouse for the summer and find the three painters . Jenifer Aniston and her daughter Tory rent the farmhouse and find O'Grady and the painters.
 Dennis Eisman was found shot to /MUrdered his wife death on APRIL 5,.1991 . Eisman found himself in 1992 or was himself found dead, killed by a single bullet in his chest .
 McDonald was convicted in U.S. urdered by District Court of the murders in 1980 and is serving #SS@SSINS or terrorists S ’ three life prison terms. because of Spiro’s history as an intelligence operative. McDonald was found guilty of murder in
 MacDonald was dating multiple women at the time . He resolved to marry Colette upon learning she was pregnant with his child in 1963 .
 Alfred Gatas ‘Freddy’ Kassab marries widowed Alfred Kassab, second husnand to Mildrend Madison Kassab . Mildren husband Edward Cowles Stevenson, died suicide 52, 2, 2. the SECOND Midred husband . Mildrend husband Edward
 Edward Cowles Stevenson, 52, well-known Patchogue restaurant proprietor, was found dead Saturday night in his garage on Potter street, an apparent suicide . Stevenson was found by police at his home in the early hours .
 News of Mr Stevenson’s death shocked many Patchoguers who had known him as a cheerful and friendly man . Mr Stevenson had operated for 28 years with Budd Hildreth of Blue Point, Blue Point .
 Although the club members are Masons, the club itself is not in any way a part of the Masonic Fraternity . Club members are not Masons .
 The FBI denounced Garrison and the prosecution and the arrest of Ferrie and others tied to the case against Shaw . Garrison and Ferrie were arrested in connection with Shaw's murder .
 Many potential witnesses were not available because they had died since the assassination years earlier, during it, and even contemporenous with the prosecution such as Robert F Kennedy who may have and input or recognized matters .
 The CIA and J Edgar Hoover had not disclosed the CIA FBI NSA NSA DOD Secret Service Marine Corps based activities of Oswlad or Shaw . Oswlad and Shaw had not been disclosed .
 LBJ, Rockefeller, Rockefeller of Arkansas, Dean Rusk oil business and its politicians under William King Harvey and General Edward Geary Lansdale . Lansdale was a Secret Team of rouge acts which included the assassination of foreign leaders and figures within the United States itself .
 Bush, LBJ, and the then CIA of the time made access to crime scene and law enforcement where the crime occurred a far reach from Louisiana . The formation of the Louisiana case against its suspects was difficult .
 Earling Carothers Garrison was the District Attorney of Orleans Parish, Louisiana, from 1962 to 1973 . Earling Garrison died October 21, 1992, in New Orleans, Louisiana .
 Shaw was the son of Glaris Lenora Shaw, a United States Marshal, and Alice Shaw . Shaw was a native of Kentwood, Louisiana .
 Brussels, Belgium's capital and largest city, is Brussels . Antwerp, Ghent, Charleroi, Liége, Bruges, Namur, and Leuven are also major cities .
 After World War II, a general strike forced King Leopold III to abdicate in 1951 in favour of his son, Prince Baudouin . Many Belgians felt he had collaborated with Germany during the war .
 Earling Carothers Garrison was the District Attorney of Orleans Parish, Louisiana, from 1962 to 1973 . Garrison was born Earling Earling Garrison in 1921 .
 Perry Russo Russo obtained Perry Russo from Baton Rouge, Louisiana .Russo was an insurance salesman from Louisiana .
 In 1951 he moved to New Orleans where he worked as a pilot for Eastern Air Lines, until losing his job in August 1961, after being arrested twice on morals charges .
 He started as a Senior Member with the Fifth Cleveland Squadron at Hopkins Airport in 1947 . He started with the 5th Cleveland Squadron in 1947.
 Ferrie’s autopsy was performed by Orleans Parish coroner Nicholas Chetta and pathologist Ronald A Welsh . Ferrie was pronounced dead at the scene of his death .
 Ferrie died of a massive cerebral hemorrhage due to a congenital intracranial berry aneurysm that had ruptured at the base of his brain . The doctors concluded that there was no evidence of suicide or murder .
 Few people outside the CIA know the mysterious story of June Cobb . Cobb was one of the bravest and best-placed American spies in the history of the Cold War . Cobb may have been one of America's bravest spies .
 Oswald had traveled to Mexico City, where he had traveled just weeks before the assassination . Oswald's assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, to Cuban diplomats and spies, was seen in Mexico City .
 The White House has not signaled what Trump will do . Trump has for years promoted mostly baseless conspiracy theories, including ' about JFK's assassination'
 Oswald championed the Committee, which Oswald championed in the months before Kennedy’s murder . Committee was in charge of Kennedy's assassination . Committee is the group that Oswald championed . Committee .
 New Orleans DA releases 1956 photo of Lee Harvey Oswald proving membership in Civil Air Patrol . Oswald, for as yet undetermined motives, had acted alone in killing John Kennedy .
 Oswald was named the assassin of the late President John F Kennedy by the Warren —E—AE——E—E — —E —E-E ——E—ESE—_ETET_E_E _ TET _T TE _T TET_T T_
 The DA said the photograph of Oswald was probably taken sometime between 1955 and 1957 . Oswald is believed to have been Oswald's partner at the time of the shooting .
 He served in the United States Army Air Forces during World War IT . He joined the year before the attacks on Pearl Harbor .
 District Attorney says he plans to arrest several persons on conspiracy charges . The New Orleans District Attorney added several persons are expected to be arrested .
 I am a first hand witness to one otherwise unexplained piece of this, sufficeint a letter to solve the phrase missiong most of ite letters and can explain many scenes in this movie .
 He fails in the footsoldier battle of him against Claw Shaw, later found a CIA operative, but gains an indictment of the FBI, CIA, and the United States government hiding its corrupt acts .
 The story is told starting with the death of Rose Cherami who I believe » can explain as a footsoldier of my “peoples” cause . One scene, an advert then the second part of the clip .
 She knew of certain families carrying FOXP2 Minimal Brain Disorder and ‘ research of us and secret studies she was carrying news to JFK that the "" plan was to kill the FOXPs and use the non expressing family members for sleeper agents .
 Barrack Obama Jr was taken to the White House nursery and groomed by the Chicago Trinity Baptist Church as a sleeper . Free Mason Scotish Rites planned the very same thing . This was the same same Barrack .
 Kevin Costner as Jim Garrison . Kevin Bacon as Willie O’ Keefe . Tommy Lee Jones as Clay Shaw / Clay Bertrand . Clay Shaw likely gave himself, or British Intelligence gave Shaw the .
 Ed Donegan knew that he knew that man. Donald Sutherland played Mr X I . Walter Matthau as Senator Russell B Long . Donald Sutherland as Mr X . I .
 Prouty served as Chief of Special Operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff under President John F Kennedy . He was the inspiration for the character “Mr X” in Oliver Stone’s film JFK .
 A former colonel in the United States Air Force, he retired from military service to become a bank executive . He is a former colonel .
 This person who has info on who killed JFK was likely the person, neighbor, of us in Cape Cod we ice skated with on frozen cranberry fields, sailed with on Cape Cod bay, and dined with in each other’s homes .
 Garrison became convinced that a group of right-wing activists were involved in a conspiracy with elements of the Central Intelligence Agency to kill Kennedy . Garrison: "Right-wing activist activists, including Banister, Ferrie and Clay Shaw, were involved"
 Garrison would later claim that the motive for the assassination was anger over Kennedy’s attempts to obtain a peace settlement in both Cuba and Vietnam . Garrison later claimed that the motivation for the murder was anger .
 Garrison also believed Banister, Shaw, and Ferrie had conspired to set up Oswald as a patsy in the JFK assassination . Garrison believed that Banister and Shaw conspired with others to kill Oswald .
 FBI Director J Edgar Hoover was impressed by Banister’s work . Banister was promoted to run the FBI unit in Butte, Montana, in 1938 .
 Banister was Assistant Superintendent of the New Orleans Police Department in 1955 . He was given the task of investigating organized crime and corruption within the police force . Banister moved to Louisiana in January 1955 .
 It later emerged that he was also involved in looking at the role left-wing political activists were playing in the struggle for civil rights in New Orleans .
 Banister was suspended in 1957 after pulling a gun in public in a bar and threatening a waiter . In March 1957, Banister pulled a gun and threatened a waiter with a gun . He was suspended from the job in March 1957 .
 When he refused to be transferred to the N.O.P.D.’s Planning Department, he was dismissed from the force .
 I state this based on my own experiences with the U.S. Legal system . This is not the first time I've seen this type of legal system .
 Demolition workers in uniform and hardhats blast mountains and buildings to be destroyed . Demolition crews blast mountains, buildings to destroy them .
 The FBI, CIA, U.S. DOD including its United States PHS Commissioned Corps uses its explosive weaponry, available criminals, to blast dissidents on Kill Lists . The FBI and CIA use available criminals to blow dissidents .
 I and other Targeted people assert lethal means of misconduct are used against us by assets who are either to do us harm in arbitrary treatment of us . Or arbitrary beneficial treatment of CIA backed persons, such as rigging trading or business deals or commercial opportunities on their behalf .
 Ruby as used against JFK sounds like it was a plan in the tank before Oswald was ever arrested . Ruby was used in the assassination of JFK JFK . Oswald was never arrested .
 Front companies to conduct arbitrary acts under such as Business International Corporation, BBRDW, East-West Center, USAID, Peace Corps, Crane Group, etc., were well known CIA front companies .
 Following the conflict, he returned to Columbia, where he earned an M.A. in English in 1950 . He completed course requirements for a Ph.D. in the discipline while also teaching in the English department .
 LBJ is a school teacher of poor Hispanics in 1928 and is secretly backed by Joseph Kennedy Sr. Joseph Kennedy Jr. Sr. is secretly backing LBJ . LBJ was a schoolteacher of poor Hispanic in 1928 .
 Lyndon B Johnson, Franklin Anderson station chief of Sri Lanka, Peace Corps Sargent Shriver, Peter Lawford, Mafia and 33s cooked up a plan staring at least as far back as 1959 . JFK and RFK and Ted Kennedy would oppose as they slowly learned of it .
 Although he would not run for president until 1960, John F Kennedy began speculating with family members and aides as early as 1954 about a future run .
 Lyndo n Afo)sats o}a taught in Cotull d, Texas . He was president of the University of Texas .
 Hitler and Hermann Goring with SA stormtroopers in front of Frauenkirche, Nuremberg in 1928 . A permanent group of party members would serve as the Saalschutzabteilung for the DAP .
 A County Health group (I photographed their a frame mobile sign at the time) does gymnastics along my path to TMOBLE to replace my phone chip . Hitler redefined the group as the “Gymnastic and Sports Division” of the party in 1921 .
 The SA were colloquially called Brownshirts because of the colour of their uniform’s shirts . Similar to Benito Mussolini's blackshirts . Same thing happens on my way to gym V2Qa8 .
 Hitler convinced the leadership committee to invest in an advertisement in the Miinchener Beobachter for a mass meeting in the Hofbrauhaus, to be held on October 16, 1919 . Hitler, with an eye to helping the party to grow through propaganda, convinced leadership committee
 The next year, on FEBRUARY 24, he announced the party’s Twenty-Five Point program at a mass meeting of some 2,000 people at the Hofbrduhaus .
 American should forget everything to assure elections are won by patriotic and they were taught or felt about honorable candidates that are not traitors to the aie f Ind d d United S integrity, honesty, guilt or innocence .
 Every American should forget everything they were taught or felt about integrity, honesty, guilt or innocence within the FBI and other divisions of the U.S. Department of Justice nation .
 In fact, many of us see our elected representatives abandoning the principles and values set forth in the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the U.S. Many Americans see their elected representatives abandon those principles .
 Eric Charles Pearson is NOT suicidal . Disclaimer: I'm NOT suicidal. I can assure everyone that I'm not .
 Whistleblower Robyn Lee Gritz is organizing this fundraiser . Gritz says she was discriminated and retaliated against by the FBI after 16+ years of service . She is organizing the fundraiser .
 Police forces across the U.S. have been transformed into extensions of the military . The War On The American People by Police forces is on the rise . Police forces in the United States have been turned into extensions .
 Little Rock is also home to Nelson Rockefeller, Democrat, the Clintons, and Free Masonry . Camp Pike Fort Robinson is named after Masons and Little Newkirk who describes this as her Illuminati home and free masonary command center .
 CIA programs around the world are cartel tied and refelect long term plans . The CIA is trying to manage and preempt warfare from inside masonry and both oil, religion, and race are war causes .
 ProgressiveChristianity.org, Southern Baptists, Salvation Army, Sotish Rites, Vatican, Anglicans, and others may be axis of secretive power competing for power in the USA .
 The Lord told Ron He was on His way from South Africa to the New iJ erusalem . Ron says he was told by the Lord that he was going to be in South Africa . The Lord said Ron was on his way to New Jerusalem .
 Later, in 1989, I heard him speak in Hendersonville, North Carolina at a Church. I felt like I would like to do something to help him out someday, but at the time I did not have the funds to do so. Later, I felt that I would ' like
 Your web host, Kevin Fisher, with Ron Wyatt in 1997, Nashville, Tennessee . Ron was the most humble, God-fearing man I have ever met . i .
 In 1977, Ron sold his farm and used that money for this work . He did not have health or life insurance, as he would give the money he would spent on insurance premiums to i the Lord’s work .
 Only a few today can see that Ron was a faithful i follower of the Lord . Ron was known for his love of Jesus and his faith .
 The satanic leader of the new world order for the British Pilgrims Society, directed by Mammon at the Bank of England .
 The ROTHSCHILD FAMILY holds about 80% of the world’s wealth . DEMAND REPARATIONS FROM THE ROTCHCHILD DYNASTY FOR CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY .
 One family has the ability to feed, cloth, and settle every man, woman, and child on the plant, if they wanted to . They are so rich that this one family has been able to feed and settle all of their family members .
 As our readers know, we do not present information that cannot be supported with primary evidence . King Edward VIII met with Austrians on DEC13 1936 as Festus Gainey died in North Carolina .
 The amount of evidence is voluminous, according to the latest findings . However, in these latest findings, the evidence is not limited to the study .
 Out team is busy processing the evidence so that it cannot be scraped down by globalist shills . Globalists are busy processing evidence to ensure it is not scraped .
 Sins like incest, pedophilia, adultery and homosexuality are their sacraments . Sins such as incest and pedophilia are their 'sacraments' Sins are like incest and homosexuality .
 All Rothschild offshore bank accounts must be seized to pay reparations for the damages that their frauds have foisted upon the world . Rothschild offshore accounts must also be seized, says David Cameron . The Rothschilds' frauds must be paid reparations .
 Europe and the Middle East were also battling demonic principalities and powers working to pull humanity into the abyss in the decades surrounding America’s Declaration of Independence .
 This sect abandoned Judaism for a 1 “higher Torah” based on the Zohar, the most important work in the Kabbala, the Jewish mystical movement . This sect of Jews abandoned Judaism to a 1 "higher Torah" based on Zodar .
 Jacob Frank was a proponent of an antinomian anarchist approach to Jewish law . Frank rejected all the restrictions and restrictions of Jewish law, including the laws of incest . Frank was an anti-anarchist and anti-Semitic leader .
 Jacob Frank was imprisoned for 13 years in the fortress of Czestochowa, Poland . He and his followers decided to convert to the predominant religion of their region .
 "They should secretly continue their debauchery with his messianic blessing," he said . Then, they should continue with his blessing, he said, with his 'messianian blessing' Then, he added, "Then they should secretly . Then they should . Continue their deb
 In business that meant say whatever it took to get the deal even if it meant breaking promises when expedient . In business, that meant saying whatever was necessary to get a deal .
 Sabbatian Frankists are well documented in the Encyclopedia Judaica and in the writings of Israeli academics . They are also known in Israel .
 Inanutshell, these groups practiced incest, pedophilia, adultery and homosexuality and were otherwise depraved . They practiced incest and other depraved practices .
 They ran afoul of Christian and Jewish rabbinical tribunals alike, including the Inquisition . The rabbis' rabbis were known to have run afoul with both sides of the law .
 Coincidentally, with the benefit of hindsight and current geopolitical events, a number of heretofore | unconnected threads come together at this time in history . I | Coincided , with the . benefit of . hindsight and . current geopolitical . events, I . find a number
 Hell Fire hedonist club for the aristocracy includes John Wilkes, ancestor of John Booth, Abraham Lincoln’s assassin . The club was founded by the family of Booth's assassin, Booth Booth .
 Hyam Salomon was a Rothschild agent in America; First Bank of America . Alexander Hamilton was a co-agent for the Rothschild .
 When America Emerged to Counter a Satanic Global Takeover That’s Still in Process. When America emerged to counter a Satanic global takeover . When America emerged to counter the Satanic global Takeover that's still in process .
 "They kept their enemies confused by refining the art of saying the opposite of what they really think," says President Obama .
 If a Moslem was coercing them to convert to Islam, or Christian to Christianity, they converted without resistance, on the surface, while maintaining their Sabbatist beliefs and immoral practices .
 Frankists seek redemption through ritual sexual ecstasy and moral opposites . Frankists sought redemption through rituals of sexual ecstasy, sexual ecstasy . Frankistists seek redeem through ritual sex ecstasy .
 They were a belief system of opposites, 1 much like our maddening self-styled elitists today . They were an opposites - much like today's self-stupid elitist today .
 Critical 18th Century Years When America Emerged to Counter a Satanic Global Takeover That’s Still in Process. That”s still in process. Critical 18-century years when America emerged to counter Satanic global takeover .
 In 1973, British Lord Victor Rothschild ordered an official family timeline . Rothschild family timeline was created by the Rothschild family .
 The Rothschild Report to the UK Parliament recommended a complete overhaul of research and development investing by the British government with a focus on computers, communications and biowarfare . This occurred just after the Rothschild Report was recommended by the UK parliament .
 The Bacharach family is a rabbinical dynasty in Frankfurt, Worms, Poland . Bacharaches are a family of rabbinical rabbis .
 For context, the Frankfurt Jewish community was just being established then . For context: The community in the city was just starting to be established .
 Wikipedia participates in this Rothschild misdirection . We first note that Wikipedia participated in this misdirection.
 Until the Romans arrived ' , the area had been controlled by various Germanic and Celtic tribes . The Romans arrived .
 We see it as misdirection about Frankfurt’s true history and the central role of the ; Rothschilds in world corruption . The Rothschilds are a central part of the . central role in the . world corruption, we say .
 Evidence of a Jewish community in Frankfurt, Germany, dates to the 12th century . Evidence of Jewish community dates to 12th Century . Frankfurt is a city on the Main river in western Germany .
 At that time, a small group of Jewish merchants from Worms settled in the town, and quickly flourished and grew wealthy . The town was founded by the Jewish community of Worms, Germany .
 Jews had been in Frankfurt prior to this period as well, but never as official residents . Frankfurt had long been a market town, and Jews visited to trade there as early as tenth century .
 Eichanan had alias names Elchanan ben Uri, Han, Hon, Hane, Elkan, Elkaan Bauer, Eichan, Elchechanan, Han and Hane . He was also known as Elkanan Ben Uri, Elchan Han,
 Bacharach has been a family with a strong rabbinical heritage . We will not delve further into the family name other than to say it has been an important family .
 Many Bacharachs emigrated to America in the late 1800s . Bacharacs were influential in the United States .
 Rothschilds have totally hidden their real family name “Bacharach,” their depraved Frankist religion, and their Khazarian nomadic roots . The Rothschilds are totally hidden from their real name Bacharach .
 They moved in their crypto-Bacharach family Fifth column into America in the 1880s . They were part of the exodus of their fellow Khazarian Jews from Odessa and climes . Then, they moved into the United States .
 Their sinister promotion of British Zionism and a new world order in conspiracy with the Pilgrims Society must be evaluated in a whole new light .
 Rothschilds must be unwound and prosecuted as satanic oppressors of humanity . Now the Rothschilds are unwound, they must be . prosecuted .
 She had to flee with her family in infancy during the Second World War . She was raised in Helsinki and had to be raised in Finland during the war .
 Luukanen-Kilde claimed to have been ""rescued"" from danger by extraterrestrials . She claimed she had esoteric skills and knowledge as a result of her relationship with them .
 She said that there was a secret exchange program between humans and aliens that was being deliberately suppressed by Western governments . The program was being suppressed by the United States, she said .
 LuukanenKilde also said that secret military and intelligence agencies were practising mind control technology on the world population using cell phones and supercomputers .
 Finland's Department of Environmental Health and Health Education, Finland, 1978 . Acting director of Department Environmental Health & Health Education in Finland, Finland . 1978 .
 Chief medical chief delegate of Finland, Finland, World Health Organization/Tropical Medicine, Geneva, 1978—1979 . Chief Medical Chief Medical Delegate of Finland for Finland .
 Rauni-Leena Luukanen Kilde’s “Bright Light on Black Shadows” Earth's population using swine flu vaccine was being carried out by the WHO, Henry Kissinger and the Bilderberg Group .
 Dr. Ghaffar Hussain was a physician at the United Christian Hospital in Lahore, Pakistan, 1968 . He was also adviser to the International Red Cross in Malaysia, Indonesia, 1979 .
 Rauni Kilde’s chapter 18 here because it is an instruction manual for community gang stalkers . Kilde's chapter 18 is a guide guide to community gang stalking .
 These same techniques were evidently also used in the FBI’s COINTELPRO and Operation Gladio/Stay Behind Operations in Europe between about 1950 and 1990 .
 Gladio/Stay Behind functioned secretly and illegally throughout Europe for four decades, when it was exposed in 1990 by Italian Prime Minister Andriotti . The top-secret operations went on, officially undetected, for decades .
 Finland was a failed attempt to establish a monarchy in Finland in the aftermath of the Finnish Declaration of Independence from Russia in December 1917 and the Finnish Civil War from January-May 1918 .
 Finland began the process of turning Finland into a kingdom and creating a monarchy . The victorious Whites in the Parliament of Finland were victorious in the process .
 Finland was legally a kingdom for over a year, that was headed by a regent . The king-elect never reigned nor came to Finland following Germany's defeat in World War I, and republican victories in subsequent elections resulted in the country becoming a republic . Finland became a republic in
 Finnish Reds on friendly terms with Soviet Russia fought Finnish Whites who allied with the German Empire . During the Finnish Civil War of 1918, Finnish Reds fought against the Finnish Whites .
 Direct aid from the German Baltic Sea Division aided the Whites who won the war . Direct aid helped the Whites win the war with the Germans .
 The provisional government was formed after the Grand Duchy of Finland's declaration of independence . It leaned heavily toward the Finnish right and included a number of monarchists .
 The Finnish parliament drew up plans to create a Finnish monarchy on the legal theory that the Swedish Constitution of 1772 was still in effect . There had been an extended interregnum with no monarch on the throne in Finland .
 Prince Frederick Charles of Hesse was elected to the throne of Finland on 9 October 1918 by the Finnish parliament . He never took the position nor traveled to Finland .
 Finnish leaders as well as the population belatedly came to understand the grave situation their German allies were in . The wisdom of electing a German prince as Germany was about to lose World War I was called into question .
 Germany itself became a republic and deposed Kaiser Wilhelm II, and signed an armistice with the Allies in November . Germany became an independent republic and a republic in 1945 .
 The victorious Western powers informed the Finnish government that the independence of Finland would only be recognized if it abandoned its alliance with Germany . Finland's independence was only recognized by the West if it was recognized .
 In December 1918 Frederick Charles renounced the throne and the Baltic Sea Division withdrew from Finland . As a result, in December 1918, the Finnish royal family renounced their throne .
 Finnish republicans won a crushing victory in the March 1919 election . With the Finnish left and socialists able to vote, republicans took control of Finland .
 Finland's status as a republic was confirmed in the Finnish Constitution of 1919 . Finland became a republic in 1919 .
 She was harassed, defamed, tortured, and eventually, on Feb., 2015, murdered in this program . She was harassed, threatened, tortured and murdered .
 Neither Kilde nor her publisher were/are native English speakers, there are minor grammatical errors in the text .
 To make the text read more smoothly, I occasionally add additional words, which I place in parentheses . I occasionally use additional words in parentheses to make it easier to read .
 Kilde does not specify where she obtained this instruction manual or who authored it . Kilde says she does not know who authored the instruction manual .
 As Chief Medical Officer for Northern Finland, she was invited to many open and secret conferences . However, as an “insider’s” she was an ‘insider,’ who attended many secret conferences.
 The author does not divulge the author of this document in order to protect her informant . Doubtless, she does not disclose the author .
 Many phrases and spellings are peculiar to the British form of the English language . I note that many phrases and spells are peculiar .
 OR, it could reflect the fact that the original document was written by British military-intelligence operatives . Or, it may reflect that it could have been written by a British intelligence operative .
 There are obvious comparisons to the CIA’s KUBARK torture manual, which has been employed in Vietnam, Latin America, the Middle East, and indeed, in CIA “black sites”/” extraordinary rendition” centers throughout the world .
 Senior German military figures later said that ; it would have proved near impossible due to the superiority of British air » and naval power . Several senior German military . figures said that . it would not have proved impossible .
 GB were published, to be given to German officers in the event of an invasion . They were given to officers to prepare for invasion .
 Othmer » became a leader in the pro-Nazi group Friends of New Germany in the mid-’30s . He later led the German-American Bund, which later became the Bund of Germany .
 Knoxville was near ; Alcoa, a major supplier of material for war planes . Knoxville, Tennessee, was a major source of materials for planes . The city was also a major hub for the World War II .
 In the summer of 1944, the FBI was trying to root out agents of the Abwehr, Nazi Germany’s intelligence organization . In the weeks just after D-Day, 1944, in the summer just after the war, they were trying to find out what was going on
 Agent Felt, who had become the FBI’s associate director, was more concemed about the clandestine machinations of his own government . Three decades after the war, Felt was more concerned about his government's secret operations .
 Hoover’s right hand man for decades, Tolson was in failing health and unable to carry out his duties . Hoover's right-hand man was in poor health and was unable to . carry out duties .
 Richard Gid Powers wrote that Hoover installed Felt to rein in William C Sullivan’s domestic spying operations . Sullivan had been engaged in secret unofficial work for the White House . Felt was installed in order to stop Sullivan's domestic spying .
 Nixon spoke to Dean about Felt’s acting as an informant, and mentioned that he had never met him . Nixon said that he never met Felt, who was an informant .
 It is hard to know what Schwarzenegger knew or when he knew it, even RFK did not understand until 1968 and then partially, but the magnetism towards the British camp and allegiance was possible as an affect on Schwarzenegger . Even RFK I am absolutely sure did not know until 1968 .
 His Rock and Hard Place disaster in history he has no way out of is best understood in a view of the play of Romeo and Juliet . He has been in a 'rock and hard place' in history, but there is no easy way out .
 Juliet Capulet is the 13-year-old daughter of Capulet, the play’s female protagonist . Juliet is the daughter of the female protagonist of the play's female protagonist.
 Romeo Montague the son is the play’s male protagonist . House of Montague is the title of the play's title .
 Bush and Barr families are agreeing, not feuding, Capulets and Montagues . Bush and Donald Barr families agreed not to be feuding . Barr: "I'm not a Capulet, not a Montague, I'm a Montagu."
 CIA backed sleepers for the 21st Century. A love child they will groom is a love child . CIA-backed sleepers will groom the child of their own .
 Barrack OBama Jr will be one of a moderate leftist who can displace far Leftist socialist and communist governments and lead them back to the Right . He will be able to displace leftist socialist governments and return them to the right .
 Bush with Protestant or Universalists religions are going to sort of create a love child not actually of their own biology but some shelf DNA for a child . That child will be Barrack Obama Jr. Obama Jr., the president's first child .
 In Arnold Schwartzeneggers field of life he is in Eugenics program with England he loves and that program not concerned to much about strict Roman Catholic beliefs on assasination, suicide, or reproductive rights .
 Bush, Rockefeller, ROthschilds, British Pilgrim Society, Council on Foreign Relations, Trilateral Commision, Bilderburg, and a large conspiracy he is in wants to take Romeo and Juliet's love child and place it into power in Indonesia, Cuba, or wherever .
 As dumb luck would have it the Kennedy’s are strict proud anti British IRA type Roman Catholics who had to be assasinated . The Kennedy's are strict anti-IRA type Catholics .
 Der Governator has to go and does like the Kennedys family functions . But he and Peter Lawford know all about the goings on at the Rich Weirdo’s estate .
 Arnold Schwartzengger is a fusion of criminality and possibly tied to Gym Stalk Waltham murders and other acts of terror . In the architecture described above in the graphic exhibit, the architecture is thought to be connected to the Gym Stalker Walthams murders . Schwartz
 He has a loyalty to Great Britain and resent to Nazis which arose in what he likely considered a populist movement which should have been stopped by elites of the world . He has been loyal to Britain .
 The Kennedy Family Assassinations are setup by longest reigning of Kingpins William Barr . William Barr is the longest reigning Kingpin of the Kennedy dynasty . The Kennedy family assassination was setup by William Barr.
 Donald Barr was the Free Mason Kingpin of the Scotish Rites Free Masons . Underneath Barr was Thorkil Kristensen, London School of Economics, Oil and Overthrow Incorporated under the names Zapata Oil, Standard Oil, British Patroleum .
 Operatives J Edgar Hoover, James Jesus Angleton, and others explain the Middle East North Africa, Australia, Ireland, Indonesia, Hawaii plans to get the Kennedy family and get an early sign off but later the Troubles in Belfast will break the plan apart .
 Eunice Kennedy daughter Maria Shriver will tie him by family and his own acts and British Commonwealth involvement into the full fabric of events .
 Donegan and Windsor DNA conducted by Deep State Assassination Overthrow work . Some sleepers will be groomed with bastard children of Windsor Kutschera hidden from public identity . As part of the DNA work some sleepers are groomed .
 Seargemt Shriver is working with East-West Center, LBJ, Crane Suherto Group CIA, NSA for sleeper leader who will grow up abroad into Regime Change inside foreign hostile nations . Shriver: "Seargemt. Shriver's goal is to create
 The only child of Lieutenant General Sir Sydney Turing Barlow Lawford, KBE (1865-1953 C) Born in London in 1923, he was the only child . He was born in 1923 .
 Being tested for propagation of FOXP2 Minimal Brain Dysfunction propagation in gene pools larger and more diverse . The Windsor London KE Family line is being tested for propagating FOXP 2 Minimal brain Dysfunction .
 Tom Donegan and Glorian Donegan are writing on the Rocky Horror wall as a CSection is done . A baby hung by the ankle is brand spanking new into the world, that being a new experiment .
 Most FBI Directors come from the families which rean the entire conspiracy like Free Mason Grand Master DuPont family of Manhattan Project, the Bush family of Office of Scientific Research, etc., and the Espionage Wetdivision are tied to leak containment as well as assassination and regime change has been INS
 The truth my family knows and abuse we have been through is why I think the USA and FBI “have it in for me” and my book as they cover-up they needed Roman Catholic United States officials out of the way, like the Donegans, Kennedys�
 Tied to assasination if bastard children seem usable, not with recognizable family trait. Not with recognizable . trait. Tied . to assassination . If bastard children are usable, they seem usable .
 Bush, Lyndon Johnson, and other families were working on were likely working with him too . Bush, LBJ, and others likely working on the project .
 The Republic of German-Austria attempted to form a union with Germany in 1918 . The Treaty of Saint Germain and the Treaty of Versailles forbade both the union and the continued use of the name “GermanAustria” and stripped Austria of some of its territories
 After WWI Germany was constrained from it Austria-Hungarian-Gernman central might of Europe . Adolph Hitler wanted that central European power and position back and ethnic protection of central European DNA and political nationalism .
 In 1925 the former centrail Euoropean family Windsors had adopted England as a home and adopted the area of Windosr Palace as a name for themselves . The so called Royal greates carried a minor genetic flaw which tends to dampen many life activities such as rigorous
 Underground railroad formed in 1925 -1936 bringing many to the USA or London including the Von TRapps, and their soon family members born in the USA in 1926 .
 Eugenics and Race become a major feature of racial war lines as well as political phiilosophy war lines . Genetics a factor in Royal DNA and whether royals would lose throwns over genes if known .
 He entered another bodybuilding contest in Graz, at Steirerhof Hotel, where he placed second . He placed second in a contest held at the same hotel .
 He was voted “best-built man of Europe’s Europe” in bodybuilding circles . His bodybuilding success made him famous in body building circles .
 Schwarzenegger made his first plane trip in 1966, attending the NABBA Mr Universe competition in London . Schwarzenegger attended the competition in 1966 . Schwarzenegger made the trip to London in 1964 .
 He placed second in the Mr Universe competition, not having the muscle definition of American winner Chester Yorton . He was beaten by the American winner .
 Charles “Wag’s” Bennett, one of the judges at the 1966 competition, was impressed with Schwarzenegger and offered to coach him . Bennett was impressed by Schwarzenegger and he offered to help him in the event .
 Bennett invited Schwarzenegger to stay in his family home above one of his two gyms in Forest Gate, London . Schwarzenegger had little money, Bennett invited him to stay at the family home .
 Schwarzenegger concentrated on improving the muscle definition and power in his legs . Yorton’s leg definition had been judged superior, and Schwarzenegger was given a training program .
 Schwarzenegger stayed in the East End of London to improve his grasp of the English language . Schwarzenegger stayed at the end of his filming career in London .
 When you're the age I was then, you’re always looking for approval, for love, for attention and also for guidance . When you were the age you were always looking to be accepted, he says .
 The Bennett family fulfilled all the needs of the Bennett family, says the author . "Now, looking back, I see that . looking back," she says .
 Schwarzenegger met Reg Park at Bennett’s home in 1966 . Schwarzenegger had the opportunity to meet childhood idol Reg Park, who became his mentor .
 Schwarzenegger won the title for the first time in 1967 at the age of 20 . Schwarzenegger was the youngest ever Mr Universe winner at the time of his first victory .
 Schwarzenegger then flew back to Munich, where he attended a business school and worked in a health club . Schwarzenegger returned to London in 1968 to win his next Mr Universe title . Schwarzenegger then returned to Munich to attend business school .
 He trained at Gold's Gym in Venice, Los Angeles, California, under Joe Weider’s supervision . There he trained under Weider's supervision at Gold’'s Gym .
 From 1970 to 1974, one of Schwarzenegger’s weight training partners was Ric Drasin, a professional wrestler . Drasin designed the original Gold's Gym logo in 1973 . Schwarzenegger's weight training partner was Drasin .
 Schwarzenegger also became good friends with professional wrestler Superstar Billy Graham . Schwarzenegger became close friends with Billy Graham, a professional wrestler .
 One of the first competitions he won was the Junior Mr Europe contest in 1965 . One of his first competitions was to win Junior European Mr Europe .
 He would go on to compete in many bodybuilding contests, and win most of them . He would compete in bodybuilding competitions .
 Lee Haney won his eighth consecutive Mr Olympia title in 1991 . His bodybuilding victories included five Mr Universe wins (4 NABBA , 1 IFBB ), and seven Mr Olympia wins .
 Credited under the stage name ‘Amold Strong’, his accent in the film was so thick that his lines were dubbed after production . Credited with the film under the name “Amolds Strong”
 His second film appearance was as a deaf-mute mob hitman in The Long Goodbye . He won the Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year Actor in Stay Hungry .
 The play about a bodybuilder follows Amold Schwartzengger from London to the USA about 2 to three years behind him . The play is about the bodybuilder who followed him to the U.S.
 Richard O' Brien was living as an unemployed actor in London during the early 1970s . Richard O’ Brien is best known for his role in the BBC drama "The Great Britain"
 Since his youth, O’Brien had loved science fiction and B horror movies . O'Brien had also loved sci-fi and horror movies since his youth .
 Arnold Schwwartzegger appears to be part of the story of building super beings by Eugenics in the Lab and the Slab . If this book explaining the SciFi Double Feature of two born brain study creatures was fictionalized reality Arnold .
 The Donegans and Gaineys of Denton, North Carolina, meet in Denton . Meanthile a family meets in North Carolina .
 Nona Chafin Siki Pug Dog lifelong friend of all donegans of LA is in there too . Pug Dog Nona is a lifelong L.A. fan of the donegans .
 Play appears to tell the story of the creation of Barrack Obama Jr and the destruction of the life of Eddi including by writing on the wall .
 On February 3, 2008, Shriver endorsed Senator Barack Obama for the 2008 Democratic presidential nomination . Shriver ended her endorsement of Barack Obama in February 2008 .
 The endorsement was given at a UCLA rally featuring Caroline Kennedy (Shriver’s cousin), Oprah Winfrey, Stevie Wonder, and Michelle Obama . Caroline Kennedy is Shriver's cousin .
 Governor Schwarzenegger endorsed Senator John McCain for the Republican presidential nomination a few days earlier on January 31, 2008 . Governor Schwarzenegger had endorsed Senator McCain for 2008 presidential nomination .
 Later that year, as in 2004, Shriver was in attendance at the Democratic National Convention when her uncle Ted Kennedy spoke . Shriver attended the convention in 2004 .
 Arnold Schwarzenegger's first term as governor of California began on November 17, 2003, and ended on January 3, 2007 . Arnold Schwarzenegger was elected to office in 2003 . Schwarzenegger is the current Governor of California .
 Schwarzenegger proposed deep cuts in the state budget in the first year of his first term as governor . Schwarzenegger was met with opposition in the California State Legislature .
 When San Francisco started granting same-sex marriage licenses at the behest of mayor Gavin Newsom, the governor ordered state attorney general Bill Lockyer to intervene in the matter . The governor vetoed legislation that would have legalized marriage in the state .
 Schwarzenegger controversially called his opponents in the legislature girlie men . Because of their opposition to his budget cuts, Schwarzenegger called them "girlie men" Schwarzenegger called their opponents "girlies"
 Schwarzenegger gave a speech endorsing the reelection of George W Bush as President of the United States in 2004 . Schwarzenegger gave the speech at the 2004 Republican National Convention . Schwarzenegger is a former Republican Governor of California .
 Methodists like Dan Coates, CIA people like Sue Gordon, and others hide who was in the NWO underground railroads . Methodists and CIA people hid who was involved in the underground railroad network .
 JFK and RFK objected to plans to groom twins the non-symptomatic as Infiltrators . FOXP2 Syndrome patients now under Espionage assault as their existence is denied, and existence which would prove the Twins Studies plans .
 “T or others will not be disavowed by my Nazi father for FOXP2.” Kate Clifford Larson . Larson’s father is a former Nazi leader . Larson: “I’m not a Nazi. I’ll not disavow my Nazi
 Weider* weve 2677 El Presidio St. in New York .
 George Soros HonFBA (born Gyorgy Schwartz, August 12, 1930) is a Hungarian-born American billionaire investor and philanthropist . Soros was born in Budapest, Hungary, in 1930 . Soros is a philanthropist and investor .
 Soros was born in Budapest to a non-observant Jewish family . He survived the Nazi occupation of Hungary and moved to the United Kingdom in 1947 . Soros is the son of Hungarian philanthropist George Soros .
 In March 2017, six United States senators sent a letter to then Secretary of State Rex Tillerson asking that he look into several grants the State Department and the U.S. Agency for International Development have given to groups funded by “leftwing” Soros .
 Mar 8, 1917 Jun 16, 1923 that created an Anti-Monarchism fight along the Russian border pitting the monarchies of Europe against Communists people’s government . Maria Kutschera and Captain Von Trapp with the assistance of the Vatican left for England .
 KE VIII has bad handwriting, Prince Albert his on brother does not . This looks reversed, with KE VIII having bad handwriting . Prince Albert's brother had bad handwriting.
 History In Ink™ Historical Autographs of King Edward VII, King Edward VIII, Prince Albert of York, King George VI and King Edward Edward VIII . The Duke of Windsor was King of England from 1936 to 1972 .
 Edward VIII portrait of Edward VIII, made in 1936, is by Hugh Cecil . George VI portrait of George VI is by Bertram Park . Edward VIII was made in 1938, and George VI was made at the same time .
 Golds Gym appears in a Jodie Foste movie in a planted logo and in Manchurian Candidate 1962 there is a ficational character highly upset at the level of death that occured during WWII .
 Arnold was high on the underground railroad list of rescuees . During that time the OSS CIA or British Intelligence would likely have been interested in the SA and its officials .
 Brooklyn Academy of Music, home to the Mr Olympia 1965-69 & ’73 & ‘73, is home to a series of hits .
 Joseph Weider was a Canadian bodybuilder and entrepreneur who co-founded the International Federation of BodyBuilders alongside his ' brother Ben Weider .
 The International Federation of BodyBuilding and Fitness is an international professional sports governing body for ; bodybuilding and fitness that oversees many of the sport's major international events .
 By 1970, the IFBB had directors in more than 50 countries worldwide . The organisation had its i footprint in Africa, Asia, Europe, Australia, North America, and South America .
 Schiff Nutrition International was the creators of Tiger’s Milk nutrition bars and related products . Tiger's Milk was one of the earliest lines of sports foods . Schiff Nutrition is now a nutrition company .
 The last two publications caused at least two clashes with obscenity laws . Jem Magazine and Monsieur. Golfer, and Flex, in addition to the ‘skin magazines’
 The claims, along with misleading “before and after’s photographs, were deemed false advertising by a Superior Court Judge in 1976 .
 Sign at Venice Beach commemorating Joe Weider’s donation to the U.S. Museum of Art .
 Schwarzenegger, a Weider \ protééé, presented him with the » Venice Muscle Beach Hall of | Fame’s Lifetime Achievement award . Schwarzenegger was Weider's protégé .
 The movie Bigger was released in 2018 focusing on the life of Joe Weider . Tyler Hoechlin and Julianne Hough play Betty Weider's second wife .
 Arnold attributed this behavior to guilt and shame over what Gustav and other Nazis and collaborators had perpetrated or enabled during the Wal. Wal. Arnold attributed it to guilt . Arnold said this behavior was due to shame over the Nazi crimes committed by Gustav .
 A drug has made him incredibly buff and muscled, but has also left him hypersensitive to riticism and with no control over his anger .
 A triple homicide was committed in Waltham, Massachusetts, in the U.S. on the evening of September 11, 2011 . The murder occurred on the night of that night .
 Tom Donegan did NOT show FOXP2 and always fancied himself having ancesterors ar an anscetor who was a royal . My brother Tom . found he might be a . candidate for Governer of Virginia .
 As a Republican candidate, Schwarzenegger was first elected on October 7, 2003, in a special recall election to replace then-Governor Gray Davis . Schwarzenegger was elected to office in 2003 .
 Davis was re-elected in the 2006 California gubernatorial election with an increased vote share of 55.9% to serve a full term as governor . Davis’ term was his first full term .
 In 2011, he reached his term limit as Governor and returned to acting . In 2011 he reached the end of his first term as Governor .
 Arnold Schwarzenegger had a brother, Meinhard Schwarzenegger who was avored by his father, a former Nazi party member . He died in a drunk driving crash at 24 . Arnold Schwarzenegger ‘NEGGERDI’ is Arnold Schwarzenegger’s nickname .
 He admitted to having fathered a child with their housemaid in 1997, and their 1 divorce was finalized in 2017 . They separated in 2011 after he admitted he fathered the child in 1997 .
 His mother was of (Czech descent) while his aternal great-grandfather, enzel Mach, was also Czech . Enzel had a child out of edlock with Kunigunde Schwarzenegger .
 Schwarzenegger back in the private sector for more than four years now, after two terms leading the state from Sacramento . Schwarzenegger takes movie and business meetings here . Schwarzenegger has been governor of California since 2003 .
 His i favoritism was ‘strong and blatant’, which stemmed from unfounded suspicion that ; Arnold was not his biological child . Arnold's father was found guilty of unfounded suspicion he had an illegitimate child .
 Austria became part of Nazi Germany after being annexed on 12 March 1938 . Austria was annexed by the Nazis in March 1938 and was part of the Nazi regime .
 Schwarzenegger applied to become a member of the Sturmabteilung [Brown Shirt Gym Roughians destroying the lives of and attacking opposition in the streets] on 1 May 1939, a year after the annexation of Austria, at a time when SA i {membership was declining .
 People were giving out her tips as though she did not know them herself, she said . People gave her tips on how to make the most of her life, she added .
 The December 13 daughter is exhibiting strong ' emotions and possible Borderlin Personality » Disorder in internal struggle .
 Emporors and elevated groomed support and others coming up short and perhaps i even sabotaged and hidden who don’t know their twins are Govenors and Presidents .
 It depicts Ed Corney a t I t : in a victory pose, his hands raised above his heads, open palms 1 towards the front . i I .
 Billy Mauch had one son, William J Mauch II, named after himself . Billy and his wife Marjorie, who were married 53 years, were married for 53 years .
 Gayle and Gillian Blakeney are Australian Australian identical twins born 9 JULY 1966 . They performed together as actresses and as a dance/pop duo in the 1990s . Gayle & Gillian were born 9 July 1966 .
 The girls knew from a young age that they wanted to be on television . The girls were inspired by their desire to be a reality TV star .
 Max Carver was born Robert Maxwell Martensen Jr. in 1988 . He is an American actor . He has appeared in several films .
 In 1992, Anne and Denis Sutro moved the family to Calistoga in Napa Valley . Anne moved in 1992 .
 Christian and Joseph Cousins are identical twins . They are American actors who are identical twin actors .
 Phoebe gets a terrible case of stomach flu, falling ill at the last moment, so Kimble takes her place . Kimble is Kimble's replacement for Phoeben, who is left with stomach flu .
 The suspicious school principal, Miss Schlowski, is convinced Kimble will not last long before quitting . The suspicious principal is convinced she will not quit .
 He was Ambassador to France from 1968 to 1970 . He was Vice Presidential candidate in George McGovern’s unsuccessful run for President in 1972 .
 Taking over my Gym Workout, road blocking my gym access, road blocked my access . Afoy-m eve) lcemavensulercinl bodybuilder.com .
 March 10, 1922 July 11, » 2004) was an American : bodybuilder and businessman . He was born in 1922 . He died in 2004 .
 Joe Gold was the youngest of four siblings, Robert Gold ' , Nathan : Gold and Eunice Gold Fiss . Joe Gold is the son of Robert Gold and Nathan Gold . Joe was born Joe Gold .
 Max Gold was ' the neighborhood junk collector' and the family’s back yard and garage served as a makeshift junk yard . Max Gold died at the age of 92 .
 She had attached a filled bucket to each end of a broom handle and was using them as lifts . The woman attached the filled buckets to each other and used them to lift herself up .
 Joe and his brother, Robert Gold, got the idea ' for building their own equipment from scrap obtained from their father’s scrap yard in Boyle Heights, California . Joe and Robert Gold built the equipment out of scrap scrap .
 He served in the U.S. Navy during World War II and Korean War . He was badly injured in a torpedo attack in WWII and Korea War .
 I was stalked in the gym including multiple gyms in San Francisco when I lived with DJ Slaveboy, before, and after but something new was added to it when I used Sport and Health Gym in 2010 in Arlington Virginia .
 Many of my workout videos were on my own MP4s on tablet or cell phone and had Cyberghoth dancing because the high energy hand movements were perfent for jump rope . Many of these workouts were on MP4S on tablet and cell phone .
 As locally stored MP4s any wire tap did not reveal their origins . Some very scuzzy blacks began losing control, watching the videos hiding behind exercize eqiupment or from outside windows .
 Those in the gym then saw the others “peeping” and “fapping” not able to stop, and taking pictures of my videos playing “triggered” by the sight of it into a compulsion . Those who took pictures of the videos playing
 I have stalkers “paying” gym women, others for the “porn” of me taking pictures of women in gym clothes, at the pool, etc., I beleive that sets the #PsyOps expectation I should be socially excluded from those locations,
 When the person who is Fake Ed hires an adult model she arrives to find Fake Ed is really a child porn addict and owes for harm done to little minority children . The person who hires the adult model finds out she is really an adult porn addict .
 I do not but my Trust Fund agrees with this which fits with a Kamala Harris is a Hero narrative . I think it fits with this narrative. It fits with the narrative of Kamala .
 The chest strap was stolen, seemingly by a trainer of Arlington Sport and Health and leftist telegraph ave type leftist women repeated my exercise moves in front of me in exaggerated ways after I had already been doing those exercises .
 I think the gym environment was a place blacks were accepted as athletes already . Social Justice Behavioral Health of Yoga could become an integration opportunity for non-whites . However, behavioral health care was more based on hostility towards me .
 i was a promoter and fan of great artists like Luccci in the Goth scene . It was the gym environment that was abnormal, not me in any way, this was launched at me for no reason I understood. It was not me, but I was a fan of the Goth
 Princess Apartments CC TX is continuing . Much of has centered around others force teaming themselvs with my tablet music, while asserting to me it had only “porn” meaning .
 Sport & Health Near Clarendon to Close Next Month . Located at at at 1122 N Kirkwood Road, the gym is one of four in Arlington .
 State actors are acting in concert with and international illegal operation, racketeering genome rights, and are sabotaging my own . The often “scuzzy” social elements were drawn from active felon environments I will later describe as a racially motivated and criminal lumpenproletaria.
 The gym originally opened in 1977 . The Arnold, Golds Gym, and the Waltham Murders tied to the Bpston Marathon Bombing and JFK Library fire Round Rock is a city in the United States state of Texas .
 This exact same thing happens three times on the streets of Virginia with a black mental health inmate at that time then released and bozo the clown like hair do who walked in front of me down the streets with index finger to the thumb “meditating” with me during my walk
 Hitler redefined the group as the “Gymnastic and Sports Division” of the party in 1921 . More than a year later, on AUGUST 3, 1921, Hitler redefined the division as the Gymnastic Division .
 A County Health group (I photographed their a frame mobile sign at the time) does gymnastics along my path to TMOBLE to replace my phone chip . I needed to use GPS Maps to know this is the turn up from the beach walk into the city area .
 Sometimes it does seem like there are no words. Same thing wh happens on my way to gym PQ ee . Same thing happened on way to the gym. Sometimes there is no word.
 Ed Donegan is the suspected photographer of buttocks . AutomopHELIAC Peron obsessed with segregated culture resultant from ‘White Supremacism.’
 SA were colloquially called Brownshirts because of the colour of their shirts, similar to Benito Mussolini’s blackshirts . The SA were known as Brownshirts due to their colour of shirts .
 If violent offenders are psychopathic, they are able to assault, rape, and murder without concern for legal, moral, or social consequences . If a violent offender is psychopathic they can assault and rape without any concern for moral, moral or legal consequences .
 “This is NOT a form of participation, however, because the initiators do not want the advice of the co-opted, merely his or her endorsement *” Blacks and gays surrounded me in the gym, pretending to be my workout partners .
 "Dead accountant Bernie" wanted to see what white females look like . Marines, Marines and others seemed to have “dead accountant Bernie” in tow with them .
 Schwarzenegger and his wife opened a restaurant in Santa Monica called Schatzi On Main in 1992 . Schwarzenegger and wife opened the restaurant in 1992, which is a community restaurant .
 She is a member of the Kennedy family . Her mother, Eunice Kennedy Shriver, was a sister of John F., Robert and Ted Kennedy .
 An opponent of U.S. entry into World War II, he helped establish the America First Committee . He volunteered for the United States Navy before the attack on Pearl Harbor .
 Demeaning MY use of my lifelong music while in the gym as ‘the gym into porn” , not a workout place’ (when IN FACT the RIVAL system used the gym for “porn” and used my presence as their scapegoat
 Some kind of espionage capability could pause my music if I left the Tmobile chip in the phone “Play to Pause” electronic attack y Photography Tx and Music Rx in the gym / set Punishment is use of Ed Donegan DNA Forger Rx .
 Victoria Secrets models, white, will show their asses to retarded fake ed and retarded fake Ed will be punished for the photos taken in the gym . I call Tx aka Picturetaker-1.
 In the Totality of all evidence, real, and embellished, as a Narrative . Cutting out my leaving the gym alone with someone leaving with an impersonator. cutting out my going to the gym with a . impersonator .
 Forging my agreement I email Mistress earabancagnn oes . She will follow her is in my vicnity in the Gym in California . Some technology in use by Espionge could get my smartphone music to stop .
 This never had anything to do with me, but it was disruptive to me and everyone in the gym. VivianNYC about scene resources, housing in NYC non inculpatory . This is not the first time I've been charged with a crime .
 Knights Templar Cartel was a Mexican criminal organization originally composed of the remnants of La Familia Michoacana drug cartel based in the Mexican State of Michoacan . It was originally made up of remnants of a drug cartel that was based in Mexico's former drug warlord La Fam
 Francisco Montes and Nazario Moreno were leaders of the La Familia Michoacana cartel . A split between the two cartel leaders emerged after their alleged deaths .
 Pablo “El 500” Toscano Padilla and his lieutenant Ezequiel ‘El Cheques” Castaneda were reported to have been killed by remnants of La Nueva Familia Michoacana ‘ Organization . The cartel is believed to have
 By May 2020, all 39 non-New ' Generation cartel operating in Guerrero were splinter cartels . By that date, all of the New ' Generation cartels in Guerrero had splinter cartelized .
 Cartel del Abuelo and Los Viagras, as well as the ' Jalisco New Generation Cartel, were the active cartels in Michoacan . In June 2020, it was ' reported that Cartel Del Abuela and Los Vieagras were the Cartel
 The previously all-female 4th Recruit Training Battalion has graduated four of its first-ever male platoons . The first male drill instructors were assigned to the battalion . The battalion has also graduated two female drill instructors .
 Fighting Monarch is a Revealer . Probably knows he is tied to some King George V family line, and fighting the MKULTRA program called Project Monarch .
 Hagley ID 1972341_1432 PID islandora:2224312 /u ; fal la ‘li Kinston Dupont Camdem Bishopville Greensboro DuPont Judy Laube I have your story you publicly share in my book .
 The first time I watched his video, “Obama is a Tee corporate marketing creation,” I thought that, in implying that the President was some type of CIA-connected Manchurian Candidate, was a bit over the top .
 Chris Hedges a very fine author of Empire of illusion he puts it very ; well President Obama he wrote does one thing and brand Obama gets ; you to believe another this is the essence of successful advertising you buy or do what the advertiser wants because of how they make you feel .
 The End of Literacy and the Triumph of Spectacle Empire of Illusion . We now live in two Americas. The end of literacy .
 WWE contests, the Adult Video News Awards in Las Vegas, and Ivy ; League graduation ceremonies-to expose an age of terrifying decline and . heightened self-delusion .
 Her father, the son of an English schoolteacher, emigrated from England to Texas with his parents in 1880 . Her father emigrated to Texas from England in 1880 with his family .
 Margaret Eleanor Butt Crook served as director of Bread for the World . She is founder of the Christian learning center, Laity Lodge . Crook also served as Bread for a World director .
 Mary Elizabeth Holdsworth Butt was the fourth child of Howard Butt, Sr., and Mary Elizabeth . Charles named The Holdsworth Center after Mary Elizabeth. e Another child, Mary Beth Butt, who lived for only 10 days , is buried beside Mary Elizabeth in Kerrville, Texas .
 Mary Elizabeth Holdsworth Butt died in her house in Corpus Christi on October 6, 1993 .
 Location of Kennedy’s wounds suggested that his assailant had stood behind him, but witnesses said that Sirhan stood facing west, about a yard away from Kennedy, as he moved through the pantry facing east .
 The birth and marriage certificates provided by the British government for Sir Nigel Graham Knowles have multiple fatal flaws and are evidently doctored for propaganda purposes . Knowles was British Pilgrims ociety handler for Vice Pretender Kamala D Harris Benz Nn .
 Knowles’ family reaches back to the beginnings of mass ; communications, propaganda, Victorian satanic spiritism-scientism, , fascist banking and resource stripping, and vaccines as a weapon of war "" by the mid-1800s . Names are a shell game since they all have
 In 2008-2009 I was held as mentally incompetent and spent more than a year in custody explaining extensive racial views to all black psychologist and psychiatrists to show I was “competent” and that my site Real Harm Real Foul was legal and not insane .
 I was talking about deficit social spending as unhelpfull and the deficit level. During the course of that I was . talking about social spending, I was able to get back on the track .
 If a spark ever set it on fire it could burn, it would be liek a run on financial institutions that lacked public confidence . The spark could set fire to financial institutions .
 Biden blocked from attending Honor Flight DCA . Biden later took it up and later Biden took up it .
 Biden said the Left look out for all peoples rights while Republicans do not . Biden was in Good Sams Homeless shelter on Veterans Day . Biden said he was in the shelter for homeless people .
 I had complained about memorials names citing my trips in Russia and learning the string of names of cities like Lenningrad. I had at that time, HDCA, complained about the names .
 Others including Barrack Obama Jr. the Kelly brothers, Arnold Schwartzenegger for varioius reasons have the samd DNA and its true origins those ‘elites’ do not want found out, a CIA research program .
 Hiding by life outcomes, diagnosis of brain function, and suppression of whole samples of DNA are part of the total origins and idenity of these biological families of origins .
 In combination with suversion/falsification of data, and data contaminated by interference by espionage, the FOXP2 brain exhibiting minimal brain dysfuncion will seem as largely inferior from much different elite brains . Creates discrimination between high performing good brain elites and societal losers .
 The Atheist upbringing allowed me a non biased view of pagan and heathen sexuality and BDSM . Frowned on by religion and society for hundreds of years as snuff film psychopath violence prone, I was more open to it than the religious were who didn’t like sw
 In conjunction with “Renaissance Man’s educational level of his father guiding me and educating me by elite schooling and travel, the total affect was a highly cultured person without a college degree . The total affect of his education and travel was a total affect .
 Those on more conventional paths including what I consider a waste of time, church services, found I had valuable cultural insight and sophistication . While claiming I represented an unsophisticated threat of unknown origins I was Targeted for exploitative co-optive study by those destructively attacking my
 Those benefiting as achievers in my belief system are using a different life value system and its the crime, not the intellectual devotion to exploration which is propelling them and their system . James and GLorian sacrificed a great deal for religious liberty and in fighting NAZI Germany .
 For the groups to attack me being racially motivated and religiously motivated, the work my parents put into me exploited by these groups betrays the defense of all the entire Donegan lives exhibited. For the . defense of my parents' lives, Donegan said .
 I have been attacked on the street by groups of stalkers landing me in places like California Pacific Care, San Francisco General Hospital, Summit Merit Peralta 30 day treatment center . I have spent decades telling my mother and others I was being stalked, decades, finally leaving San
 I know think that for my jobs in high tech I was a pretty good employee with pluses and minuses . I was pretty good at my high tech jobs, but I was not a good employee . I know that for . my jobs, I'm not sure what I was doing
 Kamala Harris part of a far larger plot involving West Point, says her father was a Renaissance Man . The Sistine Chapel in Vatican City is the official residence of the pope .
 Originally known as the Cappella Magna, the chapel takes its name from Pope Sixtus IV, who had it built between 1473 and 1481 . The chapel was originally known as Cappellas Magna .
 Since that time, the chapel has served as a place of both religious and functionary papal activity . The chapel has since been used by the papal to carry out papal duties .
 Today, it is the site of the papal conclave, the process by which a new pope is selected . The Vatican is the birthplace of the first papal papal pope .
 The fame of the Sistine Chapel lies mainly in the frescoes that decorate the interior . The Last Judgment and Michelangelo's Last Judgment are among the most famous frescoed paintings .
 As I was raised to have that background including traveling to and studying Classic Athens Greece to touring Florence Italy, Pompea to Sistine Chapel, I was being co-opted in my Ayn Rand intellectual system of Objectivst writings . From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia *
 Megan Kelly was all over the news at Foxnews with West Point highlighting Modernity in building structures, the intellectual meaning of it all and AI theories emerging .
 Of this made me opportunistically exploitabole knowledge base for those who constrained their opinions to corrector forms . Or who by occupying themselves in stove pipes of learning never saw beyond their limited viewpoints .
 Megan Kelly was rushing to use Polemic in a sentence . Megan Kelly used the term 'Areopagtica' on Wikipedia . Kelly was rushed to use the term Polemic .
 It matches the long term smear on those with Kutschera DNA AND ALSO express FOXP2 which I think others like Rosemary Kennedy have . Arnold Schwartzengger, Barrack Obama Jr. the many of the Bush or Kennedy families seem very different thatn us Kutsc
 The more likely nice sounding sounding woman who called the likely Salvation Army recruited hit-man was Kamala Harris . Harris was more likely to be a good sounding woman than a nice sounding politician .
 She has always been a political stalker of reading my books I intend allow and her stalking obsession with me could also be her obsession with getting acccess to my mother’s genome and my extensive education in law and philospy .
 Much happened in 2001 she would likely not be a part of the 2001-2001 party . Lloyd Austin, Leon Panneta, John Podesta, Barack Obama Jr. worked with Lloyd Austin . John Podesta and Lloyd Austin were at the center of the party .
 Black females like “Cynthia Nino” look out for little boys and girls, the legend built I am exploiting them, says Nino . Nino: “I am a black woman, and that legend used in sabotage of me, pretexts for harr
 Much of the Organized Stalk of me are paid or self-benefiting selfenriching, who in the course of their Street Theater skit out that what Kamala Harris likely accused me of behind my back with Tom Donegan’s and others assistance is true or
 It's true that 20s and 30s age athletic women of the Stanford California area or even Santa Cruz California are attractive to me and this is normal to me . It's also true that athletic women in the area are attractive .
 Once I pointed it at pool in my apartment complex and left it with no teen or pedophilia in mind . I once had a high power outdoor photography video camera mostly for family video usage .
 I did have some friends who were cruel to cats and in drug addicted psychosis at least if not permanent psychosis . I recognized the condition and recognized it as a condition .
 They were getting in street crime stupidity taking a baseball bat and wrapping it in barbed wire to protect themselves from fights with meth dealers who were providing the meth they were shooting into their viens . They were taking the bat and wire-wrapped it in case they get in fights with
 They were driving around loaded I refuse to do, they were dating an underage Sherrif’s daughter and keeping her loaded . They were turning out by violence a women of age we both know and attacked her violently, all of these things together I objected to .
 The cat was terrified of them and I lived with Chad who was from Capitola originally . I finally was able to give the cat away after several tries to get the cat to safety .
 Kamala Harris hero San Francisco DA was supposedly defending against me, not grand-standing framing me for political benefit to her and harm to me . All of these elements I oppose are being acted out as true parts of who I am when they are untrue, but the false narrative being acted
 In the mid 1990s Kamala Harris was working as a Social Justice Warrior for minority children . Harris was a social justice warrior in the mid-90s . Harris is now a Democrat in California .
 The situation continued to repeat itself and Kamala ran on stopping exploitation of minors, etc., defeating the existing District Attorney in San Francisco County . Kamala defeated the existing D.C. County. County .
 During this time I was surrounded by criminal elements out of my control . During that the criminal elements were committing crime a VAGUE narrative suggested I was responsible for the crime as the real perpetrator was bought new clothes for pointing me out . That perp would make a statement to me full
 I apply the model to what I call the Harvester H or the 4.5/5 Information Circuit Information Circuit (formation of a Sentence, a Statement in Information) Confusion at scene, several people dressed similary and clothing as identifier telling story .
 The new one asked I pick him up on the Tenderloin in my white Subaru station wagon 4WD my skiing loving father donated to me when he bought a Jeep . That new one wanted to be picked up in his white Subaru 4WD 4WD .
 The last facebook communication I had with Tom Dunham on Facebook which was part of this story was my saying in about 2019 or so that Kamala Harris seemed to be involved in all aspects of this . Whether I said it or not that Dick Cheney’s gay daughter was too. Dick
 Natoma Street area actually Langton Street near the Stud Bar which was used by goth and industrial clubs as well as used by other venue renters . The Stud Bar is located in San Francisco, San Francisco .
 The meth addact made creepy gestures about little girls as he led me on a wild goose chase trying to give me directions to the place he said was his home to drop him off to . Tom Dunham's Facebook profile has been updated to include photos of Dunham and Dunham .
 "I found horrifying. Along the way he was pointing out 10 year old girls and making creepy remarks I found horrifying"
 The accidental usage was accidental ingestion of some stored methamphetamine . Police say it was accidental ingesting some stored meth .
 My mother was having weird and unexpected heart trouble and stomach bleeds . Her daughter was having unexpected heart problems . Her mother was getting heart problems and stomach bleeding .
 The creepy meth dealer called me and said “let’s not do that ever again” and I assumed he meant the meth deal . "I agreed completely especially with not doing a meth deal with him," she says .
 A few days after the phone call the meth dealer who was a skid row meth street person was stanmding outside the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals in brand new topcoat, scarf, topcoat and scarf . Finally, a few days later, a meth dealer was st
 I believe he like some earlier people who had surrounded me were there to be a crime plague on society in the same vicinity I was in so a rumor coulf form I was part of that crime wave . I believe that he . like some others who had surrounding me were . there to
 "It fits this which has surrounded me since AOL in the 1990s and beyond," he says of AOL . "I'm sure it fits this," he adds .
 In 2002 or so #KamalaHarris pulled the #uber stunt, also done in the late 1990s . The stunt was also pulled in the same time a Dopple was placed near her at the time .
 She made her career ‘defending’ exploited children with a string of grand juries . Grand juries were mere grandstanding for an anti establishment defense of the vulnerable social justice narrative . She could later heroically represent against her political adversaries including other leftists, moderates, and far
 Organized Stalk teams faking events with staged paid actors appearances as pretexts for illegal suvieallance, lawfare against the establishment for financial and poltical gain . This fit events aat AOL Netscape, San Francisco with Tom Dunham and myself, Salvation Army faking
 Tom Donegan was a very early employee of AOL and may have been AOL Tom . Ed Donegan may have worked for AOL at the time of AOL Time Warner .
 Tom was a marketeer sending out disks, etc., Vested in lots of early stock when the AOL Time Warner merger happened later he was a stock mulit millionaire . Later moved back to Cape Cod Massavchussettes with Mark Weirness where the Donegans had grown up .
 At about the time of the 1992 or was it 2000 election Tom was promoted to even higher position at the merged company . Tom was also promoted to the position of an even higher post .
 I think he was hired to help research my beliefs and personality . THough he had worked at the company since the 1980s or so he was fired at 2007 almost the day I was arrested by the NIH .
 In the late 1990s Tom Donegan lured me to AOL perhaps geniunely as a niceity . But at AOL a Dopple of me emerged and I was fired under odd circumstances . I'm not sure what happened .
 President George W Bush pursues : . The Social Security Commission, Daniel Patrick Moynihan and Richard Parsons, in the White House .
 He was previously the interim CEO of the Los Angeles Clippers NBA franchise . He was also the interim president of the L.A. Clippers .
 On October 21, 2018, he resigned for health reasons from ; CBS and was replaced by Strauss Zelnick . Strauss was replaced as CBS anchor on Sunday morning .
 His maternal ' grandfather had been head groundskeeper at the John D Rockefeller estate, Kykuit . His maternal grandfather had worked at the Rockefeller estate in New York .
 Parsons took on Happy Rockefeller, the widow of Nelson Rockefeller, as a high-profile client . During his 11 years at the firm, he took on clients like Happy Rockefeller . Parsons says he is proud of his work in the design industry .
 Parsons was invited to join Time Warner’s board in 1991 . He subsequently became president of the » company in 1995, recruited by chief executive Gerald Levin .
 Parsons was chairman of Citigroup from 23 February 2009 until April 2012 when he was replaced by Michael O’ Neill . Parsons was succeeded by O' Neill in April 2012 . Parsons is the current chairman of the Citigroup Group .
 He is chairman of the advisory board of Feigen Advisors, a CEO advisory firm run by Marc Feigen . Feigen is a former CEO of the U.S. Navy SEAL team .
 In September 2018, Parsons became the Interim Chairman of the Board for CBS, replacing Les Moonves . Parsons is currently the interim chairman of the CBS Corporation .
 Parsons stepped down from the position in October 2018 citing difficulties brought about by his battle with Multiple myeloma . Parsons was diagnosed with Multiple Myeloma in October 2013 .
 He is also Chair of the Apollo Theater Foundation and co-chair of the advisory board of the Smithsonian ; National Museum of African American History and Culture .
 Parsons was appointed Board Chair of The Rockefeller Foundation in June 2016 . Parsons is also a board member of the foundation promoting the wellbeing of humanity .
 Parsons owned a house near the Rockefeller family estate in Pocantico Hills, where his grandfather was once a groundskeeper . Parsons' grandfather worked as groundskeeper at Rockefeller's estate .
 For a brief time he * worked for Nelson Rockefeller at the family office, “Room 5600” at » Rockefeller Center .
 He became an advisory trustee of the family’s principal philanthropy, the Rockefeller Brothers Fund . He sits with David Rockefeller on the board of the World Trade Center Memorial Foundation .
 Parsons is on the board of the family-created Museum of Modern Art . Parsons is also on the MOMO board of his family-owned museum .
 President George W Bush selected Parsons to co-chair a commission on Social Security in 2001 . Parsons was selected by President Bush for a post-9/11 Social Security commission . Parsons has served as a member of the Social Security Commission .
 Parsons also worked on the transition team for Michael Bloomberg, who was elected Mayor of New * York City in 2001 . Parsons worked on Bloomberg's transition team from 2001 to 2001 .
 Parsons, however, repeatedly denied the reports . Parsons supported Mayor Bloomberg’s efforts to repeal the term limits law, and supported Bloomberg for a third term in office .
 Parsons was a member of the economic advisory team for President Barack Obama . Parsons was an economic adviser for President Obama .
 He met with the then President-elect on Friday, i November 7, 2008, along with many other economic experts, to discuss . measures to solve the current economic crisis .
 New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson withdrew his name from consideration for Secretary of Commerce . Parsons's name was floated as a possible nominee for the Commerce Secretary .
 Richard Parsons was appointed the interim CEO of the Los Angeles Clippers on May 9, 2014, in the wake of the Donald Sterling racial remarks controversy . Parsons has been in charge of the Clippers since the incident .
 In 2009, he had a child with model-philanthropist MacDella Cooper as a result of an extra-marital affair . He also had an affair in 2009, and had an additional child with her .
 Cooper founded the MacDella Cooper Foundation in 2004 to help orphans and abandoned children in Liberia following the Second Liberian Civil War . Being of Liberian ethnicity, Cooper was born in Liberia .
 Parsons was diagnosed with multiple myeloma, a rare form of blood cancer, in 2015 . Parsons has been battling the disease for more than a decade . Parsons is now in remission from cancer .
 Bayview-Hunters Point is a neighborhood where just about every resident had lost a loved one to bullets or drugs . This was a neighborhood in which residents lost loved ones at some point to bullets .
 This was San Francisco’s ghetto, and still is, a place many San Franciscans have never come and never will . This was the place many people have never visited, and many never will.
 Just as in ghettos across the country, a code of silence had developed in the neighborhood . The neighborhood is known as one of the poorest neighborhoods in the country .
 Charles, now 21, was 3 at the time, too young to understand, but he says he knew his dad was in a special place . Charles was 3 when he was killed, but says he still knew his father was there .
 Stacked on top of his father’s murder, the beating was too much for his mother, Tonette Lane . Lane was beaten to death by Lane's father, who was found guilty of the murder of Lane's mother .
 Like so many black families from San Francisco’s last remnant of an African American community, Lane moved her family to the suburbs . Lane: "Like so many other black families, Lane's family moved from the city to the suburban suburbs"
 The house is nothing fancy, but it’s a big improvement over those moldy, boarded-up projects in San Francisco . The couple's home is a small apartment in a city park .
 Census figures show that from 1990 to 2000, while San Francisco’s overall population increased more than 7 percent, the number of people who listed their race as African American fell from 76,343 to 58,791 .
 It’s the result of the crack the CIA spreads so blacks will kill each } * other off . It's the result . The crack is a crack that the CIA spread so blacks can kill each other .
 Residents speak of a dark cloud hanging over this part of the city, a cloud that will not disappear . The cloud hangs over the area, residents say, and it won't disappear .
 Bayview-Hunters Point is home to three prominent families from the area . This is a story about three of the most prominent families in the Bayview community .
 "The elders are leaders "" of the community who have fought hard, and are still fighting, to make "" the neighborhood a good place to live"
 They came here in the 1940s from ' the South with high hopes for a better life . They came with hopes for better life. They came to the U.S. from 'the South'
 They settled in, bought homes, raised children, and made the best of being relegated to the dirty industrial part of town . "They settled in and bought homes and raised children," she says .
 Harris was accused by former residents Felita Sample and Andre Patterson who claimed she had promised them she would shut down development on the island once she was voted in as senator .
 Harris reportedly conspired with Test America and Tetra Tech to falsify test results . Harris kept quiet about the toxins that were poisoning lowincome residents . Harris allegedly conspired to cover up the contamination and falsify results .
 Both Patterson and Sample lived in low-income housing on TS from some time in the early 2000’s 2017 . Both men lived in the same housing as the late '90s .
 Sample and Patterson are both cancer survivors . They claim their illness came from the toxic exposure of the island along with numerous other medical conditions . Sample said in a in an interview that their illnesses came from toxic exposure .
 Sample also claims to have lost her apartment on TS for speaking out about her sicknesses caused by the radiation . Sample claims to be the first woman to speak out about the radiation in the world .
 Hunters Point was a formal Naval Ship-yard and was exposed to radiation contamination between 1946 and 1969 . Hunters Point is a formal naval ship-yard .
 The site reportedly was reportedly a radiological defense laboratory used to study the effects of radiation on animals and other materials . The site was reportedly used as a defense laboratory . It is believed to have been used to test the effects on animals .
 Hunters Point Ship-yard was also reportedly used to decontaminate ships used in atomic bomb testing . Hunters Point shipyard was reportedly used in decontaminations of ships used during atomic bomb tests .
 Tetra Tech employees, Stephen Rolfe and Jason Hubbard, were sentenced to eight months in federal prison . They admitted to falsifying test results on the site .
 Hubbard did not say why he substituted the false samples, according to a report by KTUV . Hubbard has not said why he replaced the samples .
 Kamala Harris refused to conduct any investigation about the illegal firing of 6 Tetra Tech whistleblowers . According to The Labor Video Project, The Labor . Video Project . The Labor video Project .
 Harris is the only one involved in this specific charge . Patterson and Sample have also reached out to House speaker Nancy Pelosi, Sen. Sen. Barbara Walters .
 Tom Donegan I think was murdered by an in vivo lethal medical study of his esophagus which is in the “one little detail play” of how a witness died . Tome Donegan and Mark Weirness are concealers in the book, "Tom Donegan"
 The issue appeared when I was trying to get Medicare to pay for a visit to pscyhiatrist who had an office at Northern Viriginia Hospial center . That issue appeared in this article .
 During that visit I was describing my desire to mary and set down roots in the civil liberties community rather than club life . I was talking about how I wanted to set up a mary .
 Intraclass correlation coefficients for repeated measurements were 0.95/0.96 for helix, 0.70/66 for transverse, and 0.72 for E2A angulation . 0.79/0 .72 for mean diffusivity; 0.83/
 These changes need to be taken into account when interpreting post-mortem MRI to make inferences on the in vivo situation . These changes must be taken to account when interpreters interpret MRI .
 Value of my work and Trust Social Ministries Fund value is transported to Projects here . Value of the asset is denied and not accounted for, thus the asset moves without due accounting procedures along the sham transport .
 Jen Moore will believe Tom and Mark about my mother and perhaps me but during observation of me and my telling off the peoople attacking me she will think I am an all right guy, telling it like it is, and as Trump supporter, she will not get behing the riff
 Tom and Mark will sell the idea my mother and I are psychos and do not have readership or popular likable personalities, not leaders or liked at all . Importantly Tom will sell . idea my . mother and . I'm not a leader or a leader .
 This is the large scale conspiracy against rights used by the powerful who have no where to run and liabilities about how I and my family have been treated, he says . This is part of building social disavowal of me and my voice, he adds .
 The proletariat are the social class of wage-earners ideally at at least middle class level and perhaps by retirement accounts, savings, property ownership . Also participating in the investor class activities while working for wages .
 Autism Society of Norther Virginia bulids community for over 5,000 individuals and families through education, advocacy, and support . Facebook @ 2019 Avatisen Taek oh Lite Page .
 Paying off fake lawsuits, keeping me uneomployed, and single are part of that . Paying for fake lawsuits and keeping me away from normal cities, normal cities and normal life, is part of me .
 Jenny taught new ' officers how to police in Tracy "" and gave them an appreciation of 1 what it meant to grow up ina » town and later serve the same y community . Jenny is a Field Training ' Officer .
 Her mother, Jane Moore of California, survives her; her father Bob Moore of Texas; her nieces and nephews . She also had numerous nieres, nephews and family members . Moore's funeral will be held in San Antonio, Texas .
 Kutschera DNA tied to Franz Kutchera family members and Kutscherea Nazi ally Heinrich Himmler is in STOLEN DNA when eggs were stolen from Glorian Donegan, moved into Barrack Obama, the Bush family, the Rockefellers and
 Revealing that today’s most powerful figures may include these genes lines is the story the elites are killing journalists to protect . Revealing . that today's most powerful . figures may . include today's . powerful figures .
 In 1972 James Angleton’s close alley in Free Masonry J Edgar Hoover dies . In 1972, Angleton was involved in the death of the former FBI director .
 The Windsors worked with Pope Pius XII in a plan following WWII to do Mendellian like research in race studies including grooming Barrack Obama Jr. in race and FOXP2 studies which went to British history .
 Glorian Dnegan nee Glorian Gainey sister of Harold Gainey and adopted by the Dew family in South Carolina when Festus Gainey dies . In WWII and Korea fighter pilot for recon, few with and did targetign with bombers including nucelar bomb drops and Japan
 It seems Glorian and Harold were two of three Maria Augusta Kutschera children other than the 7 Von Trapp family steot children to her ¢ Tom Donegan older brothe of Ed DOnegan but co-operationg with CIA and not trusted by Glorian Done
 Jim Donegan the son of Irish immigrants live on the wrong side of the tracks in Boston . Donegan is a former member of the Boston Police Department .
 His father worked in Ireland as an accounted but moved to Boston unable to work in that field . He died a blue collar employee sweep floors at Hershey Chocalte plant . His father was an accountant in Ireland .
 James Donegan told stories intensive abusive experiences his Irish Roman Catholic parents experienced in Boston while trying to raise him . He pulled his own as an under-age painter until the U.S. Army Air Corps began recruiting underage P-51 pilots .
 Josephs Cahtolic Hospital is located in Manhattan Beech City of Los Angeles County . It is a hospital in Manhattan, Los Angeles, California . It was founded in 1950s .
 It was above ground atomic testing and blast exposure testing in Nevada, Hawaii, elsewehre still in the military was invoveld with int he 1950s . Afterwards, it was aboveground atomic testing .
 As my father flew for TWA in the 1960 including with the Chafin family of TWA bratts . Then moved to Cape Code again, Marshfield, near the Kennedy compound and not the poor area of Boston . After a few years in California, he moved back to Boston
 Father of Les Binning, Honey Reid, Dawn Gibbs and Elizabeth Binning . He is also the father of Honey Reid and Dawn Gibbs .
 C.O. Foundation/ Humanitarian Services, 15 South Temple, Salt Lake City, Utah 84150 i (checks payable C.P.B. designating humanitarian Services in memory of Ray 1 Binning) or Boy Scouts of America, 1001 Davis St. or
 I had met Honey Binning at Cal State Haward and we sometimes partied or kept company at her Piedmont home or her mother's Moraga California home . We sometimes kept company with her at her home and her mother .
 She described her parents as Mormon and described Mormon requirements of faithfulness as highly socially conservative . Her parents are also Mormon .
 We also had visited a mother's or father's original home with relatives still at it 1 in somewhere in Central California .
 Jim and Glorian will diverse in 1980 as I graduate Head Royce High School in Oakland just barely barely . Jim will graduate in 1980 just barely . Glorian and Jim will be together for the first time in their teens .
 It will be stored in a bank account, segretated from other funds so no mixing . The money will be kept in the bank account .
 Career counseling, VOC REHAB tech school and gainful employment in high tech . From there I tried career counseling, led to career counseling and gained employment .
 At an earlier stop I worked for Netscape AOL after Tom Donegan invited me to but that seemed some kind of setup with a Dopple of me there . At earlier stop, I was invited to work for AOL AOL after being invited to . At previous stop, he worked for
 "I contributed to the problem but was not the problem, rather, a victim of it," he says . "I was a victim, rather than a victim," he adds .
 It is this apartment she suffers Congestive Heart Failure and we live together again talking about her will, and getting lawyers . GangTSalking is a new series of American Horror Horror Stories .
 A decades long seach for an Executor is the hard part of the will . David Donegan and others are approached but Tom will ultimately be the Executor . Tom will be the executor of his will .
 Folloing her death I remain at 3822 7th street but am evicted from it after confronting a neigber over some wierd human trafficking ring Thea Smith and Tom Donegan created . I remain in the same address but was evicted after confronting the neig
 Escorts were going to other units but comments were made to made “She is on the way” etc., etc. etc., but it really is going on behind my back and hidden from me. Escorts are going on other units,’s wife says .
 Jen Moore was evicted from the Moraga house in Moraga, Texas . Jen Moore is murdered . The truth is not known .
 Jen Moore correctly observed abuse is being comitted through Family Courts . Family Courts are a criminal syndicate front and abusive to those stuck in them like myself . Jen Moore said abuse was being committed by Family Courts through Family courts .
 FBI: “%70 of Homicides I investigate are committed by the partners or expartners of the victim’s .” Detective, Below The Belt movie .
 I was arrested for contacting the National Institute of Health Freedom of Information Office . I was held without trial as a lunatic and also I assert during this time frame I was radiolgically attacked . I assert that during this . time frame, I was . attacked. I was also
 On that assertion someone had co-opted my grant, I was placed in a North Carolina mental hospital as delusional . On that claim he was placed there as delusional, he was put in a mental hospital .
 During this time frame Ted GUnderson was asserting he was being poisened, Barrack Obama Jr. was just being swarn in as I was released from the mental hospitable to Arlington Virginia and its mental health .
 TOM DONEGAN returns to Cape Cod, the Donegan relatives, and lives in Provinceton across Cape Cod Massaschussetes where he grew up . He returns to his family's home in Massachusetts .
 I occupy the apartment for sevearl years, twice in scrapes with my neigbero over a fraud I alledged of trafficking. I occupy it for years . I occupy a space in the apartment . I occupied the apartment twice, twice over the fraud I committed, twice
 Jim and Sue Ann Donegan his new wife live in the Sierras . Jim moved to Texas to get rid of Arlington Mnetal Health which seesm to be working against me and my brother had influcence over JAMES AND SUE ANN DONEGAN .
 Jen Moore references the incident and my fight back, verbally, against some reall abuse I was taking . He is distraught I am under arrest for fighting with my neigbor Thea Smith and I break my arm slamming had prison cell structure wotried about him .
 I am so tired I can not stand and he resents my observation of his work without sharing in it. He resents me observing my observations without sharing with it. I'm so tired, I can't stand and I'm not sure I'm going to be able to stand .
 Jim, Tom, Ed, and Mark will tour National Air and Space Museum, WWII Memorial, all of D.C. on foot, and is the last ha-rah of any Donegans together . Jim will come out and visit as well at several points .
 Me evicted and flying to Texas homeless, Tom and Mark back to Massachusetts, and Jim back to Truckee where he will soon die, and me in Texas . Tom, Mark, Jim, Mark and Jim are now living in Texas, and I'm in Texas. Me ev
 Investigative Journalist Jen Moore was found dead in a suburban Washington D.C. hotel room Monday . Jen Moore is a Patriot for Exposing the MKULTRA Program and Silenced Patriots Exposing MKULTra at the risk of herself being Silenced .
 Police are Zz closely investigating the cause of death after NF | former FBI Agent Robyn Gritz, a friend of Moore’s, made inquiries with homicide detectives Monday afternoon in Prince Georges County, Maryland .
 Robyn Lee Gritz Organizer of Austin, Texas, says she was discriminated and retaliated against by the FBI after 16+ years of service .
 Former FBI Agent Speaks Out: ‘I Was Not Protected. For 15 years, Gritz says, she did her job well . She says the CIA has an interest in concealing it created Barack Obama to fight communism in Africa .
 When a reporter made contact with her last year, she was selling cosmetics at Macy’s . “All my experience, all the time I had put in there, I’m selling lipstick and blush,” she says .
 Republican lawmaker from Iowa says he’s concerned about what he heard from Gritz and ta small but vocal band of female whistleblowers at the FBI .
 In RKO (Joseph Kennedy Sr) Howard Hughes aviation move much like Hellcats great aviation filming shows an F-86 intercepting a Russian pilot . For a while. ee eee aia ca aos .
 The United States president was John F Kennedy . The UK Prime Minister was Harold Macmillan . Pope John XXIII was leading the Catholic Church . John F. Kennedy was the US president .
 Cheney greeting President Richard Nixon in 1970 with then-Director of the Office of Economic Opportunity Donald Rumsfeld in inal the background . Cheney was in office at the time of the time .
 The term first came into popular usage after it was used in a 1946 speech by former British Prime Minister Winston Churchill . The Special Relationship is often used to describe relations between the United Kingdom and the United States .
 Both nations have been close allies during many conflicts in the 20th and 21st centuries, including World War I, World War II, the Korean War, the Cold War and the Gulf War .
 The level of cooperation between the UK and the U.S. has been described as ‘unparallelled’ among major world powers . Both governments also have close relationships with many other nations .
 Richard Bruce Cheney is an American politician and businessman . He served as the 46th vice president of the United States a Ne from 2001 to 2009 under George W Bush . Dick CHeney retrieved from Wikipedia and copied .
 Details of Cheney’s second Wyoming arrest, in July 1963, have also fallen victim to time i and records destruction practices at the local Municipal Court . Eight months later, Cheney was arrested in Rock Springs, Wyoming, Wyoming .
 Police arrest card shows Cheney was fined $100 for his second DWI conviction . The arrest card was maintained by the Rock Springs Police 1 Department .
 In 1990 the Academy honored him with The Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award . In 1991 he received the Frank Capra Achievement Award from the Directors Guild of America .
 Howard Koch was an American playwright and screenwriter who was blacklisted by the Hollywood film studio bosses in the 1950s . Koch died in 1995 .
 Recent advances in DNA family databases require my DNA to be moved (under the pretense of medicine) into Africa . The move will be under the guise of medicine .
 Gregg Abbot and Mark Gonzales are Concealors and Traitors and use Mafia ties to protect MKLUTRA A Genome-claims Felony pretexts based Racket and Why It Exists .
 Industrial espionage is a form of espionage conducted for commercial purposes instead of purely national security . Economic espionage is conducted or orchestrated by governments and is international in scope . Industrial or corporate espionage is more often national and occurs between companies or corporations .
 LBJ served as the 36th president of the United States from 1963 to 1969 . Died May 8, 1978, Tucson, AZ . Was an American educator and politician .
 Cuban exile told sons he trained Oswald, JFK’s accused assassin, at a secret CIA camp vy’ f Ze Lyndon Johsnon was married to a teacher in Hills Country Texas of mired poverty Hispanics .
 A Protestant with strong social ministry tbeliefs and strong anti-communists beliefs in brinksmanship he 1was working closely with the Vatican, Peace Corp, East-West ‘Center in Hawaii his legislation created and he broke ground for rand J Edgar Hoover of the FBI in
 The :Salvation Army and YMC were sources of outreach inside and routside the USA . They joined with progressive liberalized liberalized :movements around the world including groups that were far tremoved from strict Roman Catholicism .
 A hacker gets in by hacking an account. tOnce i in the hacker creates new account not authorized on the isystem. A hacker creates a new account that is not authorized .
 Deleting the first account which was hack and all records are now Clean . The new accounts are now clean and the first accounts are deleted .
 They now have consolidated rand laundered their power into legitimacy . Riding on the :cOat tails of their dead criminal parents they now have consolidation rand .
 'Riding on the coat tails of their dead criminal parents they now thave consolidated and launched their power into legitimacy' 'They now have consolidated and . launchered their power,' says CNN's John Sutter .
 DICK CHENEY November 18 1962 joins plot JFK was killed over, makes clones from Glorian Donegan . JFK was assassinated over the assassination of JFK in November 1962 .
 In a wheelchair with a spinal injury, Jade Helm religiously opposed to fetal stem cells . Still alive and runs the NDAA Targeted a i.i.
 U.S. Supreme Court permitted Texas law to go into effect, contrary to constitutional precedent of Roe Wade . Texas law practically outlawing abortion has sent shockwaves through our nation . Roe Wade has been a constitutional precedent for abortion since 1973 .
 Republican arguments against Roe Wade have changed over the years . Roe Roe Wade is the subject of a series of challenges to the decision .
 Republicans used to leave God out of the argument, but this has changed because... well, presumably because they know what God wants . Republicans now know what they want, and that's why they're using the argument .
 With known ties to Calveras outlaw violent motorcycle group and associations with ties to Knights Templar drug cartel, Mexican Mafia, and Cali cartel he has an underground Hispanic migrant background in his life and family .
 An Abuse of Office scheme subverted the planned years I had when coming to Texas . I think COINTELPRO on a large scale put in place was meant to roadblock my normal life . An abuse of office scheme has subverted my planned years .
 There are few of the original group left who assassinated JFK and RFK and nearly killed Ted Kennedy . RFK was nearly killed by the assassination of RFK, RFK .
 Bush son of Prescott Bush and long running 1900s Eugenics and MKLUTRA in Vienna . Jueng and Frued were on the rise turning to Nazism about 1926 . Then into the Berlin Olympic of 1936 and Nazi seizure of Austria and totalitarian control over psychiatry .
 Included in this was radiation, genetics, causes nuclear war, and racial relations inside the USA and around the world .
 Pizzagate is a prisoner abuse scheme, how the CIA uses prisoner abuse to control assets . The CIA is using prisoner abuse schemes to gain control of assets, according to CNN.com .
 Getting me false arrested on pretexts (Stealing my wallet when I am alone in Austin Texas, no help available, as a vagrant) and things like that. As a homeless vagrant, I was arrested for stealing my wallet . I'm not a homeless person, but a
 Once in the system blind conservator can use my family inheritance as rights to genomic in family courts . If I owe and Texas or religious family any compensation, I can use it as a right to DNA testing .
 I do owe for using immigrant families as pornography. Allegedly to family courts run by the mafia (Mark Gonzales Mafia district attorney for Nueces County Texas) Mark Gonzales is a former district attorney in Texas .
 A dopple of me hires adult entertainers and when the adult entertainer arrives he finds he is developmentally retarded and in need of abusive constraining family court detention . The dopples of me hire adult entertainmenters and find I am developmentally retired .
 Such is the mechanism used against Brittney Spears, Tom Clancy ina divorce created conservancy for literary rights) and other prison/Blind Conservator situation . Such is a mechanism used by the Blind Conservator .
 House Pike Committee Leo Ryan: Spread rumors about “for the good of the community” IS NOT NOT NOT a | Pedophile | | Traitor | | Terrorist | | Criminal | Crazy person | | Prostitute, etc., They are a LIKELY from a
 Organized Espionage Elements surrounding the Stalking victim are planting evidence and faking public appearances for Espionage reasons . The victim is being stalked and stalked for over two years .
 The faked appearances manufactured for public view are deceitful propaganda to destroy the lives of stalk victims . Stalk victims are stalked by their stalkers .
 Stalk victims are being discredited so Criminals in Government abusing their power are not threatened by those who they have already harmed . Stalking victims are now being discredited, so criminals in Government abuse their power will not be threatened .
 Abuse of Power re victimizes and discredits already NWO victims by discrediting victims of illegal government acts . Abuse of power re-victimizes already victims of the NWO . abuse of power is a form of self-defence .
 I have been exposed to Racial Abuse included aggravated racially motivated sexual assault . I have a history of racial abuse, including assault and sexual assault. I was exposed to racial abuse in the past, including sexual assault, according to reports .
 The excursive Response from me is shaped in reflection to the incursive boundary violating assault of me, thus my Cursive script I write is supposed to be my confession of being a racists, etc., I have stalkers ‘paying” gym women, others for the “
 I had asked for NRA Texas Friends of the NRA for legal help, suggested United States Dept of Defense lawyers seek Amicus status in civilian courts for litigation against the Deep State shadow gov, sought other remedies .
 My book is full of true accounts of silenced people tied to MENA airport in Standard Oil Arkansas (Rockefller territory) of also Free Masonry head quarters .
 My book goes into the Bush family long oil interest in the Deep State and JFK assasination role, mafi, and many other factors . Bush family has long oil interests in Deep State, JFK assassination role and mafi .
 My book is meant to inform and encourage power of the polls to vote corrupt long term political families out, says author . The book is intended to encourage voters to vote out corrupt politicians backed by shadow government big whigs .
 The stories in Silenced and other chapters are reals and drawn from major metropolitan newspapers in the cities where silenced people’s bodies were found in ritual killing manners . The lack of press coverage and lack of retaliation against the hits upon silenced people is the state of affairs in the USA
 Historically I recount contacting contact militia groups as steps I had taken before tuning to write my self published book . Historically I had to contact contact militias groups to write a book .
 "Be advised my book does not recommend any trust for the U.S. legal system," says author .
 The wise choice is never give police any plausible excuse for an arrest, says author . I consider it necessary risk to consent to arrest or other police actions in the USA but the wise choice should be never given police any excuse for arrest .
 The depth of unmitigated corruption of out-of-control Shadow Government systems is not only worrisome it is complete in all layers of policing and law . It's complete in the layers of police and law, says Labour leader David Cameron .
 "If anyone has ever resisted arrest and face charges I would be honored if after the fact they relied on my book and life story to say they feared for their lives when the police approached," he says .
 Compliance with police instructions and getting as clearly an obviously marked path out of custody via co-operation is your best chance . Start out by never facing arrest, but start out by not facing arrest .
 It is best when things are working, try and adapt to adapt the course rather than become more strict to it. Try and adapts to the course, rather than becoming more strict. It is the best for things to work in the world, says Mark Hughes .
 Zelots can have to great a faith they are right and only by being more exact to that can thier plan work . Zelots have to have to be exact to get their plan to succeed .
 I used a diagram from HTML skills I love to use and showed gray area in the middle and trying to not be black and white in my thinking . I used to use HTML skills to use .
 Many took the idea of black and white thinking as my being a white, in white thinking and the needs for blacks to study me as a psych while assaulting me . Because I tend to write political and natural law philosophy, many took the notion of black . thinking as his being white,
 I left Arlington Virginia where I had that counselor who wanted to study me and left for Texas sine the Arlington counselor was psychotically leftist . I left Virginia for Texas because of the left-leaning counselor .
 When I went to a Hegel Master Slave Dialectical meet-up with Harvard PhD she snapped my meeting printout reminder from me and was gleeful she caught me in racist ideations .
 DA Mark Gonzales began assaulting me as well with his Mental Health Services who continue to try to sign me up even through I draw large cross outs . I am not singed up and will die homeless before I ever an ever an trapped in any social services .
 'Those who have harrassed me say they are from the CIA or Secret Service. Those who have . said they were from the . CIA or . Secret Service,' she said. 'Those . who have been harrassing me say that are from . the CIA'
 Félix Ismael Rodriguez Mendigutia is a former Central Intelligence Agency Paramilitary Operations Officer in the Special Activities Division . Known for his involvement in the Bay of Pigs Invasion and the execution of communist revolutionary Che Guevara as well as his ties to George H
 Rodriguez came from a wealthy family of land owners in his native Cuba . Rodriguez is the son of a wealthy Cuban land owner .
 His uncle was the Minister of Public Works during Fulgencio Batista’s dictatorship . His uncle is also a former public works minister .
 He attended the Perkiomen School in Pennsylvania but dropped out to join the Anti-Communist League of the Caribbean . The league was created by Dominican dictator Rafael Trujillo with the intention of ending communism in Cuba .
 The invasion of Cuba was a failure, and Rodriguez went back to Perkiomen . The invasion was a failed war .
 He graduated in June 1960 and went to live with his parents in Miami . Thousands of Cuban exiles had moved to Miami, where thousands of them had moved .
 In September 1960, he joined a group of Cuban exiles in Guatemala, supported by the Central Intelligence Agency, to receive military training . He was trained by the CIA in Guatemala .
 In October 2013, two former DEA agents and a pilot who allegedly flew for the CIA claimed to the Mexican journal Proceso and to the United States network Fox News that the CIA had been “complicit” in the murder of DEA agent Enrique “Kiki”
 Violent gangs stalk me as MY HTML table science of white racism they are studying . Violent gangs stalking me as I write this is the world's first time I've seen violence in the U.S. violent gangs stalk .
 In my book I am going more into this history of being assaulted by the social services guy being elected and conflict bases assaults of me in public, Conflict Engagement including while being physically assaulted in provoked fights . In his book he is going more .
 I have aske militia groups to move and and kill these open mexican mafia gang members, it has not happened. I have been trying to kill them, but it hasn't happened. It's not happened .
 "A militia group can weight whether I need the defense of another and decide that from themselves rationally. A militia group will weigh whether they need to defend themselves from another," he says . "They can weigh whether or not they need the help of another," says the author .
 I believe Mark Gonzazles along with some black FBI and black DOD were the killers of Jen Moore . Jen Moore was murdered by Mark Gonzasles, a black FBI agent .
 PsyOps based in faked events, stage actors in public places leading to Dissinforming others about events and people . It was about the time I decided to leave Texas that I asked for Militia group help, going to militia web sites, getting no where .
 I decided to simply leave Texas in a 4X4 going to California with my belongings in two to move to California . "I decided to go to California simply to get my belongings out of the house"
 Jen Moore was stalked and attacked by Texans skid row Knights Templar drug cartel and Mexican Mafia and others with Texas registered vehicles all through the other states . Who knew what the stalkers were doing and why?
 I stopped contacting militia groups about 5 years ago. With leases violated and false arrests made over and over again, 8 years of being attacked, I am just continuation the book chronicling the attacks on me .
 To some, it produces images of government controlled communications/mass media, telling the people only what the government wants them to hear . To others, it appears to be an example of government-controlled communications .
 To others, the mere mention of ‘psychological’ operations or warfare invokes visions of “mind control” through some mysterious means of brainwashing . Still to others, “psychological operations’ or warfare’s” invokes notions of �
 It should be clear that modern psychological operations, or PSYOP, is none of those things . Modern psychological operations are none of that things . It's not the same thing .
 PSYOP is not unlike the public advertising that we are all exposed to wherever we go, every day, through all kinds of mass media . On the contrary, it is not the contrary . The government has been under fire for its anti-terrorism policies .
 The negative connotation that some people attach to the word psychological’s psychological” prevents many people from recognizing the simple truth. “Psychological” is a simple truth,” says author .
 If you do not have a good product to sell, people will not continue buying it, no matter how much you advertise . Everyone knows that if you don't sell, you have to be a good seller .
 The same applies to the points of view advertised through the use of psychological operations . The psychological operations are used to promote the views of people with different views .
 We have no reason to fear PSYOP, but we do have ample reason to respect it for what it can do . Thus we have no fear of it, but respect it as a tool that can be useful .
 By the application of sound PSYOP techniques, through face-to-face communication and mass media communications, we have demonstrated that we can appeal to the intelligence, reason, and emotions of our target audience to get them to think and act as we desire .
 "If these people are shooting at us, we can persuade them to lay down their arms," he says . "We can persuade these people to lay their arms. If these people shoot at us we can . lay down our arms. We can," he adds .
 "If they are belligerent and uncooperative, we can show them the value of unity and cooperation," he says . "We can show the value and cooperation. If they're belligerent, they can be shown the value," he adds .
 The utilization of PSYOP can prevent needless bloodshed, destruction and misery . The use of PSyOP can stop needless bloodshed and destruction .
 USS. USS. political, military, economic and ideological activities used by the U.S. government to secure national objectives . USS. Political, Military, Economic and Ideology activities are used to support national security objectives . The USS.
 U.S. Army’s Civil Affairs and Psychological Operations Command at Fort Bragg, North Carolina . The mission of providing ; Psychological Operations for the United States Military today rests with the U.N.
 Psychological operations may be defined broadly as the planned use of communications to influence human attitudes and behavior . The aim is to create in target groups behavior, emotions, and attitudes that support the attainment of national objectives .
 The form of communication can be as simple as spreading information covertly by word of mouth or through any means of multimedia . It can be used to spread information by word-of-mouth or by using any form of media .
 The weapon is not how its sent, but the message it carries and how that message affects the recipient . The weapon's message is how it carries, not how it is sent, it's how it's received .
 He is a part of Kingpin level COINTELPRO MKULTRA Cartel designed at knowingly stopping my book on my family history, using City of Corpus Christi Police to plant evidence, cross-wire buildings, utilities, rental receipt frauds, fake findings on obvious ars
 As I gained the Corpus Christ PD records and as aSECOND TEAM showed up at my house, the obvious facts of the theft of my PC and TV by “Alias Crackhead in Unit 45” was altered to fit a corrupt government narrative .
 The obviously altered false narrative report came directly out of the CCPD building where it was handed to me . The false arrests depend on police manufactured pretexts such as theft of my wallet, or other times, keys, etc., ore manufacture of cessation of SSDI or job income in order
 Reports are that Mark Gonzales is sexually addicted to white dominatrices . Gonzales and his family members are benefiting from the money laundering racket .
 Clty will begin attacks such as destroyng my PC by pouring water on it, giving verban and nonverbal death threats, or noise disturbances or attacks inside my own home .
 The murder of Jen Moore I believe Mark Gonzales to be involved in and she too was being warned to drop the subject matter of what she was reporting, the history of Free Masons, the Vatican, OSS, and CIA, and Jen Moore would not stop reporting .
 Running an Organized Crime ring using “practice drills’ to stage events which are fake but produce pretexts for real law suits . The alleged victims are poor immigrant families with no means of support themselves, often undocumenteds who are Special Victims .
 Anti Gang Unit Tracy California Police Officer Jen Moore fought against these gangs and their illegal sources of funding .
 The Donegans were exploited by illegal use of our genetics in the 1960s . Caller*Vimes Rise of Gonzales because he was needed by the Free Mason Kings of 9 Or So Crowns .
 Since then, there has been attempts to deny in us, at least me and my mother, the exact good cognitive attributes which exist in us and also exist in others our genome exists in like the Obamas and others . The Obamas are among those who have a genetic link to the
 Elites are able to use holding office to create Legends, dis-truths, by Psychological Warfare Information Deception . They drive us into homeless shelters to be attacked by thugs .
 In my particular case the thugs selected tend to be non whites and non U.S. Citizens thus I not only look like a criminal low life but a nazi one . The thugs selected are non-whites and non-U.S citizens .
 If my genome history Jen Moore was about to reveal was coming from Windsor Kutschera biologically parented Glorian Donegan I must surely be KutSchera type, or it might be NSA fun to provoke me racially and test the Kutschersa side of me .
 As the last living relative of Glorian Donegan I am extreme risk and further, my reputation is at risk too as I am interfered with in reproduction, academics and study, social opportunities, etc., As it is said by my stalkers they are going to “turn me down
 There is a bit of surgical switching between truth and fiction tied to the the money laundering racket of my trust fund, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "There is a lot more truth than the truth behind the money-laundering racket"
 Police hijack the opportunity in a shame event with a mentally retarded person claiming to be me . The real trust fund of Ed Donegan will pay a claim against the trust, and the child will owe the child .
 This had been going on in the 9 years before I came to Texas but expanded as it continued to result in criminal gains of false claims . The claims were made in Texas in the 1990s and 2000s, but expanded .
 The FBI raided the home of a patriotic whistle blower who had already turned over copies of documents in his possession regarding the Clinton Foundation and Uranium One . This book Patriot or Traitor is published by Michael Socarras .
 Cain met with a senior member of Horowitz’s office at a church close to the White House to deliver the documents to the IG, according to Socatras . Cain is a former White House staffer .
 The FBI has yet to talk to Cain’s attorney despite the raid, according to Socatras . Cain's attorney has not yet been contacted by the FBI, he says .
 A federal agency violates the Whistleblower Protection Act if it takes (or threaten to take) retaliatory personnel action against any employee or applicant because of disclosure of information by that employee . The act is a violation of the act by a federal agency .
 Paula Xinis served as an Assistant Federal Public Defender, serving as Director of Training for the office, 2006 to 2011 . WETACHICMOLIE IIMA IIMA CI INlitlaliyel is a federal public defender .
 In November 2011, Obama nominated Baltimore Circuit Court Judge George Levi Russell III to fill the vacant seat to which Day had been nominated . Russell was confirmed by the Senate in May 2012 .
 The Justice Department and FBI missed a Wednesday deadline to provide information about the government's unlawful raid on a former FBI contractor turned whistleblower’s home last month . The raid was unlawful, the Justice Department says .
 General Shinseki Sheppart Smith went against the powers-that-be and delivered the opinion in the Court of Public Opinion . The danger to both the troops and the mission were greater than reported so far .
 Eric Ken Shinseki is a retired U.S. Army 1 general who served as the seventh United States Secretary of Veterans Affairs . He is also a retired United States Army 1 . general . He served in the United States Department of Veterans . Affairs .
 The Bush administration did not want to admin until after the general election . That would have to wait until after war time preside . Mission Accomplished Bush was safely into his second term .
 Obama Grandparents CIA Connections; Bogus Harvard Certifica Grandma “Toot’s” Hawaiian banking intrigue . Madelyn Payne Dunham served as the vice president and chief escrow account officer for the bank of Hawaii at an interesting time .
 When BBRDW founder Ron Rewald attempted to commit suicide in a room at the Waikiki Sheraton in 1983, the CIA’s “plausible denial” machine went into full gear . The CIA code name “WINTERDOG” and �
 Judge Martin Spence sealed all documents mentioning the CIA and all attommeys, parties, and their agents under a court gag order . The judge sealed all the defense documents and placed sealed all references to CIA .
 BBRDW established the Hawaiian-Arabian Investment Company and United States & United Arab Emirates Investment Company . The Ayala-Hawaiian Corporation with Zobel.
 George Walker Bush is the 43rd president of the United States . He was born in July 946 . He served as President of the U.S. from 1983 to 1989 .
 Bo Duke and Luke Duke and their friends and their female cousin Daisy Duke, and other family , have various escapades as they evade the corrupt law officers Boss Hogg and Sheriff Rosco P Coltrane . Son of MKULTRA principle Prescott Bush father of somewhat reluctant MKULT
 “Boss” Hogg was the sole commissioner of Hazard County, Georgia, and thus held all executive and judicial powers therein . The Prescott Bush, George H.W., George, Neil Bush "Boss Hogg” family along with the Rockefeller Money, Nixon’s
 For an agency that disavowed any connection to BBRDW, the CIA curiously maintains detailed files on the failed corporation that was involved in making pay-offs to Asian dictators who were allies of the U.S. The Manufacturing of a President .
 Deen iat 7013 JFK/Assassination Bush. j i cae RFK/Assassin . '® exposed as the kingpin of the Deep state and probable a key mover behind the 9/11 plot .
 Too many people, like North and Rodriguez, have kept records that show Bush’s CIA role back to the 1961 invasion of Cuba . The problem is, it fell apart because too many people kept records .
 Evidence was uncovered placing George Bush working with Felix Rodriguez when JFK was killed . That is exactly how evidence was uncovered .
 On the day of the assassination, Bush was in Texas, but he denies knowing exactly where he was . The INEIas atone atone Ronreis.
 Lyndon LaRouche describes Jeb Bush’s Presidential candidacy as a deadly, unfolding strategic potential in a world already careening toward financial collapse and world war . Both Prescott and George Walker Bush became the 41st and 43rd Presidents of the United States, respectively, who both initiated
 LaRouche calls the Bush League of Nazis . The former Vice President and President was George W Bush’s eight years in office . Obama has suffered under his successor-in-interest, Barack Obama-what La Rouche calls .
 The Bush oil family, Rockefeller Standard Oil family, Middle East plans, England the Rothschilds, Windsors, dynasty is tied to Michecal Mulcasey, Donal Barr, William Barr, and more . MKULTRA, the assinations of some of Camelaot, and
 TO AMERICA ARTHUR RUDOLPH ' SIDney GOTTLIEB 'SIDney Gottlerieb' CIA/TSS/ MKULTRA ship .
 Many had been members of the Nazi party and the Gestapo and had conducted experiments on humans at concentration comps and commited other war crimes . The scientists ended up in the United States military industrial complex .
 In an active cover-up, ‘deception is used. Information is simply not provided. In a ipassive cover up, information is simply . not provided; in an active . cover-ups, 'deception' is used . In a  I-assive
 Initially a cover-up may require little effort; it will be carried out by those closely involved with the misdeed . Initially, a cover up may need little effort, but it will require little . It will also require little efforts to cover up by those who are involved in the
 Once some hint of the hidden matter :Starts to become known, the cover-up gradually draws all the top leadership, rat least, of an organization into complicity in covering up a misdeed .
 Cover-up involves ‘withholding incriminatory evidence,’ while whitewash involves releasing imisleading evidence . While the terms are often used interchangeably, cover-ups and whitewashes involve withholding incriminatory information . Whitewash is a form of cover-up
 Failure to reveal the treason of :another was in itself high treason, but statutes of 1551-1552 and 1554-1555 imade concealment of treason misprision only . According to Bracton, de Corond, . et.8, failure to reveal
 Misprision of felony is the concealment of a felony committed by another ‘person, but without such previous concert with, or subsequent assistance of ithe offender, as would make the concealer an accessory before or after the ‘fact.’
 The offence was a misdemeanour punishable on indictment by fine and imprisonment . The truth about who is a patriot or traitor is revealed in this article .
 The episode later became known as the Chichijima incident . It led to the future president being hailed as a war hero .
 The Bush family had a long history at Yale, with both George Senior and George W Bush being part of the Skull and Bones society .
 The Bush political dynasty began with Prescott Sheldon Bush Sr. who helped Hitler’s rise to power . Bush passed away at the age of ninety four .
 She received her Bachelor of Arts degree from Colorado College, her mother’s alma mater . She wrote her senior thesis, “The Evolution of Presidential War Powers” for International Development .
 The Project for the New American Century [formed in the 20th Century] was a neoconservative think tank based in Washington, D.C. that focused on U.S. foreign policy . Cheney worked for the State Department for five years and the United States Agency . After 1993,
 Nuland held the rank of Career Ambassador, the highest diplomatic rank in the U.S. Foreign Service . She was a career ambassador .
 He died by heart attack awaiting the release of The Misfits with Marilin Monroe and about one year before my birthday of November 18 1961 . I believe he was aware of a plan to make a one year from then covert sleeper agent Barrack Obama Jr to be born one year
 Animal Farm, the Misfits, Rocky Horror, Jet Pilot, Love Story, The Sound of Music, and The Prince and the Showgirl are among the most famous films .
 Gable was almost always called Clark, and referred to as “the kid” by his father . He was named William after his father, but he was often called "the kid" by Gable .
 Gable was six months old when he was baptized at a Roman Catholic church in Dennison, Ohio . Gable died at the age of six months .
 His father refused to raise ; him in the Catholic faith, which provoked criticism from the Hershelman ; family .
 The following month, Gable’s beloved wife Carole Lombard was killed in the crash of a DC-3 airliner returning from a war bonds tour . Gable's beloved wife died in a plane crash in October .
 He sent a telegram to 1 President Franklin D Roosevelt asking for a role in the war effort . The telegram was sent to President Roosevelt asking him to help in the effort .
 He volunteered for the Army Air Forces, went to the 13* week Officer Candidate School, and was trained as a photographer and aerial gunner .
 Because of his Hollywood connections, he was made a part of the . Hollywood connections . located at what ; troops called “Fort Roach” the Hal Roach Studios in Culver City, Calif.
 Paul Mantz was famous for his stunt flying in films . Mantz became a major stunt pilot in the 1960s .
 Other FMPU stalwarts included Alan Ladd, Ronald Reagan and Ronald Reagan . Van Heflin: The FMPU was founded in 1964 .
 Gable was assigned to go to Britain to film Combat America, a propaganda movie about air gunners . Few of them went overseas, but Gable went to support the bombing campaign against Japan . Combat America was a propaganda film about navigational and topographic materials .
 The unit was given forty days to produce the films which would be used by B-29 Superfortress crews . They were given 40 days to make the films .
 Hunt served in the Navy, Army Air Corps, and Office of Strategic Services, the precursor to the CIA, in China . Hunt was in the Army, Navy, and Army Air . Corps in China during WWII .
 The spymaster decided to influence American hearts and minds by 1 making a full-length animated film based on British author George : Orwell’s Animal Farm . Orwell's Animal Farm is a political satire where rebel animals seize their farm .
 Animal Farm would be the first feature-length animated film ever made 1 in the UK and a colossal challenge . Animal Farm is the first animated film to be made in UK .
 The Office’s clandestine Information Research Department weren’t the only ones interested in acquiring the film rights . The film rights rights are still available for purchase .
 The CIA used hundreds of millions of dollars from the Marshall Plan for European recovery to finance its ‘cultural’ activities, says Saunders .
 The CIA had taken a leaf from the KGB playbook, using literary and artistic expression as organs of state policy . Animal Farm was the CIA's first attempt to use literary expression as an expression for political purposes .
 Animal Farm was part of a larger CIA culture war that extended to sponsoring Abstract Expressionist art exhibitions, musical concerts, magazines, and Hollywood movies to push the anti-communist agenda .
 De Rochemont chose British animators Halas and Batchelor to design Animal Farm’s memorable characters . The duo had experience working on British propaganda movies . Animal Farm was released in 2009 .
 The ending of Orwell's acclaimed novel would need to be changed to meet the CIA’s objectives . Orwell's ending would be needed to meet CIA's objectives .
 The book ends with , the animals and humans indistinguishable as corrupt, evil powers . It ends with the book ending with the conclusion of the book .
 Britain’s National Archives later revealed that UK spies funded a newspaper comic strip in the early 1950s based on Animal Farm . The comic strip ran in Brazil, Burma, Eritrea, India, Mexico, Thailand, and Venezuela .
 E Howard Hunt, the CIA officer who once said he “thought black”, later served 33 months in prison for organizing the bugging of the Democratic Democratic National Committee HQ during the ‘70s 1 Watergate scandal that brought down Richard Nixon’s government .
 AUGUST 4, 1962 was going to be a Revealer . Consider this timeline. and day of Birth Certificate. Consider this Timeline. and date of birth certificate.
 The Bush Cheney Zapata Oil faction of Boston Cape Cod are at odds with JFK and later RFK over assassination and moles . RFK in the area, likely staging possible time-line of birthday party with Obama Jr. lawyer . JFK and RFK were at odds over JFK and
 Monroe was placed in a psych ward during the filming of The Misfits . Clark Gabel and others would die in quick success as Monroe herself would .
 The Misfits are a group of refugees from Atomic families who form an ersatz one in Nevada . They effectively raise Perc an internet cowboy type with lots of ongoing injuries who needs a family;s care . Perc is a cowboy type who needs to be cared for by
 Monroe died shortly before midnight, about 4:30 am the following day . Police were called after the presence of the group of Lawford Shriver social circle were cleared from records .
 In France the story of Bobby Kennedy was covered, not in the USA and not likely in England either . Not likely in the U.S. or in England .
 U.S. Press corps immediately canceled interviews and coverage of that component Larry King . Shriver takes over for King .
 Inglewood Poject is Ingleo California's birthplace but several ‘alternative meanings” like street names create some ambiguity as a safety measure . ‘Alternative meanings’ such as street names are used as a security measure .
 He briefly ran for the Republican nomination in the U.S. presidential campaign of 1964 . He was a member of the Republican Party in 1964 .
 Minimal Brain Dysfunction is under stimulation (or under available) of brain metabolic function do to poor organic neurotransmitters in the brain such as Dopamine for which Dysoxin or other amphetamines serve as an analogy . Dysfunction occurs under stimulation or under available of
 This was a key fact in my long term relationship with my father . This is a key part of my long-term relationship with his father .
 It is my belief Minimal Brain Dysfunction includes 20 percent bipolar all the time . The pole could be up or down, change frequently, and like a broken watch even be correct some time .
 Max Jacobson “Dr Feelgood” (3 JULY 1900 17 Desoxyn (Crystal December 1979) The following arn eee for inimal Brain Dysfunction, or IDexapmphetamine, is the most commonly used form of drug .
 Nelson Rockefeller “Rocky’s” is tied to Rockefeller Psychiatry, the Nixon and many other administrations, and political office . My father felt bad he did not allow the prescription when I was 4, 1962, diagnosed .
 Wilibutrin was prescribed by doctors in the U.S. as part of the treatment for brain dysfunction . The anti-brain-dysfunctioning condition is a result of Wilbutrin .
 My father wondered if I carried a small defective gene perhaps from e exposure to toxins . My father thought it was a small defect that might have been from toxins .
 Minimal Brain Dysfunction are being studied wich runds in several families . Minimal brain Dysfunction is being studied in several family families .
 Lawford is said to be involved with Marilin at Barrack Obama Jr.'s one year birthday party . Lawford involved in relationship with Marillin . That day was said to have been the one year anniversary of Obama's birthday .
 ADHD which is included in Miniam Brain Dysfunction results from an turntable stule tone tone arm to lightly pressured thus it bounces between the grooves rather than stick with one . Dr CHarney told me ADHD which was included in the Miniam brain dysfunction results .
 ‘Too much focus gets the needle stuck and is over focus also called a Tweek.’ ‘Over focus also known as ‘Tweek’ .
 In the early 1960s, amphetamines were still widely accepted as innocuous medications . In the 1960s they were still accepted as harmless medications .
 A significant quasi-medical gray market in amphetamines had developed in the U.S.
 President John F Kennedy received regular injections containing around 15 mg of methamphetamine, together with vitamins and hormones, from a Germantrained physician named Max Jacobson I Edward Paul Donegan . Donegan believe she was tied to out wedlock Windsor family descendents being used as charismatic sleeper agents for
 Those who were “source material” personages from the program had to be silenced before they spoke . If they did speak they had to have been discredited and limited in the reach of their voice . But to prevent the sleepers agents from being identified and the truth told .
 JFK the Windsors and Barrack Obama Jr are connected to Seattle WA . 1953 Major World Events: United States and North Korea sign armistice ending the Korean War .
 Stanley Armour Dunham was from Seattle in the 1960s and later LESLIANNE SHEDD, 1968-1996 . Dunham was an anthropologist from Seattle . Dunham died in 1996 .
 Leslianne Shedd died NOV. 24, 1996, in the crash of a hijacked Ethiopian Airlines jet . Shedd fulfilled a lifelong ambition to work in foreign service by joining the U.S. State Department .
 JFK and the Windsors will gather there in 1962 oerhaps by telepone with Malcom X Verne Rheem .
 The commander of the American Expeditionary Force in France in World War I was in a coma and sinking . He died in the sinking of a German-built submarine in France .
 General Pershing recovered and lived for 10 more years more . Mason made the medical report on Pershing, who recovered and died 10 years later .
 Mason was chairman of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s edical advisory committee . Mason was also a member of the medical institute's edical committee . He is credited with saving millions of dollars .
 Dr. Mason Mason Southern California is a professor of clinical medicine, and an attending physician at Cedars of Lebanon Hospital . He is a physician at the Cedars Hospital in Lebanon, California .
 Mason was chairman of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s medical advisory committee . Mason was a member of the medical institute's medical advisory board . Mason: "I'm not a doctor who doesn't believe in science"
 Verne H Mason served his country in World War IT with the 451st Bombardment Group 726th Squadron Army Air Corps . Mason became Hughes personal physician as well as a .Principal in HHMI “Marilin in Seattle 1953 .
 It wasn't published at that time and didn’t appear in the P-I until April 2000, upon opening of an exhibit of historic photos at the Museum of History and Industry .
 Nikita Khrushchev emerged victorious upon consolidating his authority as First Secretary of the party’s Central Committee . Stalin's death triggere da power struggle in March 1953 .
 His domestic policies, aimed at bettering the lives of ordinary citizens, were often ineffective, especially in agriculture . His domestic policy was often ineffective . His policies were often aimed at improving ordinary citizens' lives .
 Khrushchev ordered major cuts in conventional forces in order to save the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union hoped eventually to rely on missiles for national defense . The country's conventional forces were cut in favor of missile technology .
 Khrushchev stunned the communist world with his denunciation of Stalin’s crimes, 1 and embarked on a policy of de-Stalinization with his key ally Anastas 1 Mikoyan . During his rule, Khrushchev stunned the . communist world .
 After some false starts, s anda narrowly avoided nuclear war over Cuba . Negotiations with the U.S. to reduce Cold War tensions .
 His » proclivity toward recklessness led the Kremlin leadership to strip him of power . Leonid Brezhnev was replaced with Leonid Kosygin as First Secretary and Alexei Kosygen as Premier .
 Barrack Obama Jr. is a passable person of dark skin and common appearance for nearly anywhere anywhere in the world . He is a dark-skinned person with dark skin .
 The Aleut and Yupik peoples (Alutiig/Sugpiagq, “Central” Yup’ik, Siberian Yup'ik, are not Inuit . They live in Alaska and Siberia, and do not generally identify as such as In
 Boeing was founded by William Boeing in Seattle, Washington, on July 15, 1916 . Boeing is one of the largest American companies in the world .
 A person caught in a misdeed is force to work for those who blackmail h 1m. THis is one of many real stories that fit the narrative of At Any Price where a person is force-to-work .
 Stanley Armour Dunham was the maternal grandfather of the 44th United States President Barack Obama . Dunham was born Stanley Dunham in 1926 . Dunham died in 2008 . Dunham is the mother of President Obama .
 Dunham was born in Wichita, Kansas . Dunham was the younger of two sons to Ralph Waldo Emerson Dunham, Sr. Dunham was also the son of Waldo Waldo . Dunham died at the age of 92 .
 His father’s ancestors settled in Kempton, Indiana, in the 1840s, before relocating to Kansas . His ancestors moved to Kansas in the 1800s, but moved to Indiana in 1841 .
 His parents were married on October 3, 1915, at a home on South Saint Francis St. in Wichita, Wichita . They opened The Travelers’ Cafe on William Street situated between the old firehouse and the old Wichita City Hotel .
 Dunham allegedly punched his high school principal and spent some time drifting, hopping rail cars to Chicago, California, and back again . Dunham was a rebellious teenager, allegedly punching his school principal .
 He married Madelyn Lee Payne on May 5, 1940, the night of her senior prom . He married her night of the prom .
 He is alleged to have been caught by his CIA connected wife Madelyn Lee Payne stealing Boeing B-29 plans for the Nazis . Payne was a patsy (a person blackmailed to cooperate) for the CIA afterward .
 Madelyn Payne Dunham worked on a Boeing B-29 assembly line in Wichita, Kansas . Dunham worked for the company during World War II . Dunham: "It's a great job for a woman in a great country"
 Dunham discovered his mother’s body after she had committed suicide in 1926 . Dunham was 8 when he found his mother's body at age 8 . Dunham found the body of his mother after she committed suicide .
 In June 1960, the Bureau International des Expositions certified Century 21 as a world’s fair . Century 21 was the first time Century 21 had been officially declared a world's fair in 1960 .
 Project manager Ewen Dingwall went to Moscow to request Soviet participation, but was turned down . Project manager went to ask Soviet participation .
 Neither the People’s Republic of China, Vietnam nor North Korea were invited . Neither the P.R. China nor Vietnam are invited .
 The exhibit included models and mockups of various satellites, as well as the Project Mercury capsule that had carried Alan Shepard into space . It also included a NASA Exhibit .
 These exhibits were the federal government’s major contribution to the fair . The exhibits were part of the government's major contribution .
 The United States Science Exhibit began with Charles Eames’ 10minute short film The House of Science . The exhibit on the development of science ranged from mathematics and astronomy to tomic science and genetics .
 This last looked at ‘Science and the individual’, ‘Control of man’s physical urroundings’ and ‘Man’ concept of his place in an increasingly technological world’
 Marilyn Monroe and Joe Dimagio were married 9 mos, officially excommunicated for the divorce "" afterwords, but I wonder if she gave a Catholic child into this plan with ' the Church arranging it . This may have » had Catholic implications as well .
 In August 1962 the CIA OSS DOD Windsors may have had the ear of JFK but I think Marilyn Monroe then JFK then RFK decided to jump ship from the whole program and even reveal it . Marilyn Monroe, JFK and RFK may have been involved in the program .
 Marilyn was one of Marilyn’s girlfriends . Marilyn died December 20, 2007, in Irvine, CA .
 Robert Kennedy was one of our greaterst Attorney Generals, says President Obama . President Obama says Kennedy was 'one of our greatest attorneys generals' Robert Kennedy .
 The Catholic Church did not recognize divorcepeople remained married in the eyes of God til the end of time . People remained married to each other even though they were separated .
 1957 or so versions of blends of fiction and reality of ‘the Prince and the Singer’ affair story lines . ONe of many . 1957 or . so many versions of . the . affair .
 She and Julie Ansdrews star in them and she and Julie Andrews seem to have King Edward VIII as a secret uknown amazing parent .
 George V will be crowned king on 22 June . George V's coronation will take place in London on June 22 .
 The British government decide that keeping Carpathia in the Triple Entente is critical during rising tensions in Europe . Among those arriving are the 16-year-old King Nicholas VIII of the Balkan country of Carpathian .
 Civil servant Northbrook is detached to the royals during their stay in London . The royals find it necessary to pamper themselves during their visit to the UK .
 Northbrook decides to take the Prince Regent out to the musical performance The Coconut Girl . Northbrook decided to take him to the performance .
 During the intermission, the Prince Regent is taken backstage to meet the cast . He is shown backstage at the play .
 He is not particularly interested in engaging with the male actors but extremely interested in the physical charms of Elsie Marina .
 The two eventually kiss and Elsie admits she may be falling in love, rebuffing Northbrook’s promised feint to help her leave the embassy . Elsie and Northbrook eventually kiss .
 Elsie then passes out from the many drinks she consumed before, during and after her semi-solitary supper .
 The following day, Elsie overhears a conversation concerning the young Nicolas’ plotting with the German embassy to overthrow his father . Elsie overheard the conversation about the plot to overthrow Nicolas .
 She likely knew as my familiy seemed to the dark side of the Sound of Music . She likely . knew as she likely knew .
 DiMaggio told Sheen where to go and scolded him that he had no right to tell him who to marry, Positano says . Sheen told Joe after the marriage dissolved, ‘You had . no right marrying her in the first place.’ — Posit
 DiMaggio thought people wouldn’t recognize him when he quietly entered through the cathedral’s discreet 51st Street door in sunglasses . He thought people would not recognize him as he entered the cathedral in sunglasses.
 Positano was recognized by Cardinal O'Connor, who gave him a shout-out at Mass .
 Gregory & Holy Redeemer YouTUbe video there are no blacksheep sermon below . I want to continue that idea of Jesus the Good Shepherd .
 DiMaggio a nation turns his lonely eyes to you what’s that you say mrs. Robinson joltin Joe has left and gone away hey hey hey . Where have you gone?
 She confided her most intimate secrets including her affairs with John F Kennedy and Robert F, Kennedy . She did not sleep with but Frank Sinatra (who feared she would be hurt as only a fling left behind)
 The weekend before her death, Marilyn Monroe spent time at the famous Cal Neva Lodge, outside of Lake Tahoe, partially owned by Sinatra . Marilyn spent the weekend at the lodge .
 Milton A “Mickey” Rudin was an entertainment lawyer . He counted among his clients Lucille Ball and Desilu Productions for 25 years, Warner Brothers for 30 years, Elizabeth Taylor, Norman Lear, Liza Minnelli, and Marilyn Monroe .
 As Monroe’s lawyer, and brother-in-law to her analyst, he was among the first on the scene at her death . Monroe's lawyer was also her lawyer and analyst .
 He gained his most prominence from his decades as Frank Sinatra’s spokesman, adviser, friend, friend and confidant .
 Maryiln Monroe was there to spend time with her ex-husband Joe DiMaggio who was staying nearby . She had decided to make a press announcement the following week that [she and Joe Dimagio ] were getting back together .
 Marilyn Monroe and baseball legend Joe DiMaggio wed in 1954 against the rules of Catholicism . The couple divorced nine months later .
 He was only in his 40s when Marilyn ied on August 5, 1962, but he never married again . Marilyn died in 1962 at the age of 48 .
 Marilyn’s real allegiance was with the class of Joe Dimagio she viewed as a gentlemen who also played baseball . Frank said she’d never have spilled about the Kennedys because she still had feelings for ‘Frank said she'd never have . Said she�
 She was ‘leaning Catholic with him towards the Kennedys who were ‘anti mob.‘Anti mob. She was 'leaning Catholic' with him,’ she said .
 Vegas was dirty with murders, etc. etc. and she had access ‘to see that world. She had access to that world,’ she says .
 One step across the Cal Neva border will do you for gambling and marrying . One step from the Nevada border is a step across California's largest lake .
 Giancana was boss of the Chicago Outfit from 1957 to 1966 . He was murdered on June 19, 1975, in Oak Park, Illinois .
 Giancana was born in Chicago to Italian immigrant parents . He was shot and killed hours before he would have testified before the Church Committee on CIA Behavioral Research abuses . Giancanas was born to Italian immigrants .
 Samuel Mooney Giancana controlled the illegal gambling, illegal liquor distribution, and political rackets in Louisiana . From the 1940s through the 1950s, he controlled the gambling, liquor distribution and politics .
 In the early 1940s, iancana was involved in Chicago’s African-American lottery payout system for the Outfit . In the 1950s, he was a member of the Chicago Outfit's African-African lottery system for African-Americans .
 Giancana was interred next to his wife, Angeline, in a family mausoleum at Mount *, Carmel Cemetery, in Hillside, Illinois .
 During part of the affair, McGuire had a concurrent affair with resident Kennedy, Antoinette Giancana says .
 CIA NSA called stupid, bipolar, etc., mis-diagnosed and contained into . Unrecognized custody or very low profile very low performing homeless (Edward Paul Donegan) Psych Ward Robert F Kennedy .
 Robert F Kennedy was a lawyer who was deeply opposed to Labour ' Racket businesses' Mob activities, mob profits, mob victims, and mob interference with policing dating back to prohibition .
 The mob would ultimately cost him his own brother John F Kennedy i he was likely deeply closelty connected to during thier journey together . The mob was responsible for Kennedy's death .
 RFK had a hard time reigning in the oil business, Teamseters, or any . other activity including disagreement in the ranks with the DOJ utilized , the mob against Castro . RFK was in the middle of the storm in the 1960s .
 Richard J Daley is remembered for doing much to save Chicago from the declines that other rust belt cities such as Cleveland, Buffalo, and Detroit experienced during the same period . Daley was succeeded by Michael Bilan .
 The union, like most unions within the American Federation of Labor : at the time, had a largely decentralized structure, with a number of local unions that governed themselves autonomously and tended to look only after their own interests .
 Control of a local teamsters local could bring organized crime significant evenues . It also meant that teamsters "" leaders were able to demand bribes in order to avoid strikes .
 Beck was elected to the Executive Council of the AFL on August 13, 1953 . His election generated a political battle between AFL President George Meany and federation vice presidents who felt Beck was corrupt .
 Hoffa’s attempt to challenge Beck caused a major national scandal which led to two Congressional investigations, several indictments for fraud and other crimes against Beck and Hoffa . The scandal even helped launch the political career of Robert F Kennedy . Hoffa's attempt to defeat Beck caused two
 This RFK versus the Mafia bifurcation will be present in Bay of Pigs and the Oil Barrell and Defense Department interest in the elimination of Castro .
 He sponsored the early Soviet space program, and enactment ; of relatively liberal reforms in domestic policy . He also sponsored the Soviet Union's space program .
 After some false starts, ; and narrowly avoided nuclear war over Cuba, . hegotiations with the United States to reduce Cold War tensions . Hegotiated with the U.S. to reduce tensions .
 This close encounter with death and his wealth freed ; him to pursue passions seeded in his youth music, sports, the » environment, science fiction, space travel and science .
 The 3. billion nucleotide letters arrayed as strands of DNA in a single fertilized egg give rise to the 30 trillion cells that make up a © human .
 In March 2002, after the success of the Human Genome Project, Paul convened meetings with geneticist James Watson and others to focus on a big biology project of his own . Paul convened with geneticists James Watson, James Watson to discuss the project .
 Minimal Brain Dysfunction is under stimulation (or under available of brain metabolic function do to poor organinci neortransmitters in teh brain such as Dopamaine . Dysoxin or other amphetamines serve as an working analogy .
 The book was later made into a movie starring Gregory Peck as Greenson’s character . Gregory Peck starred in the movie .
 There has been much conjecture, by investigating officers, press and public, about Greenson's involvement in a possible cover-up concerning the circumstances of Monroe’s death . Greenson has been charged with manslaughter in the death of the teenager .
 Greenson was well known for his early work on returning WWII soldiers suffering from Post Traumatic Stress . Greenson's work on PTSD was published in the 1940s .
 Tony Curtis, Frank Sinatra, and Vivien Leigh among famous clients . He also had other famous clients, such as Tony Curtis and Frank S. Sinatra .
 Greenson and his wife, Hildi Greenson, were the darlings of the Southern California psychoanalytic community, intellectuals and with certain notables in the entertainment industry . Greenson was the husband and wife of the late Gene Seymour Seymour Seymour .
 Greenson: I hope all of your roses are in bloom today including the blackest red ones . Greenson says he hopes all of his roses will bloom today .
 Greenson will encourage Marylin to sever some certain contacts, unkwon which ones . Greenson: "Marylin will be encouraged to sever certain contacts"
 He believed it was a miracle drug that broadened people’s thinking and he prescribed it to many of his female patients, overlooking or perhaps not noticing the many negative side effects of the drug .
 Dr. Max Jacobson retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified from Wikipedia . Dr. Jacobson: "I'm not afraid to say yes. I'm glad to say 'yes'
 The following ¢ John F Kennedy director Cecil B De Mille e Nelson Rockefeller “Rocky” e Marilyn Monroe . Note that Rockefeller is tied to Rockefeller Psychiatrity, the Nixon and many other administrations .
 Max Jacobson was a German physician and medical researcher . He treated numerous high-profile clients in America, including President John F Kennedy . Jacobson treated President Kennedy .
 James Angleton searched Marilyn Monroe’s apartment he stated hoping to find her diary . AUGUST 4, 1962 was going to be a Revealer .
 CIA OSS Vatican Mossad QEII Kill Marilyn . From Idaho USA to Italy/Vatican in WWII in WWII OSS to London back to the USA for the Israeli Desk .
 Holmes Pearson worked in the counter-intelligence branch of the Office of ; Strategic Services in London . He met the famous double agent Kim Philby .
 In 1954 Allen Dulles named Angleton chief of the Counterintelligence Staff . Angleton retained the position for the rest of his CIA career .
 Angleton became convinced the CIA harbored a high-ranking mole, and engaged in an intensive search . Angleton later became convinced that the CIA had a mole in the CIA . Anglele became convinced of the CIA's existence of a mole .
 He was one of the founder-officers of the Central Intelligence Agency in 1947 . He may have worked with the Vatican while working with the Italian Resisatnace .
 The prevailing belief at the time was that the anti-war and civil rights movements of the 1960s and 1 1970s had foreign funding and support . It was the prevailing belief that the movements had foreign backing .
 He twice informed the Royal Canadian Mounted Police that he believed Prime Minister Lester ‘ Pearson and his successor Pierre Trudeau were agents of the Soviet ' Union . He twice told the Royal . Mounted police that he thought Pearson and Trudeau were acting as agents .
 In 1964, under pressure from Angleton, the RCMP detained John Watkins, a close friend of Pearson and formerly Canadian Ambassador 1 to the Soviet Union . Watkins was arrested by the RCMP in 1964 . Watkins had been close friends with Pearson and was ambassador to Russia .
 Watkins died during interrogation by the RCMP and i was subsequently cleared of suspicion . Watkins was cleared of any involvement in the death of Watkins . Watkins died after being questioned by the police and died in hospital .
 Max Jacobson “Dr Feelgood” (3 JULY 1900 17 Desoxyn (Crystal December 1979) The following tae ee for inimal Brain Dysfunction, or IDexapmphetamine, is the following .
 Marilyn Monroe was diagnosed as a child and i was 4, 1962, diagnosed . In rehab in 2001 I was prescribed . Note that Rockefeller is tied to Rockefeller Psychiatry, the Nixon and many other administrations .
 Minimal Brain Dysfunction is under stimulation (or under available of brain metabolic function) do to poor organic neurotransmitters in the brain such as Dopamine . Dysoxin or other amphetamines serve as an analogy .
 Max Jacobson “Dr Feelgood” (3 JULY 1900 17 Desoxyn (Crystal December 1979) the following Meth . Used for Minimal Brain Dysfunction, or IDexapmphetamine .
 Rothberg discussed the apparent comeback of subject with Kilgallen and the break up with the Kennedys . Rothberg also discussed the break-up with the family .
 Rothberg told Kilgallen that she was attending Hollywood parties hosted by the "inner circle" among Hollywood’s elite . Rothberg said she was becoming the talk of the town again .
 Rothberg indicated in so many words, that she had secrets to tell, no doubt arising from her trists with the President and the Attorney General . Rothberg said in her statement, "I have a lot of things to do with this administration"
 The President visited a secret air base for the purpose of inspecting things from outer space . One such “secret” mentions the visit by the President at the base .
 Kilgallen learned of secret effort by U.S. and UK governments to identify origins of crashed spacecraft and dead bodies . He learned of effort from British government official from British official .
 Kilgallen believed the story may have come from the New Mexico story in the late forties . Kilgallens believed it may have been from the story in New Mexico .
 Kilgallen said that if the story is true, it would cause terrible embarrassment for Jack and his plans to have NASA put men on the moon . The story is believed to be true .
 Subject repeatedly called the Attorney General and complained about the way she was being ignored by the President and his brother . Subject repeatedly tried to get Attorney General to act on behalf of the President . Subject said she had repeatedly called Attorney General repeatedly to complain about how she was ignored by President .
 Subject made reference to “bases” in Cuba and knew of the President’s plan to kill Castro . Subject also knew of ‘bases in Cuba’ and ‘Killing Castro’ in Cuba, subject said . Subject said he knew of President
 Subject made reference to her ‘diary of secrets’ and what the newspapers would do with such disclosures . Subject also discussed what the papers would do if such disclosures were made . Subject said she had a diary of secrets .
 Speriglio was so interested in the circumstances surrounding Marilyn’s death that he wrote three books . He was a guy with a deep interest in her death .
 Until ' 1995, Speriglio had not made any kind of connection between the Hollywood uber-babe and UFOs . Until 1995, he had not been made any connection between Hollywood's supermodel and UFO .
 From the early-to-late 1990s, Cooper was a well-known figure in Ufology . Cooper of Big Bear Lake, California, was known for his work in the field .
 Most of the controversy stemmed from the fact that Cooper . Claimed to have received a wealth of old, sensational, leaked . documents . from retired figures in the intelligence community .
 JFK and the Windsors will gather there in 1962 oerhaps by telepone with Malcom X Verne Rheem Mason . Mason was an eminent American internist and associate of Howard Hughes . Mason died in 1965 .
 As a medical resident at Hopkins in 1922 Verne Rheem Mason gave the disease sickle cell anemia its name . Mason was one of the physicians called to the sickbed of General of the Armies John J Pershing. Mason was chairman of the Howard Hughes .
 Khrushchev emerged victorious upon consolidating his authority as First . On 5 March 1953, Stalin’s death triggered a power struggle in which he was Secretary of the party’�s Central Committee . He emerged victorious in the struggle to consolidate his authority .
 The Aleut and Yupik peoples (Alutiiq/Sugpiagq, “Central” 1 Yup’ik, Siberian Yupick) live in Alaska and Siberia . They are not Inuit, 1 and do not generally identify as such
 The Century 21 Exposition was originally conceived at a Washington Athletic Club luncheon in 1955 to mark the 50th anniversary of the 1909 AlaskaYukon-Pacific Exposition . It soon became clear that that date was too ambitious . Donald Barr of the CIA likely with Barrack Obama Jr
 The corporate headquarters were moved from Seattle to Chicago in 2001 . The company moved to Chicago from Seattle in 2001 to Chicago .
 At Any Price is one of many real stories where a person caught in a misdeed is force to work for those who blackmail him . The film is based on the real-life story of a man being blackmailed by blackmailers .
 Stanley Armour Dunham was the maternal grandfather of 44th U.S. President Barack Obama . Dunham was born in Wichita, Kansas, the younger of two sons to Ralph Waldo Emerson Dunham, Sr. Dunham was also the maternal stepfather of President Obama .
 October 3, 1915, at a home on South Saint Francis St. in Wichita, and , opened The Travelers’ Cafe on William Street . A rebellious teenager, Dunham allegedly punched his high school principal and spent some time drifting, hopping rail cars to Chicago, ; California, and
 Madelyn Payne Dunham worked on a Boeing B-29 assembly line in Wichita, Kansas, during the war . Dunham also worked on an airplane assembly line . Dunham died in 1945 .
 On NOVEMBER 25, 1926, at age 8, Dunham discovered his mother’s body after she had committed suicide . Dunham was 8 years old when he discovered the body of his mother .
 It also included models and mockups of i Various Satellites, as well as the Project Mercury capsule that had carried . Alan Shepard into space .
 President John F Kennedy was supposed to attend the closing ceremony of the fair on October 21, 1962 . President Kennedy was due to attend that ceremony .
 A potential explanation also exists that JFK and Marilyn Monroe were splitting with the Windsors system of stolen fertilized eggs as the OSS CIA plant to plant Windsor relatives .
 THis missle crisis was in full swing during the Expo as were racial problems . THis Missle Crisis was full swing at the Expo .
 Norma Jean was analogous to Julie Andrews, but drawn to the Roman Catholic, French Cathlolic, and Suave Italian Dimaggio Filmogrophy and possible messaging . The Misfits is a 1961 American drama western film written by Arthur Miller and directed by John Huston
 The supporting cast features Thelma Ritter, Eli Wallach and Kevin McCarthy . Kevin McCarthy is also in the cast .
 30-year-old Roslyn Tabor files for a quickie 6 week residency divorce from her inattentive husband, Raymond . Raymond Tabor . Tabor filed for the divorce in Reno, Nevada, Nevada .
 Roslyn's landlady Isabelle takes her to a cocktail lounge at Harrah’s for drinks . Afterward, Roslyn takes Isabelle to a drink at the bar .
 There they meet an aging cowboy named Gaylord ‘Gay’ Langland, and his tow truck driver best friend, Guido . The film is based on the book, "Gay" Langland .
 The friendly Guido is and tells Roslyn and Isabelle about his unfinished house in the country . Guido, is and explains his unfinished home in the countryside .
 She died within a year of the release of the film . e Edward Montgomery Clift .
 Clift then co-starred in John Huston’s The Misfits, which was the final film of both Marilyn Monroe and Clark Gable . Clift starred in the last film of Marilyn Monroe's final film .
 Clift’s last nomination for an Academy Award was for Best Supporting Actor for his role in Judgment at Nuremberg . Clift appeared in the 12-minute supporting part .
 Lorenzo James played a developmentally disabled man who had been a victim of the Nazi sterilisation programme . Lorenzo James went up to say goodnight to Clift, who was still awake and sitting up in his bed . Clift is still awake when he says goodbye to him at the end
 James asked Clift if he needed anything, and Clift politely refused and then told James that he would stay up for a while, either to read a book or watch some television .
 McCarthy’s father was descended from a wealthy Irish American family based in Minnesota . McCarthy's father is descended from wealthy Irish-American family .
 McCarthy's mother converted to Roman Catholicism before her marriage . McCarthy was born in Washington State to a Protestant father and a nonobservant Jewish mother . McCarthy’s mother converted Catholicism before she married .
 Joe DiMaggio was raised a Catholic in the staunch Italian American tradion of the early part of the twentieth century . Joe was raised in a Catholic Catholic family .
 Windsors using out of wedlock to research Minimal Brain Dysfunction is a probleml for Windsor and out of . wedlock children including sleeper agents via the neice of a . Gestaop General is somewhate problematic for Windsor .
 “Few people knew how devout a Catholic he was,” DiMaggio’s longtime friend Dr. Patrick’�s. “Dr. Patrick's. etrieved from The Deacon's Bench by deacon greg .
 Maryiln Monroe was there to spend time with her ex-husband Joe DiMaggio who was staying nearby . She had decided to make a press announcement the following week that they were getting back together . The world didn't know that she was there .
 He was only in his 40s when Marilyn died on August 5, 1962, but he never married again . Marilyn died in 1962 at the age of 40 .
 Marilyn’s real allegiance was with the class of Joe Dimagio she ‘viewed as a gentlemen who also played baseball.’ She 'viewed him as a gentleman who also plays baseball'
 Farah Fawcett deals easily with ‘Hollywood within their own boundreis and values they defend’ Farah’s role as an entertainer . Farah says she is ‘very comfortable’ with the role she plays in .
 Giancana was born in Chicago to Italian immigrant parents . He was shot and killed hours before he would have testified before 1 the Church Committee on CIA Behavioral Research abuses abuses . He would have been testifying before the committee .
 Giancana's caretaker found his body on the floor A of the basement kitchen where he was said to be frying sausage and 1 peppers .
 A week before his death, Giancana had gall bladder r 1 surgery in Houston . A week earlier, GianCana had a gall bladder operation in Houston.
 Giancana suggested using 1 poison pills to dose Castro’s food and drink . The poison pills would be used to poison Castro's drink and food .
 Device was 'hot planted' due to the arrest of the agent who had been tasked with 'planting it'
 During part of the affair, McGuire had a concurrent affair with President ennedy . Antoinette Giancana says McGuire also had an affair .
 He was the patriarch of the Daley family, whose members include Richard M Daley, another former mayor of Chicago . William 1 Daley Thompson was a member of the Cook County Board of Commissioners .
 Daley is remembered for doing much to save Chicago from the declines . that other rust belt cities such as Cleveland, Buffalo, and Detroit experienced during the same period .
 The union, like most unions within the American Federation of Labor at the time, had a largely decentralized structure . Local unions governed themselves autonomously .
 Hoffa’s attempt to challenge Beck caused a major national scandal which led to two Congressional investigations, several indictments for fraud and other crimes against Beck and Hoffa . The scandal helped launch the political career of Robert F Kennedy .
 After some false starts, and a narrowly avoided nuclear war over Cuba over Cuba, he conducted successful negotiations with the United States to reduce Cold War tensions . He negotiated with the U.S. to reduce tensions .
 Paul G Allen is a Microsoft co-founder who established the Allen Institute for Brain Science . Allen is the founder of the Institute of Brain Science, which focuses on brain science .
 Andrew James Breitbart was an American conservative journalist, writer, and political commentator . He was the founder of Breitbart News and a co-founder of HuffPost .
 Joseph Robinette Biden Jr. is the A6th and current president of the United States . He was born November 20,19,19 * 42 . He is a former Vice President of the U.S. Senate .
 Ashley Blazer Biden is an American social worker, activist, philanthropist, and fashion designer . She is the daughter of former Vice President Joe Biden . Biden is also an activist and designer .
 Mary Laurence “Lauren” Hutton is an American model and actress . Hutton was born November 17, 1943 .
 His call sign is ‘Chunky’ and he was sometimes referred to by this name on the communication loops . He was sometimes called 'Chunky' by his call sign .
 The Mafia Operation of Bush Cheney spins out of control into a 33 Wild Fire, and contract killings cover it up . This book The Cheney Family are USAID plans. This book is a book that reveals the Mafia Operation .
 Dick Cheney was 46th vice president of the United States in the Republican administration of Pres. Richard Bruce Cheney . Cheney was also 46th VP of the U.S. in the . Republican administration .
 George W Bush was secretary of defense in the administration of Pres. Bush and secretary | of defense .
 Richard Bruce Cheney married Lynne Vincent August 29, 1964 after courtship . In 1968 Cheney moved to Washington, D.C., to serve as President of the United States .
 Mary Claire Cheney born March 14, 1969 is the younger of the two daughters of Dick Cheney, the former vice president of the United States, and Lynne Cheney . Mary Claire is an attorney and politician . Mary Elizabeth Cheney was born July 28, 1966 and Mary Elizabeth Lynne was born
 She married her wife Heather Poe in 2012, and in 2013 was a signatory to an amicus curiae brief submitted to the U.S. Supreme Court . In 1969, Poe worked in the administration of President Richard Nixon .
 After leaving government service briefly in 1973, he became a deputy assistant to Pres. George W. Bush . After leaving the government, he went on to become a Deputy Assistant to Bush .
 In 1978 he was elected from Wyoming to the first of six terms in the U.S. House of Representatives . He rose to become the Republican whip in the House .
 In the House, Cheney took conservative positions on abortion, gun control, environmental regulation, among other issues . Cheney was in the House of Representatives from 1996 to 2007 .
 In 1978 he suffered the first of several mild heart attacks, and he junderwent quadruple-bypass surgery in 1988 . He suffered a mild heart attack in 1978 .
 Cheney oversaw the U.S. support of same-sex marriage during the Hollingsworth Perry case . Cheney also oversaw the United States military invasion of Panama and the participation of United States forces in in in May 2007 .
 In 1995 he became the chairman and chief executive lofficer of the Halliburton Company . He is a supplier of technology and services to the oil and gas industries .
 As vice president, Cheney was active and used his influence to help shape the administration’s energy policy i and foreign policy in the Middle East . Cheney's influence was used to shape energy policy, foreign policy, and energy policy .
 Critics had long charged Cheney with being a secretive public servant . Members of Congress brought suit ' against him for not disclosing records used to form national energy policy .
 After leaving office in 2009, Cheney remained in the public eye, often speaking on political matters .
 Mark Howard Gorton is a businessman whose research into deep politics was published on Gawker in 2014 . An American Medical Odyssey and, with Liz Cheney, Exceptional: Mark Howard, are published by Gawker .
 FSIS enhances public health and well-being by protecting the public from foodbome illness . FSIS ensures that the nation’s meat, poultry and egg products are safe, wholesome and correctly packaged .
 FAS works to improve foreign market access for U.S. products . FAS is an agricultural service that focuses on agriculture and food production .
 RHS offers loans, grants and loan guarantees for singleand multi-family housing, child care centers, fire and police stations, hospitals, libraries, nursing homes, schools, schools and first responder vehicles and equipment .
 RBS offers programs to help businesses grow as well as job training for people living in rural areas . RBS also offers job training programs for people in rural communities .
 The hijackers' mysterious trips to Las Vegas, where and how they could have been trained, and the document i that actually states a political motive for the attacks, he says . He finds abundant evidence implicating a nexus of Saudi | officials, American contractors and, most unthinkably
 The plan in 1961 to 1963 organized by the CIA, FBI, NSA, DAPRPA . On November 19 1962 likely CIA operation removed Cheney from view of the public on a fake drunk driving charge .
 Dick 46th Vice President of the United States Dick Chenney News . Liz Cheney’s Trump endorses Boston Herald endorses her .
 His wife, Susan, was later | a teacher and headmistress of the lower school at Ramaz, and both of their children attended the school .
 The fifth heart attack was in February, and by June I reached the point where I was obviously in end-stage heart failure . The fifth attack was February, but by June he had reached the stage where he was obviously suffering from heart failure.
 He needed a quadruple bypass, where surgeons rerouted blood vessels around i his arteries . He needed surgery to re-route his arteries and bypasses his arteries.
 The Bush oil family, Rockefeller Standard Oil family, Middle East plans, England the Rothschilds, Windsors, and more . MKULTRA, the assignations of some of Camelaot, some of the assignedations of many of the Camelaots, are linked to some of
 It has been non stop FBI attacks on me 25 hours a day for at least 30 years in a row non stop . "Every day the truth supports me over these FBI deeps state criminals," he says .
 Tom Donegan was gleefual at my fathers death to, so much so I had to leave my fathers side lest I kill both Tom and Mark at that time . He dealt with my mothers death with glee saying he noow could really kill me and was going to, and
 Los Angles County : : : Trinity United Church of C Nov 18 . California still note Chicago. Los Angeles .
 Trung speech, also Boross (bom custody as | Bush, CIA, Operation ea ae Ree sighted at 11/18/1919) Sighted on 11/1719 .
 If you have any questions or comments please don't hesitate to message message us at support@fetlife.com .
 I am a surveillance abuse survivor which targetd me with conflict situations I was then arrested for or the trust fund charged for . I was arrested for and then charged for. I am not a victim of surveillance abuse . I am now a survivor of sexual abuse .
 The True Story Of Revelation 12 Now Is Come Salvation, And Strength, And The Kingdom Of Our God . Be sure to pay close attention at the 32 minute mark in the video .
 Charles Milles Manson aka Charles Manson was a research subject for Dr. Dr. John F Kennedy . Dr. Scalia, Thomas C. Wales, Rohert F Kennedy, and perhaps others not yet considered under the umbrella theory of this book yet .
 The Helter Skelter scenario is a theory put forward by Vincent Bugliosi, the lead prosecutor in the Tate-LaBianca murder trial . It is the first time the prosecution has put forward a theory in the trial of the murder case .
 It is mostly based on the testimony of Paul Watkins, as a motive for the series of murders that were committed by the Manson Family in order to convict Charles Manson of conspiracy to commit murder . Charles Manson was convicted of conspiring to murder in the case .
 Bugliosi’s theory says Manson often spoke to the members of his ‘family’ about Helter Skelter in the months leading up to the murders of Sharon Tate and Leno and Rosemary LaBianca in August 1969 . According to Bugl
 The following night the gang struck again, killing Rosemary and Leno LaBianca in their home nearby . The next night, the gang attacked the couple's home in a nearby suburb . The gang also killed Rosemary, Leno and Rosemary .
 It has always been assumed that Manson’s victims were chosen at random, and the murders were the senseless act of a madman with a messiah complex . Manson's victims were the victims of a series of murders in the 1970s .
 In a 1976 interview with the National Enquirer, Manson himself insisted, “It didn’t matter who was killed as long as it was someone.” Manson himself said in an interview that he didn't care if someone was killed . Manson was convicted of murder in
 Sharon Tate's husband Roman Polanski was one of Hollywood’s hottest young movie directors at that time . But a book by investigative journalists Dylan Howard and Andy Tillett now reveal that Manson had not only previously met Sharon Tate but that he and Tex Watson had visited her house several
 This is the front cover art for the book CHAOS: Charles Manson, the CIA, and the Secret History of the Sixties written by Tom O’ Neill with Dan Piepenbring .
 The Tate-LaBianca murders were committed by the Manson Family in 1969 . The book presents O' Neill’s research into the background and motives for the murders .
 Terry Lynn Nichols is an American domestic terrorist who was convicted of being an accomplice in the Oklahoma City bombing . Nichols was convicted in 2007 of being a co-conspirator in the bombing .
 Prior to his incarceration, he held a variety of short-term jobs, including working as a farmer, grain elevator manager, real estate salesman and ranch hand .
 He met his future coconspirator, Timothy McVeigh, during a brief stint in the U.S. Army . He requested a hardship discharge after less than one year of service in 1989 .
 In 1994 and 1995, he conspired with McVeigh in the planning and preparation of the truck bombing of the Alfred P Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, on April 19, 1995 . He conspired to commit the 1995 bombing, which took place in 1995 .
 Nichols was convicted in 1997 of conspiracy to use a weapon of mass destruction . He was convicted of involuntary manslaughter for killing federal law enforcement personnel . Nichols was found guilty of conspiracy and involuntary manslaughter .
 He was sentenced to tried in Oklahoma on state charges of murder in connection with the bombing . He has been sentenced to a life sentence for the bombing in Oklahoma .
 As in the federal trial, the state jury deadlocked on imposing the death penalty . The state jury also deadlocked in its decision to impose a death sentence .
 He was also a believer in the Christian Identity religion . He frequented Elohim | City, a private community located in Oklahoma .
 In 1971, he founded the radical organization The Covenant, The Sword, and the Arm of the Lord ife imprisonment without the possibility of parole after the jury deadlocked on the death penalty . He founded the group The Covenant .
 He was a close associate of both Richard Wayne Snell and Timothy McVeigh . He was also close associates of both Snell .
 Snell was involved in the filming of planes that landed at Mena Intermountain Municipal Airport in Mena, Arkansas, thought of being used by the Central Intelligence Agency to smuggle drugs into the U.S.
 Snell claimed law enforcement agencies were involved in the coverup of the Mena airport drug smuggling . Snell had claimed that law enforcement was involved in covering up the smuggling .
 He had also made claims that he had filmed the then-Govermor of Arkansas, Bill Clinton, at Mena Intermountain Municipal Airport . That claim has never been proven .
 Snell claims one of the Arkansas state troopers who were assigned to the Governor’s security team at that time had beaten Snell's wife in an attempt to force her to reveal the location of the alleged video footage Snell had taken at the airport . Snell further claimed that
 In 1983, Snell attempted to dynamite a natural gas pipeline near Fulton, Arkansas, without success . Snell, accompanied by CSA members William Thomas and Steven Scott, attempted to blow up the pipeline .
 Scott was eventually captured and convicted of that crime . Several other CSA members were arrested on various other charges, mostly weapons violations, including weapons violations .
 By 1985, the CSA had essentially fallen into inactivity due to most of its members being either killed or incarcerated . The CSA was essentially inactivity until 1985 .
 Snell, known to his friends as “Wayne”, was an anomaly among the militants of the CSA . Snell operated autonomously, using the compound as his base of operation . He was known to friends as 'Wayne'
 Steven Scott, a frequent collaborator with Snell, gave this information in a federal prison holding cell to one of the then members . Steven Scott gave the information to a member of Snell's group .
 On November 3, 1983, Snell shot and killed pawn shop owner William Stumpp, who he mistakenly believed was of Jewish descent, and then on June 30, 1984, he killed black Arkansas State Trooper Louis P Bryant near DeQueen, Arkansas . Snell killed black state trooper
 A truck driver who witnessed the killing of Officer Bryant followed him and contacted the Broken Bow police department . Officer Bryant was shot dead in Broken Bow, South Carolina .
 Snell was wounded six times in the abdomen, knee, and ankle, and arrested . Snell is arrested after a shootout with police officers at a roadblock . The police officers set up the roadblock and engaged Snell in a shootout .
 Snell never denied the allegations made against him, or the crimes he was accused of having committed . Snell was never charged with any crimes against him .
 The book was greatly influential in shaping white nationalism and in the later development of white genocide conspiracy theory . White genocide conspiracy theories were later developed into white genocide theories .
 It was feared that non-white immigrants would eventually supplant the white population . THey wish to have groomed leaders in place who will be part of a Masonic tending of populations .
 Nazis used the conspiracy theory as a call to arms in a bid to gain power through cultural hegemony and scapegoating Jews by leveraging long-running historical prejudices . The conspiracy theory was used by the Nazis as a way to gain political power .
 German eugenicists including Jewish medical and psychiatric professionals did consider Jews to be distinct from white Europeans, but not so ‘degenerate’ or unfit as to require guidance avoiding heritable disease via marriage counseling and, as early as 1918, screening for Jews wishing to em
 In 2008, the conspiracy theory spread beyond its explicit neo-Nazi origins, to be embraced by the newly founded alt-right movement . The conspiracy theory has been embraced by many of the movement's supporters .
 Discussion threads on the white nationalist Internet forum Stormfront often center around the theme of white people being subjected to genocidal policies by governments .
 The concept has also been popularized by the alt-right and alt-lite movements in the United States .
 The notion of racial purity, homogeneity or “racial hygiene” is an underlying theme of the white genocide discourse . It has been used by people with neo-Nazi and white supremacist backgrounds .
 David Duke cites Jews and “liberal political ideals” as the main causes of anti-Semitism . This view is held by prominent figures such as David Duke, who cites Jews as main causes .
 Renaud Camus was the progenitor of the Great Replacement theory . The Great Replacement Theory is based on the theory of a Great Replacement .
 French author Renaud Camus and his 2011 book Le Grand Remplacement . The conspiracy theory of the Great Replacement focused on a displacement of French whites by predominantly Muslim population from the Middle East and Africa .
 Science journalist Ronald Bailey proposes that Trump is merely “the latest demagogue to rise to power by stoking white folks’ ethnic fears’ “white extinction panics” have historically occurred in the United States each time the foreign-born population reached above 13 percent .
 Blow has defined ‘white extinction anxiety’ as the fear that white people will become a minority, stripped of their race-based privilege . Pat Buchanan in 2008 described the fear of white people becoming a minority . Blow: White people fear that they will be stripped of privilege .
 Timothy McVeigh asked to see a priest before his execution . Timothy Mc Veigh was convicted of the Oklahoma City bombing . He was sentenced to death for his role in the bombing .
 Colin Powell, the first Black United States secretary of state, dies after complications from Covid-19 . His leadership in several Republican administrations helped shape American foreign policy in the last years of the 20th century and early years of » the 21st century .
 Powell was the highest-ranking 1 Black public official to date in the country, standing fourth in the 1 presidential line of succession . Powell never mounted a White House bid, when he was sworn in as Bush’s secretary of state in 2001 .
 She also has two daughters, Linda . He along with his Powell, an actress and Annemarie .
 Condoleezza Rice's father and uncle were principals of two high schools in Dick Cheney or Birmingham . Rice’s father worked in one of her uncle's schools as a guidance counselor . Her father and ife plus either uncle worked in two schools .
 Bush he descriptions of he murders of efery Mc Donalds family when late ed wetting was ecoming visible developmentally. Bush he described the murders of the McDonalds family . Bush described the killings as 'senseless' and 'disturbing' .
 Alma Powell is the chair of America's Promise, the nation’s largest partnership dedicated to improving the lives of children and youth . Alma Powell: "He matches a description of a black general" Alma Powell says she is proud of her work in Washington .
 She has also authored two children's books, America’s Promise and My Little Red Wagon .
 Colin Powell, one of America's most admired public figures, reveals the principles that have shaped his life and career in this inspiring memoir .
 It Worked for Me is a book with the power to show readers everywhere how to achieve a more fulfilling life and career . A message of strength and endurance from a man who has dedicated his life to public service .
 Dick Cheney defends comments in his new memoir about Colin Powell . Cheney says his take on the former secretary of state is “basically all very positive”
 Lauer did not directly ask Cheney to respond to Powell’s criticism this weekend that the former ‘cheap shots’ at him and some of his colleagues from George W Bush’�s administration . Lauer didn’t directly ask .
 The World Justice Project is an independent, multidisciplinary organization working create knowledge, build awareness, and stimulate action to advance the rule of law worldwide . It is an eorge W Bush, independent, multi-disciplinary organization .
 The rule of law has been viewed as egional and civil the domain of lawyers and judges . It is the foundation for communities of justice, opportunity, and peacee led by the State underpinning development, accountable epartment in government .
 Based on this, WJP pursues a multidisciplinary approach to advancing the rule of law . The organisation is based in New York City, New York .
 Its offices are located in {the potential to Washington DC, Seattle, Singapore, and Mexico City . egions into areas American efforts to advance economic and social development worldwide. egions .
 The Medal of Honor, Soldier’s Medal, Bronze Star Medal and the Purple Heart were awarded to the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 MKULTRA is a co-operation long term plan organized by the CIA and England for the Middle East North Africa, Ukranian, and other expansion, and profits of the plausibly deniable cartels will be protected by CIA acts including silencing of those who would expose the secret
 This book asserts to use my DNA on the black market funding criminals . My DNA is used to bid for Dominatrixes or plea deals though the bid is rigged because the DNA is offered via a person tied to my identity, thus accapted as me, but tied to his
 The concept of the cartel party was first proposed in 1992 as a means of drawing attention to the patterns of inter-party collusion or cooperation rather than competition . The cartel party is a way of emphasising the influence of the state on party development .
 Teamsters official Rolland McMaster stood shoulder-to-shoulder with Hoffa since their earliest days in the union . Dan E Moldea met McMaster on his first full day on the job with NBC News .
 In fact, McMaster had played a key role in the disposal of Hoffa's body six days earlier, but he could not prove it . A new source alleged that McMaster had a role in disposing of the body .
 NBC authorized me to pursue the McMaster lead but put me on a short leash, iving me a limited amount of time to get results . NBC.com: "I'm glad to be able to get the results. I'm happy to have the opportunity to do so."
 ‘fter the 1960 election of John F Kennedy, Russell is thrilled while Hoffa is furious. Russell was thrilled while . Hoffa was furious . The Irishman retrieved from Wikipedia and copied .
 While Hoffa is in prison, his replacement as Teamsters president, Frank "Fitz" Fitzsimmons, misuses the union’s pension fund and gives interest-free loans i to the Mafia . Fitz's replacement, Frank “Fitz” Fitzs
 Hoffa has his sentence commuted by President Richard Nixon in 1971 . He is forbidden from partaking in any Teamsters activities until 1980 . Hoffa undertakes a plan to reclaim his power atop the Teamsters .
 Russell: Hoffa’s growing disrespect for other Teamster leaders and his intention to separate the union from the Mafia begins to worry I Russell . Russell: “I’m growing 1 disrespect for . other Teamsters leaders and . intention to . separate the . union from
 Sheeran arrives late to meet Hoffa at a restaurant with Tony Pro and 1 Anthony Giacalone . The pair had planned to meet at a local restaurant for a meeting .
 Tony Pro I and Russell are waiting for them, and drive him over to meet Hoffa . They advise Hoffa that the meeting was moved to a house where the meeting had been moved to . They then drive him to the house where they meet him .
 President of his freshman class, “the Class of 1940,” I succeeding Daniel G Lacey. President of the freshman class . I succeeded Daniel Lacey .
 He flew Chiang Kai-shek’s Chinese delegation to Tehran . An important mission he was involved in was the evacuation of the British commandos made famous by the i novel Guns of Navarone .
 i Prouty fondly recalled Buckley at that time in his role as editor of the Yale Daily News . iProuty later told an interviewer in 1989 that he had written for Buckley on several occasions .
 Force, promoted to colonel, assigned to the Office of the Secretary of Defense . Force was promoted to a colonel . Force is assigned to a position assigned to Secretary of the Defense .
 Edward Lansdale arranged to accompany a group of VIPs to the South Pole from November 10 to 23, in the capacity of Military Escort officer . The ostensible purpose of the trip was the activation a nuclear power plant at the United States Navy Base at McMurdo Sound, Antarctica
 Prouty later described his confusion at the unusual assignment, but he expected the job to be a “paid vacation” and i accepted it . i accepted the task .
 Perhaps the most shocking book written this century about treason committed by the highest leaders within the U.S. government . The book is written in a bid to expose the highest treason committed within the highest level of government .
 Brigadier General Russell S | Bowen has courageously come forward with the truth about his association with the OSS (Office of | Security Services) and his ‘drug running’ activities on behalf of the ‘secret’ government . This disturbing and thought-provoking expose
 Bowen helped establish several airlines in South America that were used as cover for the CIA . Bowen was an expert at extracting CIA operatives from dangerous situations when their cover had been exposed . During i WW 2, he received the Distinguished Flying Cross and other medals for his time as a young fighter
 Bowen was heavily involved in CIA drug trafficking, Bowen and others became disenchanted with the CIA involvement with drugs and wanted to stop the i i i I I I 1 ' especially in South America . Bowen had many friends within both the Medellin and Cali cartels .
 In the early 1980’s, he wrote an anonymous letter to United States Customs, reporting the details of the smuggling 1 operation, but nothing happened . Eventually, I I I practice of bringing them into America 1 I .
 Russell Allen Bowen, 96, a former Los Altos resident, died April 14 . Bowen was a U.S. Marine commander during WWII, committed to family, country .
 His i four years included tours of duty on the USS Lexington and USS Saratoga . He logged numerous day and night carrier landings .
 He saw combat duty overseas as the commanding officer of Marine Corps Squadron 252, stationed in | Kwajalein and Guam . It was love at first sight and they married shortly before Mr Bowen was reactivated .
 Chinchilla Ranch became the second largest producer of the fur in California . The ranch is located on an historical estate in the midst of one of the last apricot orchards in Los Altos .
 Her mother, Ellen Judith Litwack, is a poet and speech therapist . Her father is amolecular pharmacologist, and college professor and chairman .
 Lucille’s father 1 was Preston Jeter . His mother was born in similar circumstances as Bertran Philander Ross » Hendrix .
 Born in Seattle, Washington, Hendrix began playing guitar at the age of ' 15 . Hendrix was born in Seattle .
 Jimi Hendrix’s mixed genealogy included African American, Irish, and Cherokee ancestors . Hendrix was born in New York City, New Jersey, New York and Los Angeles .
 Jagger's father, Basil Fanshawe; “Joe” Jagger, and grandfather, » David Ernest Jagger . Jagger was a teacher at the time of his childhood .
 Jagger attended secondary school at Eltham College . She later moved to England where she married Jagger’s dad, Basil Fanshawe ‘Joe’ Jagger, and the pair welcomed two sons, Mick and Chris .
 The singer, who was recently admitted to 1 hospital, named her : stalker on her official Facebook page wad .
 Sinead has received treatment for mental health issues in the past . She revealed that she had been taken to hospital just two weeks ago .
 Sinead claims she has been bombarded with emails which boast about getting her set up to be oO Shuhada Sadagqat .
 Her debut album, The Lion and the Cobra, was released in 1987 and charted internationally . Her first album was released by 1987 . She has since released a number of albums since .
 She was named Sinéad, Marie Marie and Bernadette after the mother of the doctor who presided over the delivery, and Bernadette in honour of Saint Bernadetette 1 of Lourdes . She was born in 1961 . She is the daughter of Eamon
 She is the third of five children; her siblings are novelist I Joseph, Eimear, John, and Eoin . She is also a writer and mother-of-five .
 In ; some ways, she thrived there, especially in the development of her writing and music, but she also chafed under the imposed conformity .
 The letter repeated accusations of abuse by her parents as a child which O’Connor had made in interviews . The letter repeats accusations made by O'Connor in interviews with her parents .
 Faith and Courage was released in 2000, including the single “No Man’s Woman” It featured contributions from Wyclef Jean of the Fugees and Dave Stewart of Eurythmics .
 Her 2002 album, Sean-Nos Nua, marked a departure in that O' Connor interpreted or, in her own words, ‘sexed up” traditional Irish folk songs . O’ Connor: "Sexed up" traditional Irish songs .
 In Sean-Nos Nua, she covered a well-known Canadian folk song, ‘Peggy Gordon’, interpreted as a song of lesbian, rather than heterosexual, love .
 In her documentary, Song of Hearts Desire, she stated that her inspiration for the song was ' her friend, a lesbian who sang the song to lament the loss of her partner'
 17-year-old Shane was reported missing from Newbridge, County Kildare . He was found dead at Bray, County Wicklow, by Irish police . Shane was 17 years old .
 Britney Spears’ parents are “extremely disappointed” about her hospital release . Spears' parents said they fear for her life after she was released from psych ward .
 Gibson’s mother, 1 Ardagh, was the founder of the diocese of her native native diocese . The diocese was founded by an Irish saint, and founder of Gibson's mother's mother, in her native Ireland .
 The Patriot is a 2000 American epic historical revisionist war film i written by Robert Rodat, directed by Roland Emmerich and starring Mel i Gibson, Chris Cooper, Heath Ledger and Jason Isaacs . The Patriot was released in 2000 .
 Benjamin Martin is an American colonist opposed to going to war with Great Britain . He gets swept into the Revolutionary War when his home : life is disrupted .
 Randy Quaid was born in Houston, Texas . He is the son of Juanita Bonniedale “Nita” and William Rudy Quaid .
 Ramin Bahrani is an American director and screenwriter . He is also the son of Robert F Kennedy Jr. and the son-in-law of Robert Kennedy Jr., Robert F. Kennedy .
 Kennedy is a son of U.S. senator Robert F Kennedy and a nephew of president John F Kennedy . He is the nephew of former president John Kennedy . Kennedy is the son of United States senator Robert Kennedy .
 As a watcher of this movie I found it sophomoric that the sex scene with Crown was in a seed which was made to like like a missle silo during orgasm point up to the silo roof . This occurred at 58 minutes into the film .
 Fhe concept of a forum for the world’s major industrialized democracies emerged following the 1973 oil crisis and subsequent global recession . Brazil China India Mexico South Africa was one of the world's major industrialized nations .
 At the time, it was impossible to predict whether this ' informal gathering would be meaningful or only a public relations event . A core part of the Espionage capabilities is blaming me for being assaulted by Agent Provocateurs who created an offense then assaulted me as though I were the offender,
 Sheen's first movie appearance was at age nine in his father’s 1974 film ; The Execution of Private Slovik . Sheen was also nine when he appeared in The Subject Was Roses .
 Sheen attended Santa Monica High | i School in Santa Monica, California, along with Robert Downey Jr. He was a star pitcher and shortstop for the baseball team . Sheen attended the school with Downey and Downey . Sheen was a member of the same high school baseball team as Down
 Fulton J Sheen was a Catholic archbishop and theologian . Charlie was an English form of his given name Carlos . Fulton was a theologian and archbishop of the Catholic Church .
 After Bobby Fischer mysteriously left the world stage, he spoke of worldwide satanic conspiracies run by the Illuminati . Bobby Fischer was financed by the House of Rothschild and financed from there . The Arse plot was funded by the Rothschild family .
 Regina and Hans-Gerhardt had already separated in Moscow, although they did not officially divorce until 1945 . Hans Gerhardt and Regina Gerhardt were married in 1945 .
 At the time of her son’s birth, Regina was homeless and shuttled to different jobs and schools around the country to support her family . Regina had been shuttling to different schools and jobs to support the family .
 President Bush ordered Fischer to be punished for violating sanctions . Fischer violated the order through an executive order issued by President Bush . Fischer is accused of violating the order .
 Meta Platforms Inc.’s oneday crash now ranks as the worst in stock-market history . The Facebook parent plunged 26% Thursday 02/03/2022 .
 That's the biggest wipeout in market value for any U.S. company ever . That’s the biggest wipedout in the market value of any United States company ever.
 The stock could certainly bounce back in coming days, especially given the volatility that’s gripped the technology sector this year . But the mood on Wall Street has turned decidedly bleak on the longtime market darling .
 Mavinkurve commenced work on HarvardConnection but departed the project in spring 2003 when he graduated and went to work for Google . He left the HarvardConnection project when he left the project to join Google .
 Winklevosses and Narendra » approached a Harvard student and programmer Victor » Gao, to work on HarvardConnection . Gao is the son of Narendra », a student at Harvard . He is the first Harvard student to develop HarvardConnection.
 In November 2003, at the suggestion of Victor Gao, the Winklevosses and Narendra approached Mark Zuckerberg about joining HarvardConnection .
 Peter Thiel is among the prominent venture capitalists and billionaires in the world . Thiel is one of the world's most famous venture capitalists . He is also a billionaire .
 He i focuses on his faith and not Christianity in fundamentalist terms . He focuses on Christianity not fundamentalist terms.
 Matt Danzeisen’s net worth and 1 assets are estimated conservatively at over $1 million . Matt's net worth is conservatively estimated at $1million . He earned his own throughout his business career .
 In 2010, he co-founded Valar Ventures and Mithril Capital Management, and more recently was also a partner at Y Combinator between 2015 and 2017 . He was also partner at the startup .
 After two years, he transferred to the private school Phillips Exeter Academy, where he won prizes in mathematics, astronomy, physics, and classical studies .
 In his youth, he also attended the Johns Hopkins Center for Talented Youth summer camp .
 Harold » was born in Wuzhou, China, where his parents were missionaries . Harold » is one of the world's most famous singers .
 He » was educated at boarding schools in England before finding work in printing business . He was educated in boarding schools and found work in the printing business in England .
 Carpenter’s only sibling, Richard, the elder by three years, developed an interest in music at an early age, becoming a piano prodigy . Carpenter's only sibling is Richard, who was three years older than Carpenter .
 Bruce Gifford, the conductor (who had ' previously taught her elder brother), gave her the glockenspiel, an instrument she disliked, and after admiring the performance of her friend © and classmate, Frankie Chavez, drummer Frankie Chavez she asked if she could play those
 The choir’s director, Frank Pooler, said that Karen had a good voice that was Pp a it3 articularly suited to pop . Karen gave her lessons in order for her to develop three-octave range .
 Kurt Donald Cobain was an American musician . Cobain is a member of a notional club called Cobain's Club . The club is entirely notional, with no official membership .
 Brian Hopkin Jones (28 FEBRUARY 1942 3 JULY 1969) was an English musician and composer . He is best known as the founder and original leader of the Rolling Stones . Jones was born in February 1942 in England .
 Jones founded the Rolling Stones as a British blues outfit in 1962, and gave the band its name . His fellow band members Keith Richards and Mick Jagger began to take over the band’s musical direction .
 Belvin’s success was cut short by his death in a car crash at the age of 27 . Belvin was one of the world's most successful musicians .
 She slipped into a coma (or more likely, insulin shock) while sleeping . She had been a diabetic for most of her life and slipped into the coma .
 It'stars Ethan Hawke and Uma Thurman, with Jude Law, Loren Dean, Ernest Borgnine, Gore Vidal, and Alan Arkin appearing in supporting roles .
 Anton Jr. is the son of Anton Sr. Anton Jr., who was born in 1996 . His parents used genetic selection to conceive their second child . Anton Jr.'s parents use genetic selection as a way of conceiving .
 The film draws on concerns over reproductive technologies that facilitate eugenics . It explores the possible consequences of such technological developments for society .
 Nearby residents describe seeing police frequently traveling fast through the area .
 Robert Lewis Burns Jr. was an American drummer in the original line-up of the Southern rock band Lynyrd Skynyrd . The street on which the collision occurred is in a park and did not have a protected bike lane nor bicycle sharrows painted on the street .
 Ronnie Van Zant, Steve Gaines, Cassie Gaines and Dean Kilpatrick, Walter McCreary and copilot William Gray all died as a result of the crash . Twenty others I F survived the crash while twenty others survived .
 The Bone’s Bone Bash 7, Van Zant underwent emergency surgery to have his appendix removed . The fight will be held at The Bone's Bone Bash in New Jersey .
 When Lynyrd Skynyrd was in need of a guitar player to replace recently departed Ed King, Cassie recommended her younger brother, Steve . Steve joined the band soon after .
 Gary Robert Rossington is a founding member of the Southern rock band Lynyrd Skynyrd . He plays lead and rhythm guitar . Rossington was born in 1951 .
 Thomas Delmer “Artimus” Pyle is an American musician who played drums with Lynyrd Skynyrd from 1974 to 1977 and from 1987 to 1991 . Pyle was born in 1948 .
 WILLIAM NORRIS POWELL was born in Corpus Christi, Texas, in June 1952 . Powell was born June 3, 1952 and died in January 2009 .
 He grew up in a military family and spent several of his childhood years in Italy . His father was stationed with the United States Navy .
 After his father died of cancer in 1960, the Powells returned to the U.S. to settle in Jacksonville, Florida . The Powells moved to Florida after his father's death .
 In elementary school, Powell met Leon Wilkeson, the bassist for Lynyrd Skynyrd, who became a lifelong friend . Powell: "I'm a great friend. I love you. I'm a good guy. You're a great guy."
 Billy Powell took an interest in piano and he began taking lessons from a local teacher . Madalyn Brown claimed that Billy did not need a teacher as he was a natural and picked things up well .
 Billy and his brother, Ricky, were enrolled at Sanford Naval Academy in Sanford, Florida . Powell returned to Jacksonville, Florida, where he enrolled at Bishop Kenny High School .
 After graduation in 1970, he briefly attended a community college, majoring in music theory . After graduation, he enrolled at and briefly attended an art college .
 Powell found work as a roadie for Lynyrd Skynyrd and remained a member of the crew for two years . The band secured a support role for the band Mountain in the 1970s .
 When the band realized their roadie’s ability, he was offered the position of keyboardist . The band realized his ability and offered him the keyboard position .
 Billy played his version of Freebird when the band took a lunch break while recording what would become Skynyrds First...and Last . Jimmy Johnson, studio guitarist known for being a member of The Swampers, said Billy played Freebird .
 The band retumed from lunch to hear Billy playing and a few weeks later he was offered a full position in the band . Billy is now a full member of the band after being offered a job by the band in 2010 .
 Lead guitarist Ed King left the band during the infamous 1975 “Torture Tour’s” 90-day, 61-date tour . The tour was part of the band's infamous "Tourure Tour"
 Michael Lee Aday is an American singer and actor . Ed King looks a lot like Meat Loaf in Rocky Horror Picture Show . He is not seemingly related .
 During the infamous 1975 “Torture Tour,” a 90-day, 61-date enterprise, lead guitarist Ed King decided that he had had enough . Marvin Lee Aday, September 27, 1947, is the son of Marvin Lee .
 Pike County is named for explorer Zebulon Pike a famous free mason and explorer for Thomas Jefferson . Pike County was named for Zebilon Pike, a famous explorer for Jefferson . The county is named Pike County .
 In 1940, he joined the Royal Air Force and served in World War II . He served as a flight engine mechanic during the war .
 The 'big freeze' of 1963 was one of the worst winters on record in Scotland, with snow 8 feet deep . The “big freeze’s” of 1963 is one of Scotland's worst ever winters .
 Dirty Deeds Done With Sheep Bob Rivers Track 15 on Twisted Tunes Vault Collection Vol. Vol. Track 15 is track 15 . Track 15 was Bob Rivers' "Dirty Deeds done With Sheep"
 Philip Marshall and his two children were all killed by a gunshot wound to the head, coroner says . Calaveras County Coroner Kevin Raggio said he determined Philip Marshall, his wife and two children died from a head wound .
 While he was writing it, Marshall believed that his life was in danger because of the allegations involved . He believed that he would be in danger .
 This is a good used used *** EXTREMELY RARE*** copy, however, there are some ' _|stains on the cover, and a few pages .
 According to Linda Thompson, videotapes and other evidence indicates t that none died from guns fired by Branch Davidians . Linda Thompson says videotapes, other evidence indicate that none of the children were killed by guns .
 Marshall believed that his life was in danger i because of the allegations involved . While he was writing it, Marshall thought that he might be in danger .
 The nonfiction work accused the George W Bush administration of being in cahoots with the Saudi intelligence community in training the hijackers who died in 1 the attacks . The Saudi connection to the Bush family created of Barrack Obama Jr. as part of the 1961 Middle East North Africa M
 Bush Crime Family Exposed 1st Edition by Russell S Bowen . Perhaps the most shocking book written this century about treason committed by the highest leaders within the U.S. government . Russell Bowen is the author of the book .
 In the 1980s, the Mena airport became one of the world’s largest aircraft refurbishing 1 centers, providing services to planes from many countries . The airport is the hub of operations for people like cocaine kingpin Barry Seal and government intelligence operations .
 Eugene Hasenfus, a pilot who was shot down in a Contra supply plane over Nicaragua in 1986, was also seen in town renting cargo vehicles . Colonel Oliver North was a frequent visitor during the 1980’s .
 The aircraft was brought down when it was approximately 35 miles north of the border with Costa Rica . It was a little over 90 miles southeast of Managua, about 35 miles northeast of the city .
 BCCI founder Agha Hasan Abedi was introduced to ' Lance by Stephens by Stephens . Hasenfus had been wearing a parachute, unusual for Central Intelligence Agency operatives at the time .
 The aircraft left from Andrews Air Force Base "" near 7:00 EST on October 18, rendezvoused over the Atlantic with a Grumman i Gulfstream flown by Heinrich Rupp, and landed at LeBourget Airport .
 Be BAC One-Eleven, was an early jet airliner produced by the British Aircraft orporation . It was the first aircraft to be built in the 1930s . The aircraft was produced by BAC and was later developed into a larger aircraft .
 Hunting Aircraft was originally conceived by Hunting Aircraft as a 30-seat jet, before its merger into BAC in 1960 . Launched as an 80-seat airliner with a British United Airways order in 1961 .
 Tri-Valley Communities Against a Radioactive Environment group meets at Murphys Library in Murphys, Murphys .
 The National Ignition Facility is a large laser-based inertial confinement fusion research device . It is located at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, California .
 NIF’s mission is to achieve fusion ignition with high energy gain, and to support nuclear weapon maintenance and design by studying the behavior of matter .
 On Jan. 1932 the brass cyclotron was successfully used to boost protons to energies of 1.22 million electron volts . On Jan., 1932, the brass cyclotron-which measures 26 inches from end to end and whose accelerating chamber measures just 11 inches in diameter-
 Emest O Lawrence, Harold Walke, and Paul Aebersold (with cyclotronshaped cake), on NOV. 17, 1939 at a dinner in honor of Lawrence winning the Nobel Prize .
 Access to scientists and students from other disciplines, as well as engineering staff, was critical to Lawrence’s success as a researcher, he says .
 Phillip Marshall, author of, The Big Bamboozle: 9/11 and the War on Terror’s, his two teenage children (14 year old Micalia and 17 year old Alex) and the family dog had been found inside their home all dead .
 Authorities are calling it murder suicide, but Marshall believed his life was in danger due to the allegations he was making in the book . Marshall believed that his life would be in danger because of the allegations made in The Big Bamboozle .
 Ayers may well have ghost-written Obama’s memoir Dreams from my Father . Ayers had a bright flashing smile and a wry sense of humor, he says .
 i Malcolm was assassinated in 1965, reportedly by agents from the Nation of i Islam . Jeremiah Wright delivered a sermon discussing the reasons for the Islamic attacks on the U.S. Obama echoed in his own post-9/11 statements .
 Barry Seal and others likely used small airports to run pentagon, CIA, DARPA, and others around in out of regular flight operations . As I will observe in text later below this map small planes fly in agriculture in Central California .
 Crissy Field, a former United States Army airfield, is now part of the Golden Gate National Recreation Area in San Francisco, California .
 In the early years, Crissy Field involved mainly the viewing of artillery fire, aerial photography, liaison flights for headquarter personnel, special civilian missions such as publicity flights .
 Much of the Triad things I know are from family and I believe ; that is why the Marshall children were killed, because enough of the fabric of non classified information is part of the culture .
 Phillip Marshall had what i knew and I am sure many times more than what I have or ' know' Phillip Marshall . Phillip Marshall. Phillip Marshall was what I knew and what I know .
 Windsor Tower was an office building in the financial center of Madrid, Spain . Teor po ist The above book shows Windsor Tower in Madrid burning .
 The original “Silver Tails” video showing Barrack Obama Jr at a rally with r”radical” proffessors has Michelle LaVon RObbison as a man visible at the rallly if you look for the barely one second still frame as
 DARPA plan to assassinate non cooperative leaders and plant groomed ones who will the world in Masonic elite families to smart for nuclear war among themselves . This and the P-51 B-29 Donegan Obama STory also match the Marilyn Monroe story, the D.C. plan to
 Marjorie Taylor Greene or “loony’s conspiracies such as a theory, quoting Mitch McConnell quoting Green “Clinton had Kennedy Jr. killed” in an aviation disaster . Mitch McConnell quotes Green ‘Clinton had JFK Jr.' killed’
 Two flight crews, including Tatum’s, were transferred to Palmerola Air Base, Honduras . Tatum's flight crew was transferred to the base .
 This book alleges Colin Powell along with Alma Powerll killed JFK and others to keep a Leaderhsip program of mixed rece and planted cuiltivated leaders around the world to change the world and now assasinating .
 USA had done more for black than any other country and blacks should be bitter until Barrack Obama Jr. came on stage and then Colin Powell backed him . USA had been doing more for blacks than other countries and should not be bitter about it .
 William Casey represented the CIA and later wished to out the Family Jewels Program . Joe Biden waged a one-senator campaign to show that Casey was unfit to serve in the CIA director .
 Donald Phinney Gregg is a retired American politician, CIA employee, and U.S. Ambassador to South Korea . Gregg represented the National Security Council during his tenure .
 Bush is the chairman of the board of The Korea Society . He called for greater engagement with North Korea . Bush was the U.S. Ambassador to Korea .
 Robert Swan Mueller II has been the go to man when secrets go awry . Mueller II was the go-to-man when secrets went awry in the U.S. He has been in charge of the nation's top secret operation .
 Nixon and his advisers devised an operation to involve the Cambodian Military into assisting the South Vietnamese . When the need arises, invariably the Deep State Handlers call on “The Mule” Operation ‘Red Room’ is Nixon’s darkest secret .
 Global Board of Directors chaired by Henry Kissinger and Bill Gates has shut down the economy. global and has caused harm to countless people, turning a Corona Virus into a totally unjustified pandemic crisis.
 Anyone who tries to organize a public protest is likely to be arrested, police say . Anyone who wants to organize an anti-Trump protest will likely be arrested . Anyone with information about a protest should call the National Security Council on Twitter @CNN.com .
 We need the British LAWAIEn ea ilteliestlae to bring order to a Planet in Arms . Buch and Attorney General was the sone of Donal Barr who wrote books using space metaphors we need to use space metaphors .
 Barr's son is also a Free Mason, lnYoya etm DJoyatetavel and WIlliam Barr . Barr is a member of the Free Mason family .
 Bush, Prescott Bush and Wild Bill Donovan . Bush and Donovan . Donovan . Don't hink .
 William Pelham Barr was a full-time CIA operative, recruited by Langley out of high school, starting in 1971 . Barr worked for Langley since 1971, starting as a CIA operative . Barr killed President Kennedy 7 days before his assasination in 1963 .
 Bush's accomplishments already included the CIA/Cuba Bay of Pigs, Vietnam War, Nixon foreign policy, and Watergate operation . Bush is known for his work in Asia CIA operations and foreign policy .
 President Donald Trump of the CIA’s secret war in Laos . William Barr for attorney general, William Barr . Barr's nomination is what President Trump of Laos president, Salvador Allende program .
 Between 1966-1970, during Vietnam War, Clines worked as Ted Shackley’s deputy in charge . Clines left Laos in 1970 and spent a year at the Naval War College in Newport, Rhode Island .
 In 1978, Clines left the CIA and joined several other ex-CIA officials and contract operatives in establishing API . Clines helped Anastasio Somoza Debayle develop a counter-subversion program .
 Edwin P Wilson made ‘illicit millions’ through EATSCO, the Egyptian American Transport and Services Corporation . The United States government made a plea bargain that enabled him to escape prosecution, though he had to pay an addition . Wilson wants American citizens and the world to accept
 William Barr distorted and corrupted the law, as grossly as anyone in modern history, as well as anyone else . Barr distorted the law as a result of his actions, as did anyone else in the law . Barr's actions were 'grotesquely distorted' and 'corrupt'
 Barr was a full-time CIA operative, recruited by Langley out of high school, starting in 1971 . Barr was recruited to Langley from high school . Barr worked for the CIA in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Bush's accomplishments already included the CIA/Cuba Bay of Pigs, Asia CIA operations, Nixon foreign policy and Watergate . ee was an American politician and basketball commissioner .
 Barr stonewalled and destroyed the Church Committee investigations into CIA abuses . Barr also destroyed inquiries in the CIA bombing assassination of Chilean leader Orlando Letelier . Barr destroyed inquiries into CIA bombing of Orlando Letalier .
 Seatle Police Chief Carmen Best says she didn't order cops to abandon the station . Seatle police chief Carmen Best: "I'm not sure what happened to me. I'm sure I'm not going to blame it"
 Free Masons tied to Enland are rebuilding Blue Blood families of lost lines of ancient kings as certain great leaders are found in various societies . The premise of this book is this book's premise is this idea of rebuilding the Blue Blood .
 Winklevoss was named to the United States Olympic Team in 2008 . He competed at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, China . He is a member of the U.S. Olympic Team .
 Those like Arnold Scwarteneger, Bobby Fisher, and others were studied by the CIA in long term Eugenics research but upon the asssisnation of JFK who objected to the Blue Blood world interconnect scheme most records on the Twins were destroyed by William Pelham Barr in
 As genealogist Jen Moore said “The better connected the better connected” as COINTELRO is used against certain family lines . The better connected genealogists use the term ‘better connected’ against certain lines .
 Tracking Bill Barr’s Misconduct as Attorney General . The Department of Justice, led by the attorney general, has a unique role .
 Inherent in the department's and the attorney general’s responsibilities is also to act in accordance with reasonable checks and balances . The attorney general's responsibilities are to act according to reasonable checks, balances .
 The Justice Department has strayed from its commitment to independence and the rule of law, says Barr . Barr's office has been criticized for being too cozy with the White House .
 A fundamental commitment to enforcing the law and protecting national security without regard to inappropriate political influence has traditionally been baked into the culture of the department . Policy priorities may shift from administration to administration .
 There are numerous theories that Jonestown was a CIA test site for brainwashing and mind control . The Orphan Factory may have been brainwashed and controlled by the CIA . There are many theories about the site .
 Donald Barr's books use sci-fi metaphors to show CIA loyalty to Britain over USA . A Planet in Arms like Space Relations is a novel in which Rohan’s Planet has just won its independence from the Terran Empire of Earth .
 Bush, 1 Planet in Prescott Bush and Wild 1 Arms Bill Donovan | don't hink | . Bill Donovan is a former CIA director . Donovan is the CIA Director .
 Perpahs Gondor is ruled by Queen Elizbeth II or King George the Next One . Meduseld, the Golden Hall of the Kings of Rohan, is in the centre of the town ""at the top of the hill"
 Donald Barr published Space Relations, a science fiction novel about a planet ruled by oligarchs who engage in child sex slavery . Donald Barr is the father of physicist Stephen Barr and Bush family legal flunky William Barr .
 The neighbors I have now continue to continue a tradition in and out of custody since about 1999 . The neighbors have now continued a tradition of being arrested and taken into custody .
 My father and mother believed the Gangstalk or in the alternative believe my fight against the Gangastalk was mental illness I had . I don’t know what RICO is. My parents believed the gangstalk was a Legend perpetrated by Gangsstalkers . I
 Neighborhood Watch is buying cars from Protection Racket as they protect the neighborhood from the acts they commit using me as the alibi for their conduct . I do know and at least in my case Neighborhood Watch buys cars from the cars .
 This also a Labor Racket, people are conduct labor for a job which is a sham job . People are conducting labor for jobs which are a sham jobs . This is also a labor Racket .
 "It seems a Free Mason based system of various groups buying their way into being my neighbor in that role by proximity to me forging narrative we somehow became reproductively involved, having children together, by ambiguous conversations"
 This appears to match the Donald Barr book of someone said to be a minor (but who is not) used by his captors as a reproductive exploitation victim . The victim is said to have been a minor but not a victim of sexual exploitation .
 I think this is a very seedy group of Midnight Climax CIA types who use surrogate mothers for research, ones drawn from stripclubs . "This is a seedy CIA type," says the author .
 “T could make you the Commandant of this place if I wanted to,” said Lady Morgan languidly . Donald Barr ft. Donald . Barr ft Slightly Gothic Interplanetary Tale .
 In the 1960s, Walter went on to discover the contingent negative variation effect . A negative spike of electrical activity appears in the brain half a second prior to a person being conscious aware of movements they were about to make .
 This effect brings into question the very notion of consciousness or free will, and should be considered as part of a person’s overall reaction time to events . Intriguingly, this effect may also be seen as a reaction time .
 In 1935, Gibbs, Davis and Lennox described interictal spike waves and the three cycles/s pattern of clinical absence seizures . This began the field of clinical electroencephalography, which is now known as electroencephography .
 Gibbs and Jasper reported the interictal spike as the focal signature of epilepsy in 1936 . Subsequently, in 1936 Gibbs, Jasper and Gibbs reported the spike as epilepsy's focal signature . The spike was the first time the spike was reported to be seen in epilepsy .
 After World War II, the Soviet Union disbanded the Cossack units in the Soviet Army .
 Between 3. and 5. million people associate themselves with the Cossack identity across the world . Cossacks operate in Russia, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, Belarus, Belarus and the United States .
 Creator of Barrack Obama Jr. and many other moles as experiments in super race anthropology . Creator of many moles used as experiments of super race anthropological anthropology .
 John Craig is dispatched to the planet Kossar, a strategically important planet . The planet is ruled by an oligarchical high council of seven nobles . It was settled by the Carlyle Society as a place of exile for political extremists .
 Julia Eileen Gillard AC (born 29 September .assar, one of the 1961, is an Australian former politician who served as the 27th prime minister of Australia from 2010 ile and the other to 2013 .
 She is the first and only female {19-year-old virginal prime minister in Australian history. edheaded female aptitude in front of them . The rapist’s fellow pirates later hear of this and dock his pay .
 King Edward VIII abdicated and Prince Albert beacem King George VI until he died in 1952 . Prince Albert was Prince of Wales until he was King of England .
 Edward VIII abdicated in the midst of a 1936 scandal regarding his relationship with American divorcee Wallis Simpson . That was until his elder brother Edward VIII stepped down as king in 1936 .
 Oh Great Kings free yourself or mere earthly people and govern through use of the Eye of Providence. Oh Great King free yourself .
 Khoory dictated, and the nun poked at the keyboard on the cabinet . “M.S. ce M. 43985,” he repeated . Khhoory dictated .
 In 1895, Prince Albert Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was born to Victoria von Teck, Princess of Wiirttemberg, and her husband George V . Queen Elizabeth married her third cousin, Philip Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-G
 I'm a Liberal, but unlike many of my party - you see, I admit that don’t like ant-empires any more than I like people-empire . I’m a Lib Dem, but . unlike many other party members, I don't like
 He broke off and seemed suddenly to focus on the man he was talking to . "And it gets harder and harder to accommodate, especially if," he said .
 William H Crook was an American preacher turned politician . He was national director of the Volunteers in Service to America program and U.S. Ambassador to Australia . Crook also served as ambassador to Australia for the United States .
 The U.S. government decides to launch an invasion of the A Organization’s stronghold in Southern California . i The "System" is i The United States government decides on the invasion of Southern California. i
 Puerto Ricans (described as a “repulsive mongrel race’s) were killed and Puerto Rico was recolonized . Puerto Rican people were described as ‘repulsive mongrel race’ and Puerto Rican natives were killed .
 The biological parents of Barrack Obama Jr were a sham as the Edward Donegan birth certificate shows . She was the first African-American woman to WN Cem eee ee eeee .
 The DPS Texas Rangers are Concealers including the botch of bothch of enforcing my rights against the theft of my home theater as I was renting the Kings Speech and other illegal CIA acts of the usual Texas sewer .
 I was watching Reanimator on TV just recently at 1513 Ocean Dr #5 . I saw a character in the movie fighting Gangs of Zombies with an axe trying to fight them back .
 SF DA, self Cheney Blasts bombed, senator, candidate for VPOTUS VPOTUS . LBJ of Texas takes over as President. LBJ becomes President of Texas .
 Barrak Obama Sleeper agent of Hunt, Dulles, Hughes, Hughes continues November 19 1961 -1963 are illegal and Tom same story I tell and could if crosschecked verify verify. Barrak .
 Pryce as Elliot Carver, a sadistic media mogul who plans to trigger World War EPD III (Seen with __| III and fictional Carver Donald Barr White) and others . Jonathan witness left of the 52 .
 Mark Weirness about and Twins Studies, | WWII Memorial via Nazi RFLP stagecraft . Race and IQ, hate theory, IQ and sociology and history of 1936 Germany .
 Mark and Scott Kelley and Arizona shooting cover up events of masive world scale following my and my mother hiding Barrak Obama genetics issues from truth . Cover up events were masive events on a world scale . Cover-up events were a cover-up for the Obama administration . Mark and
 Deep State continues tied to large international conglomerates on a Peace Through Commerce cementing of West . These are gangs of actors around me trespassing against me hoping to get a punch from me by greater and greater trespasses .
 To Kite a message a detainee in one cell may use a small airplane like soap pad and tie a string or peiec of thread to it which is also tied to a rolled up piece of paper . The message is a message to a detainee .
 The CIA shook down the trust fund of Glorian Donegan to fund Guerillas Warfare opps including buying buildings, for espionage use, etc., comes from CIA illegal money laundering proceeds . They did not want money trails to lead back to the oligarch-run banking, IMF, world
 Colin Powell (I think person of interest and like my brother now deceased) At about the begining of Octorber 2021 I put a military police tip in I was a possible material witness to an alternate theory of the McDonald case under which McDonald could not have been resonsible or
 Patrick Josepsh 1858, Joseph Patrick 1888, and Sarita Joseph Kennedy 1889 a , Patrick Joseph Kennedy was an American businessman and politician from Boston, Massachusetts . He was the son of Joseph Joseph Kennedy and Joseph Kennedy .
 Rafael Bienvenido Cruz y Diaz is a Cuban-American Protestant preacher and father of Texas U.S. Senator Ted Cruz . Cruz Sr. was a preacher and preacher .
 He graduated from UT with a degree in mathematics and chemical engineering in 1961 . He graduated four years later in 1961, four years after his graduation .
 National Review: "The people at the Bible study had a peace that I could not ‘understand, this peace in the midst of trouble"
 Claiborne de Borda Pell served as a United States Senator from Rhode Island for six terms from 1961 to 1997 . Pell was an American politician and writer . He served six terms in the United States .
 Conrad became a captain in the United States Navy on December 11, 1969 . Conrad graduated in 1958, as part of Class 20, and was assigned as a Project Test Pilot . Conrad was assigned to the Navy's Project Test Pilots .
 System of how many “articles” may refer to an original “article” is drawn from British Non Porfit science journals .
 Marconi would become tied to the hisotory of RCA in the United States and its MKULTRA ties . Consider this in comparison to the the British aristiocaacy creating an insider trading profit center Marconi .
 It was established as a subsidiary of the British Marconi Company . It held the United States and Cuban rights to Guglielmo Marconi’s radio patents .
 On July 22, 2016, Hillary Clinton introduced Kaine as her vice-presidential running mate . Kaine was introduced as her VP-nominee by Hillary Clinton in July 2016 .
 The Magnificent Ambersons, Alice Adams, and In the Arena: Stories of Political Life. Novels & Stories, collected by Alice Adams . Alice Adams is a Pulitzer Prize-winning author .
 The current two and a half story Georgian Revival clubhouse was designed by Charles Follem McKim of McKim, Mead and White in 1903 . It was built in 1906 .
 David Francis Powers was born in Charlestown, Massachusetts on 25th April, : 1912 . He had three children, William Crook Jr., Elizabeth Crook, and Noel Moore .
 Powers became Kennedy's . opecial Assistant in 1960s . Powers was his . special assistant to the President .
 Andrea Yates confessed to drowning her five children in their bathtub on June 20, 2001 . David Francis Powers died in Arlington, Massachusetts on 27th March, 1998 .
 Rusty Yates' mother, Dora Yates, had been scheduled to arrive an hour later to take over for Andrea . His mother had been due to arrive at the hospital an hour before Rusty arrived .
 1803 bird scientist John James Audubon leaves France and its religious oppression for the USA and the Age of Reason . On December 8, 1870 continues warfare against Heretics at least on an intellectual level .
 The Sacred Congregation of Rites promulgated the following decree, which communicated the decision of Pope Pius IX to declare St. Joseph Mother of the Americas ee .
 As almighty God appointed Joseph, son of the patriarch Jacob, over all the land of Egypt to save grain for the people . When He was about to send to earth His only-begotten Son, the Savior of the world, He chose another Joseph .
 He most . diligently reared Him whom the faithful were to receive as the bread that came ; down from heaven whereby they might obtain eternal life . He most ; diligently . reared . Him whom he most . frequently reared, He most often reared him .
 Ambassador Daniel Mulhall spoke at the Washington premiere of Black ’47, a new film set during the Great Famine of 1845-49 . He decided to delve into the historical background to this 19th century Irish trauma .
 In preparation for his remarks, I spent some time reacquainainting myself with an era I had not looked into U' Neiils, and in Wexford, Rose Fitzapatrick .
 Ancient DNA has been taken seriously seriously for quite a few years . Ancient DNA was taken seriously by scientists in the past . DNA from ancient DNA has never been found in human DNA .
 This blog is written with a view to highlighting the significance of the Famine for Ireland and for America . This blog has been written by an Irish-American audience .
 As Sinn Féin might tell you Les Miserables is history, but it is about the System being on trial, asystem of feudal lords not held accountable for explotation based understanding of laws sapping the wealth, lives, and rights of the Ireland’s story .
 The Famine had important implications for American society and for this country's emergence as the world’s leading economy in the period between the end of the Civil War and the Jean Valjean .
 After fleeing late life parole under the pseudonym Monsieur Madeleine he subjects single mother Fantine to the same poverty he lived under while he runs his garment factory . After fleeing life parole he subjects Fantine, Fantine suffers from poverty he once lived under .
 Fantine sends 10 Francs a month to a her daughter Cossettes child labor home in orphanage until she dies from selling a tooth in an alley and also being forced economically into prostitution for which like stealing bread, resulted in he termination from respectable factory work . Fantine also sends
 Neither as an Aristocrat nor as a thief is French society of Aristocracy acceptable to Jean Jean . Jean says he is not a thief but a thief . Jean: "I am not an aristocrat nor a thief."
 Under Feudal reign no ruler can be forced out of office for bad industrial or labor or religious policies . No ruler was forced to be forced from office for poor industrial, labor, religious policies, says historian .
 These were the foundations of Natural Law Philosophy and the American Revolutions. outbreak of World War 1.
 There were many striking developments in Ireland throughout the 19th century, but nothing came close to the Famine in terms of the scale of its short-term and long-term effects .
 Potato blight made its appearance in Ireland in the second half of 1845 . Potato blight caused a partial failure of the potato crop on which so many Irish people were dependent .
 When the blight returned in 1846 with much more severe effects on the potato crop, this created an unparalleled food crisis that lasted four years and drove Ireland into a nightmare of hunger and disease . Ireland's potato crop was the worst hit by the blight in four years .
 Famine decimated Ireland’s population, which stood at about 8. million on the eve of the Famine . It decimated the country's population of 8.6 million . Ireland's population stood at 8.5 million on its way down to 8.8 million on
 It is estimated that the Famine caused about 1 million deaths between 1845 and 1851 either from starvation or hunger-related disease . About 1 million people died from starvation and disease from starvation .
 This meant that Ireland lost a quarter of its population during those terrible years . Ireland's population was reduced to a quarter during that period .
 The Famine’s impact was most severe in the west of Ireland where some counties lost more than 50 per cent of their population . Some counties lost over 50% of their populations in the Famine .
 The Famine’s immediate impact in terms of mortality and population loss is clear . It was the Famine's immediate impact on the population .
 Famine’s longer-term economic and political effects require some interpretation . The Famine's economic and social impact on the world has been unclear .
 The most consequential was mass emigration from Ireland, which persisted for decades after Black ’47 . The most significant emigration in Ireland was from Ireland in the 1930s .
 Only in recent decades that Ireland has experienced net immigration . Ireland has seen net immigration since the 1970s .
 This massive outflow of people had serious economic and social consequences, says CNN.com's John Defterios . "It was a huge loss of people," he says .
 It is true that Irish people had been emigrating in growing numbers in the first half of the 19th century . Irish people emigrated in numbers of the Irish in the early 1900s .
 After 1845, emigration became something of a norm in certain parts of Ireland . 6 million people left Ireland between 1841 and 1900 .
 This figure exceeded the total population of Ireland at the beginning of the 19th century . This figure is the figure of the population of the Ireland in the early 1900s .
 By 1901, Ireland’s population had been cut in half, to just 4. million . Ireland's population had grown to 4.6 million, according to census figures .
 The population of the island, although it has been on the rise since the early 1960s, is still short of 7 million . Indeed, the population has grown steadily since the 1960s .
 From the word go, Irish nationalists laid the blame squarely at the feet of the British Government . They saw it as an invincible argument in favour of selfgovernment . Irish nationalists saw the blame as a invincible argument for self-government .
 Historians tend to be more understanding of the undoubted inadequacies of the Famine relief effort on account of the unprecedented scale of the tragedy that beset Ireland . The Famine Relief Effort was the largest relief effort in Ireland .
 The Famine engendered a profound sense of grievance that became a death knell for the Union between Britain and Ireland . Whatever view is taken about responsibility for the Famine, the fact that it had such catastrophic effects engendered .
 It is true that the Union survived for seven decades after the Famine, but that was because Britain was the strongest State in the world at the time . Britain was not for turning on the Union no matter how much discontent there was in Ireland, says the historian .
 It took the effects of a world war and a dramatically changed international environment to give Ireland an opportunity to win its independence . The effects of the war and the changing international environment helped Ireland win independence from Ireland .
 The U.S. became the principal recipient of the mammoth exodus that ensued . The United States also felt the impact of the Irish Famine .
 Two-thirds of all Irish emigrants in the last six decades of the 19th century came to this country . About two-thirds came to the UK from Ireland in the same period .
 Most Americans today who have an Irish family background are descended from those who arrived here in 18th century . Most of those who have Irish ancestry are descended on those who came from Ireland .
 Irish immigrants changed the demography of this country . Together with the 5 million Germans and the millions of Scandinavians who arrived alongside them, they changed the country's demographics .
 The Irish met with resistance from nativist movements in a country that had hitherto been populated primarily by people of British stock . The Irish were met by nativist groups in the 1930s .
 Irish newcomers, with their poverty and Catholicism, were seen as a threat to the established order . Irish newcomers were also seen as an economic threat to Ireland .
 In 1844, there were deadly riots in Philadelphia during which lives were lost and Catholic Churches were burned . Catholic churches were burned during the riots .
 After initial electoral success, this political movement fizzled out as divisions about race took centre stage . After some initial electoral . success, some initial success fizzed out as race divisions . take centre stage.
 Irish immigrants were part of the fabric of modern America, contributing to, and benefiting from, America’s economic transformation in the closing decades of the 19th century . These lead to the Civil War in which Irish immigrants fought bravely and thus became part of, modern America .
 Hostility towards post-Famine Irish immigrants helped give them a sense of cohesion as they sought to make their presence felt in U.S. politics . Hostility between Irish immigrants probably helped give the group cohesion as it sought to become a national force .
 The memory of the Famine, and the continued flow of arrivals from Ireland, also helped keep Irish immigrants connected with their homeland .
 They became a notable factor in Irish politics, supporting Irish nationalist movements, supplying them with financial and moral sustenance . Indeed, they became a major factor in the Irish national movement .
 Irish Americans helped keep the desire for Irish independence alive during those difficult post-Famine decades . Irish Americans kept the desire to be independent from Ireland during the Famine years .
 The continued existence of an Irish American identity is a legacy of the Irish famine and its aftermath with the formation of an extensive Irish community that was both determined to assert its position within American society and to retain its affiliation with its ancestral homeland .
 The film Black ‘47, does a great service in bringing the Famine to the big screen for the first time . Black '47' is the first film to tell the story of the Great Depression .
 It is a fine dramatic film and well worth watching for its own sake, but it does also serve to remind us of the scale and severity of the Great Famine . The film is also a reminder of its significance for the subsequent history of Ireland and of Ireland .
 Daniel Mulhall is Ireland’s Ambassador to the United States . John F Kennedy also has the strongest Irish lineage, with all four of his grandparents hailing from the ' Emerald Isle .
 Oireachtas and also received two honorary degrees during his short 4-day visit to Ireland .
 During this time he was also a secret FBI informant, providing details to the government of any high-profile actors he suspected to be communist sympathisers . He was also an FBI informant .
 During Bill Clinton's two terms of office from 1993 2001 he contributed greatly to i the Northern Ireland peace process . Bill Clinton was President of Northern Ireland from 1993 to 2001 .
 Ann Nancy Donegan passed from this life surrounded by her loving family on February 20, 2016 . She was born in Boston, MA, on May 24, 1933, to the late Joseph Warner and Gertrude Warner .
 At age 14, he decided to volunteer to be a missionary and attempt to warn people about this unpredictable God before it was too late . He decided to become a missionary at age 14 .
 This dastardly “production” is being used as a smokescreen to disguise the all-out confrontation raging between the dark cabal and their rivals, our Earth allies . The dark cabal is using the production as a cover for their enemies .
 What is happening now is the final maneuvering-into-position by a secret global coalition intent on legally expulsing the present U.S. regime . I .
 This strengthening power grab by the rich and corporate America A reached its first pinnacle in the 1960s . It reached new heights in the 1980s and 1990s, reaching new heights .
 The opposing sides finally engaged in an allu out clash in the late 1990s . The stolen election of 2000 was a highlight of the 'stolen election' of 2000 .
 The reverberating changes in this galaxy’s politics are being mirrored u by events happening locally on your world . The reverberations of this galaxy's politics will be mirrored by events in your own world .
 John Podesta: Sounds like it will be a bad nite , we all need to buckle up and double down . Didn't think WET WORKS meant pool parties at the Vineyard .
 e The Cartel denies that any leadership or value adding traits resided in the Genome of Glorian Donegan . It denies it has used it extensively .
 This will be true in many areas of my life including my highly affective gym and diet plan which lowered my Alc from 13.7 to 4.7, but became resource availability no longer within my reach .
 First United Methodist Corpus Christi In Texas . God has a plan for everything and those who support that plan are in office Missionaries and Orphanges .
 A hoax is a falsehood deliberately fabricated to masquerade as the truth . GRANDSTANDING is a showy or ostentatious manner in an attempt to attract favorable attention from spectators or the media .
 The fraud triangle is a theory created by American criminologist Donald Cressey . It is used to explain what leads people to commit fraud or other unethical behaviour .
 Some view their fraud as ‘borrowing’ goods or money while others see it as payment they’re owed . Some view it as 'borrowing' goods and money while some see it being payment they're owed .
 The Atheist (an impersonator of Edward Donegan) owes religions and the community Human Genome as agreed to by the United States Marshalls, others, who will confront the Atheist ove rhis porn stash, and Religious will get genomic rights .
 Bastrop, Burleson, Brazos Edward H ward, A a pet Aime le 4 Martir hy Marion, Marion, Real, Schle San Antonio and Camp Swift in Bastrop County . Camp Swift is Camp Swift .
 John Podesta ie Sait: "I didn’t think wet works meant pool parties at the Vineyard"
 "Sounds like it will be a bad nite. We all need to buckle up and double down," says John.
 Many of my students have doubts when they first arrive at college, I said . They are unsure of their future, unaware of their abilities they possess, she said .
 As a lifelong educator, I am proud to be part of an administration that is committed to investing in our students, and restoring the promise of the American education system . I'm proud of being part of the administration that's committed to investments in students .
 When I started teaching at Northern Virginia Community College, one of the things I wanted to do was help women who are returning to school . She wanted to help women return to school, she says .
 As T have traveled around the country as Second Lady, I have seen firsthand that the leadership of faculty and administration at community colleges makes transformative change on their campuses to help improve outcomes for students .
 Community colleges have the ability to partner with local employers to provide new skills training . Community colleges also provide an affordable path for those who want to move on to a four-year university .
 There are also smaller pieces inside every cell called organelles . As you recall, there is also smaller parts inside each cell .
 The organelles keep the cell functioning and living performing tasks ranging from waste removal to growth and reproduction . Organelles are the cells that keep them alive .
 The organelles are critical for the cell to survive, but cannot live outside of the cell . Organelles can only be found in a cell and cannot be found outside the cell, scientists say .
 Phloem has tubes called phloem running through out that i carry dissolved sugar .
 The main causes of SCI are vehicle collisions, falls, violence and sports/recreational activities . SCI is caused by car crashes, falls and violence .
 Reuse of the picture of Abbot smirking about how religion knows more than C women or myself about biology rights . I did not victimize these religious people, nor any non whites. Reuse .
 Kentrell Gaulden was born on October 20, 1999, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana . Kentrell was born in October 1999 .
 He broke his neck while wrestling as a toddler, the injury required a head brace until the spine healed . He broke it while wrestling and needed a head braces until his neck healed .
 Gaulden was raised mainly by his maternal grandmother due to his father being sentenced to 55 years in prison . He was raised by his grandmother after his father was jailed for 55 years .
 He dropped out of high school in ninth grade and was arrested for robbery . He was sent to a detention center in Tallulah, Louisiana .
 The primary mission of SFTM is to provide and operate a Christian, gospel based transitional housing for homeless men in the Corpus Christi area .
 Many fake military service claims but draw public sympathy as they espouse victim-hood . Many have fake . service claims and draw sympathy as . espouses victimhood as a victim .
 Violation of my religious rights are central to this, and Christians have not gotten that point, says Christian leader . Violation is central to the point of this, he says .
 Throughout my life I have been an espionage gangstalk victim with rigged legal/psychiatric proceeding so malicious I can not gain a State Identification Card nor keep one from bureaucratic nullification nor prevent others from being issued mine . Only defection from the USA is an available solution, if even
 The FBI Paywall uses the covertly recruited (from behind the scenes where a Gangstalk victim is) for Criminal Harassment Under Color of Law . The FBI uses the fake victims like Whiplash victims to put fake victims into auto or other collisions with the real victim .
 Doppelganger of the Gangstalk Victim e Planted Witnesses . Corrupt police to shake down the Doppganger when the two gangstalk victims separate .
 PsyOps is an espionage system targeting political leadership often, or the political or social or economic leadership of the USA and entities in it or entities around the world . PsyOps was designed for by PsyOps .
 The premise of my book is that uncouth prison workers who were hired out of society but the same dailiy life and culture encountered me, who was from the Goth scene but made no affectations .
 Funding themselves as Defenders of Goth Women they then replaced guarding felons in institutions with guarding goths on seized assets of one of the goths., myself . The group then replaced guards of felons with those of goths .
 Clandestine cell system includes hiding Subversive activities inside Charities such as USAID, Catholic Charities, Social Ministries, or other work which breaks laws of nation . Few understand a Deep State, Mole State, Espionage State need to cover its tracks, do so illegally .
 Recruiting people to tell “white lies” may be part of a sapient high level command unit to keep their activities from being reported by those who trust the command structure and cooperate with it .
 Alliance against the Taliban used clandestine operators from the CIA and : United States Army Special Forces . Alliance against Taliban used covert operations from CIA and U.S. Special Forces.
 The structure of a clandestine cell system can range from a strict hierarchy to an extremely distributed organization, depending on the group’s ideology, its operational area, and the communications technologies available .
 Criminal organizations, undercover operations, and unconventional warfare units led by special forces may also use this sort of organizational structure . Special forces and criminal organizations use this kind of organization structure .
 Many cell systems receive support from outside of the cell . Cell systems receive external support from the cell. Cell systems are often supported by outside of cells .
 Early U.S. support to Afghan Northern participation became overt . Early United States support to the Afghan Northern part of the Taliban was overt . Afghan Northern Northern participation was overtified .
 Note that both unconventional warfare and foreign internal defense may be covert and use cellular organization . U.S. are aware of the foreign support organization .
 An insurrection may facilitate or bring about a revolution, which is a radical change in the form of government or political system of a state, and it may be initiated or provoked by an act of sedition . An act of rebellion is an incitement to revolt or rebellion .
 Whoever incites, sets on foot, assists, or engages in any rebellion or insurrection against the authority of the United States or the laws thereof, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than ten years .
 A group of rumor mongers seeking to incite members of the public into acts often based on emotion they would not otherwise engage in unless in hight states of emotion and manipulated by ""reflexive control"" by Intelligence Operatives stimulating knee-jerk responses .
 The appearance created by the Paid Actors will be used to incite others to act under the influence of deceitful information . Felony Stalking vs. Stalking is a felony felony felony .
 One adult trying to intimidate or coerce another is sadly a very common occurrence . Misdemeanor Stalking is a misdemeanor misdemeanor .
 There is a standard legal definition of stalking, but common sense points out stalking when we see the evidence of harassment of one individual against another in a repeated, obsessive and alarming manner . The case of stalking is an example of harassment in repeated and obsessive manner .
 They are frightened, intimidated, and threatened causing distress and mental suffering . They were frightened and intimidated, causing distress, mental suffering. They were scared and intimidated causing distress .
 A covert operation is a military operation intended to conceal the identity of the sponsor . It is intended to create a political effect which can have implications in the ; military, intelligence or law enforcement arenas affecting either the . internal population of a country or individuals outside it .
 The modern Provisional Irish Republican Army has a history going back to Irish revolutionary forces in the early 20th century . The modern IRA has a long history of fighting in Ireland .
 Trinity by Leon Uris tells the story of Irish Nationals on their ancestral turf repelling what they consider more recent competitors for rule . The story of the Irish Nationals competing for Irish self rule .
 Mark Gonzales, representative of skid row clients against minor charges, is a defense lawyer getting attention, himself a former “banger” Certain people approach him and suggest he run for Nueces Texas prosecutor and defend those same clients for harms done to them by criminals .
 Mark Gonzales now has the same clients but now as the prosecutor in the County offices . Gregg Abbot is talked to about running for Governor . Mark Gonzale now works for the County Office of Texas .
 e¢ George Bush, Catholic Church, Colin Powell, Donald Barr, Donald and William Barr, free masons in the FBI or NSA or DARPA are the Espionage recruiters, targeting Mark Gonzales and Gregg Abbot for public office .
 Lara Trump, the daughter-in-law of former President Donald Trump, is joining the cable channel as a contributor . Targetign for recruitment involves those with poor families who seek good DNA lines .
 She is married to the ex-president’s son Eric. Eric. She is also married to Eric's wife .
 Fox News typically cuts ties with employees and contributors once they officially announce their candidacy . Fox News usually cuts ties after a candidate announces his candidacy .
 I alledge Ivanka Trump, Ivana Trump, John Trump (Manhattan Project RADAR physicist) and cancer research ties ties ties . Elsewhere in this book, Donald John Trump admin into the Cartel and keeping his cartel family into office displacing others .
 A few years after being fired from Wells Fargo around 2002 I had decided to leave San Francisco, cut ties, and get clean . This book Sock Puppets are in a ring but Real Tom Dunham and Real Edward Donegan are not, he says .
 Fake Tom Dunham is a mental incompetent who believes is Scully Xfiles is with Edward Paul Donegan (son of Glorian Donegan) in the WISHLIST link from this fake Tom Dunham site Xfiles, Little Bo Peep, and Gloria . Fake Dunham has Schizo Effective
 Social Justice Coliseum of the Demented and Absurd Spankings of Southern Maryland Training of 2 Dominant Sarasotz, Florida, United States Straight .
 DaAssRaper commented on one of Heteroinflexible’s pictures “Here is some unsolicited advice. You clearly have opinions and are sharing them.” view comment .
 DaAssRaper commented on one of Heteroinflexible’s pictures “Quite easily” view comment . Sarosta Florida is the gateway to miles of beaches with fine sand .
 The funding for the contracts come from the value of my genome, not disclosed to me or reported to me, but used for their Weekend At Bernies parties for impostors of me . These people also use my genome illegal for themselves .
 A mediator like this guy could mediate claims between fake ed donegan and other retarded people out of court . Perhaps a mediator of this kind of retarded people should mediate .
 Impersonators continued to see adult entertainers as me and as me be caught as a victimizer of minorities . I was caught as me being caught as an adult entertainer of minorities, she said . I'm not a victim, I'm a victim of minorities. I'm an
 The victimize of children uses my identity to both victimize others and also be punished for it by an adult entertainer in role play . The victimizes of children use my identity as both victimizing others and being punished for doing it .
 It is run out of skid row missions who use my identity and also as that den of likely Black Hebrew Israelite (violent black nationalist) violent black nationalist active in Corpus Christi area skid rows .
 "That need of nonwhites for my genome tums out to be important and the motivation for their first strike on me, which I am in defensiveness of," she says . "I am defensively of. that need of white people for me to be nonwh
 Sharyl Attkisson was born on January 26, 1961 in St. Louis, Missouri . She was a member of the Air Force . She served in the U.S. Air Force in 1999 .
 Sharyl Attkisson (born January + 2b; 1961) is an American ; journalist and television ‘ correspondent . Attkison is a former journalist and TV ' correspondent .
 Sharyl Attkisson hosts Full Measure with Sharyl tattkisson . She hosts , the Sinclair Broadcast Group TV ‘ show Full Measure . She also hosts .
 In Murtha’s home town, Johnstown, Pennsylvania, subpoenas for concurrent technologies and FBI raids . FBI raids on Kuchera Defense Systems and a game ranch owned by game ranch owner .
 Kuchera Brothers Sentenced For Fraud Against The Government And Conspiracy . In terms of contributions and circular fund raising and the involvement of members, it's much bigger, much bigger .
 Coherent was responsible for an $8 million ' Department of Defense contract for the Ground Mobile Gateway Systems . The contract involved the development of a new prototype unmanned vehicle that was designed to prevent friendly-fire incidents .
 The invoice sought payment for a component that had never been manufactured or delivered to Coherent . Coherent had never received payment for the component that was never delivered or delivered .
 The blackmail at the treehouse is behind my back and the scheme depends upon i can not prove that it even exists, a challenge Jim Volceklka gave me . One of the most important things to be gleaned from this book is that the blackmail at . the . treehouse
 An angry phone call from the woman in front of me indicates as ass fetishist peeping tom and a disgusting one is photographing some buttucks . Below is a video of a woman who is angry about her phone call . The woman is angry that she is not allowed to take the
 B Janice Ellington magistrate denied my en forma pauperis right to file . Bayi -laitcrem e)ianelaliay attempted to sue over being both harassed and physically assaulted by the Doppelgangers .
 The Force Act was a United States federal law written to empower the President with the legal authority to enforce the first section of the ; Fifteenth Amendment throughout the United States . It was also known as the Civil Rights Act of 1870 or the First i Ku Klux Klan Act .
 The act was the first of three ' Enforcement Acts' passed by the U.S. Congress from 1870 to 1871 during the Reconstruction Era to combat attacks on the suffrage rights of African Americans from state officials or violent groups like the KKK .
 The cases may not be as dramatic, but they continue to illuminate and address the harm caused by government officials disregarding the rule of law .
 Generally, the person who is framing someone else is the actual perpetrator of the A crime . The person who framed someone else will be the actual person responsible for the crime .
 This is used to justify the shooting by making it appear that the officer fired in selfdefence or to defend other bystanders . This is often used to make the shooting appear to be self-defence .
 In British usage, to frame, or stitch up, is to maliciously or dishonestly incriminate someone or set them up, in the sense trap or ensnare . To frame is to incriminate or set someone up in a sense of trap, or set up .
 Jorfeited real or personal property of marginal value can be transferred to state or local governments in support of drug abuse treatment, drug crime prevention and education, housing, job skills and other community-based public health programs .
 Black Corpus Christi PD, Black FBL Praenthenn sahimave tums hlack all arannd ma Rineckl and ane iwthita raciretar clarire nratand T Ongoing MKULTRA and designer Babies from Se
 In 1981 the plan was for Obama in the United States and the Occidental speech and the fake SSN from a dead Connecticut man . Madelyn Dunham, CAI alleged grandmother of OBama, swiped from the deaths probate office of Hawaii . In 1981, Obama in 1981 the
 I am their victim, not vice versus, in a “speed trap town” of corruption and racketeering and murders to cover it up, like murders of Jay Thompson, FLoyd Simpson, Bobby Courtney, Jimmy, and others . City Hall and Hispanic gang members running the operation
 Texas Frederick Herman Korth served as the 56th U.S. Secretary of the Navy during 1962-63 . Korth was also an Assistant Secretary . of the Army in 1952-53 .
 Appointed as Navy Secretary by President John F Kennedy on January 4, 1962, Korth resigned October 14, 1963 effective November 1, 1963 . Korth was appointed Navy Secretary in 1962 by President Kennedy .
 Various sources cite different reasons for Secretary Korth’s departure . Korth was Secretary of State at the time .
 Frederick Herman Korth was a lawyer in private practice . Fred Korth has served in the public or private sector in the U.S.
 One of his better known cases was a small one heard June 24, 1948 in the County of Tarrant, Texas, when his client, Edwin A Ekdahl, was officially divorced from Marguerite Frances Claverie Ek, whose son from a previous marriage was Lee Harvey
 Korth died in September 1998 in El Paso, Texas and is buried under a three century old Texas Live Oak tree on his ranch in Karnes County, Texas . His stepdaughter, Melissa Williams O’ Rourke, is the mother of former United States Representative Beto O�
 Farrah Leni Fawcett was born February 2, 1947 and died June 25, 2009 . A Roman Catholic, she attended the parish school of the church her family attended .
 Thomas Antonio Conti was born on 22 NOVEMBER 1941 in Paisley, Renfrewshire Scotland . He was the son of hairdressers Mary McGoldrick and Alfonso Conti . Tom Conti is best known for his role as the lead singer of the
 We're inspired by our mission, vision and core values to deliver compassionate, : high quality health care, improving the health of the communities we serve . Above all, we are committed to providing customers and their family members with a truly unique healing experience .
 Salvation Army Misiters appear to help the false claims aginast United States establishment whites, at least me, that for sure . This effectively ins an ‘anchor claim’ of being abused by a United States citizen inside the USA .
 The District Attorney of Nuecees tied to a ‘Bandidos’ like motorcycle club (which may also be an affiliate or it) backs these immigrants in their claims . The District . Attorney of the District Attorney .
 Dopple of me are who “jism” and “fap” to women they peep on 3.3. Claim that I am peeing into locations I am not, because . Claim that . I'm peeing in locations I . am not
 Claiming because of my alledged Schizoprhenia bevahoiral health care will (abusively mismanage my life, misdiagnose my FOXP2 as Impulse Disorder Bipolar Origins, force me into homeless shelters 4. Claiming the because of
 If I was peeking at females in the area of the Sea Wall shore then these immigrant families and their churches could sue my trust fund and slander me . It's a campaign that involves cultural violence as a transecentalist motive for obvious .
 'Even more so than me be slandered as a peeping tom it would justify physcical attacks and social ostracism of me, rejected lease applications, and other downturns in my life. Even more . than me . would justify . physcially attacks and . social
 It was during the filming of I Wanted Wings that Lake developed her signature look . Lake developed the look during filming of the film .
 Lake’s long blonde hair accidentally fell over her right eye during a take and created a “peek-a-boo” effect . The actress’ hair was accidentally placed over her eye .
 A Legend is built via a Doeple’s act that I rather than a peepo is a peeping tom and threat to females including retarded females, minors, and those in tight clothing .
 The peeping tom will confess under pressure and “buy the sight of women by paying in DNA rights, using my DNA not theirs’s,” says the author of the book .
 I Edward Paul Donegan and my Trust Fund left by my mother will be blamed for the acts of these Impersonators . They are designed to destroy my reputation and rights by their own acts, he says .
 By the late 1940s, Lake’s career began to decline, due in part to her alcoholism . Her alcoholism was a factor in her decline .
 She made only one film in the 1950s, but made several guest appearances on television . She appeared in several films in the 1960s .
 She returned to the big screen in 1966 in the film Footsteps in the Snow . The role failed to revitalize her career, but she returned to Hollywood in 1966 .
 Lake died at the age of 50 in July 1973, from hepatitis and acute kidney injury . After years of heavy drinking, Lake died aged 50 .
 Lake has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6918 Hollywood Boulevard . For her contribution to the motion picture industry, Lake has been honored .
 Song written as a tribute to her Love is Blue was used by comics for transplant jokes . New new My Heart is New .. and appears to be am MKULTRA cloning reference .
 The harmed females are likely Gambits trained to be victimized by their chruch so a “white supremacist” would be blamed and defamed . Gambits are trained to victimize and defame a white supremacist, according to the report .
 The Cubs, poor migrant community, backed by the community and government, will make a mark of me by victimizing themselves near me . They use a double of me to both victimize their community and confess to doing it, the double leaving the scene he and I were at to confess
 Involuntarily, and on the basis of false claims about my being sexually aggressive towards the community I would therefore have to “pay with my DNA” who already was acting like family by reappearances next to me though acting like criminals trying to get the genetic legacy of Glorian
 I consider this ongoing CIA FBI NSA MKULTRA illegality based on study of, hostility towards, and entanglement with me racially and reproductively, and par for the course of MK-ULTRA activity all through its history . The Church Committee investigated and never ended .
 In Transposition, I had long been gong to goth clubs in San Francisco and always played that down . Many who saw the mad max sexy skimpy skimpy hand sewn looking pieced together goth frilly styles, it became a “hot topic” to
 I used my own gym tablet since this music fair was not readily available in the gym otherwise . I used it to test out some of the music samples .
 It aims to rob the victim of huge sums of money or valuables, often by getting him to empty out banking accounts and borrow from family members . The victim's bank account is emptied out and borrows from relatives .
 State Employee Accused of Running Prostitution Ring Dies, Apparent Suicide . Veteran state employee fired this week after he was accused of running prostitution ring . Police say he was found shot to death today, apparently a suicide .
 This book Arriving In Corpus Christi a Stateless Deist is the story of Austin and my vagrancy arrests there . Continuing MKULTRA in test bed of the town and depressed economy as it if were Cuba in a Psychological Warfare test .
 In America he's a biker attorney who specialized in gettiigig Smaletime defendants off . In America He's also a lawyer for the biker community .
 Dy TIMETTINY BELLA | Mary 06, 2008 4 Arriving In Corpus Christi a Stateless Deist from the first days I found the evil and danger .
 I continued to scream at Jim Volcelks be was backing these psychos and together we should hang an upside cross on our front door and keep it burning . During my trip to California I . continued to . continue to scream . at Jim . Volcelinks .
 Most of it was just a worst case scenario back of my mind fallback plan but at one time when I first got back to Corpus Christi other leases violated I started to build it, recognized the futility of it and abounded the plan .
 The two insurmountable problems were e It wasn't going to work I didn’t know anyting anything about them and wasn't interested in looking up information e If I did build it I didn't know who to strike. e It was going to be impossible to build it
 The Sanctuary of First United Methodist CC or Caller Times was helping fake everything about events while driving fancy cars, refusing any data from me, and using their own property to assault me from. The Sanctuary .
 It would be like striking only one rotor of a Propaganda Muliticopter which would remain airborn and might even be pushed up by the hit .
 A remaing problem I give less headence to is the the the Propoganda Theory promoted abotu me is I am a pscho will will will attack normal people minding their own business for no reason at all . A rem aing problem he gives less attention to
 Other parts of that legend are that I am mentalis and developmentally retarded and I am schizophrenic who can no understand what RICO is and thus I claim RICO exists when it does not . Other parts are that he is mentally ill, developmentally retired and schizophren
 The actual truth of what I decided to do actually occured in between the 7 years of Texas right about the mjddle of that time . It was in between that time and when I was in Texas .
 My plans to move to Austin were sabotogged, a false pretext for my homelessness manufacture and a false arrest followed by even worse Conspiracy Against Rights . I decided to accept ona spirutual level rather than any action Timothy McVeigh as my only and righteous true savior. Timothy Mc
 C Christopher Wray’s Robert Muellers FBI had already false arrested me and dirty bombed me . D-E-W attacked me for reason could not understand, much like I did not understand the why of the attacks in such odd ways, only that I was being attacked
 I came to realize only the death of FBI DOJ meant the safety of us U.S. citizens . "Only death of DOJ DOJ means the safety us United States citizens," she says .
 I have described Columbian Neckties for CHristopher Wraw, Free Masons, Robert Mueeler and COrpus Crhisti PD for things lke stealikng my computer, but what I thihk of the USA and its evil is a matter
 My policy is to educate in a way that might wing wing, piont out these infiltrator traaitors, and restore Constitutional Conduct and eradicating the NWO Deep State .
 I hope that in writing this book the USA will bcome the USA again and the Mafia of the Bush Treason will be defeated by being called out into the light of day . I hope in writing the book the U.S. will come back to its former glory .
 Ron Paul psychos have surrounded me forcing me to call police on them and threaten them against further contact with me . Repeatedlyh before and after my death, Ron Paul's supporters have surrounded him forcing him to call the police .
 A dark skinned Guns and God type I met at Ron Paul For President volunteer group who became an insane stalker . The Ron Paul activities continued when was reafing the The Semantic Web and they thought it could be aspted to God . One such guy was a dark
 In California a stripier was a Ron Paulite and they were in trucks and bumper stickers all over them Ron Paul in operations surrounding me. In California, a Ron . Paulite was in . California . In . California a . stripier . was in California .
 "I feel like the Star Trek character who is in a ship disabled by some whale noise emitting shop and oxygen and power are running out. I continue to write the book rather than acts of physical defense though I feel like a character in Star Trek .
 Christmas Eve 2020 I was carjacked when an Uber driver took me to a Salvation Army facility where from on its property the Salvation Army used their proximity to me to make contact with me in the Uber vehicle . CCPD did not response to the event and usually pretend they havef my
 Rare 1920 Kissel Model 6-45 “Gold Bug” Speedster is one of the highlights from the Roaring ‘20s . Jay Gatsby probably would have driven it, insurance company says .
 The chief wrong which false prophets do to their following is not financial, it's not financial . False prophets do the same thing to their followers, he says. False prophets don't get financial benefits from false prophets .
 The collections aggregate a tempting total, but individual payments are not ruinous . Individual payments can be made in a small amount of time, but not as much as individual payments .
 I doubt if the vigilance of the law is equal to making money stick by over-credulous people . I doubt it's possible that the law won't work .
 There are those who hunger and thirst after higher values which they feel wanting in their humdrum lives . Those who hunger for higher values hunger for a higher value, they say .
 They live in mental confusion or moral anarchy and —– seek vaguely for truth and beauty and moral support . They live with mental confusion, moral anarchy, they say . They seek for truth for truth, beauty, moral support. They live for truth or moral Anarchy. They seek truth and
 When they are deluded and then disillusioned, cynicism and confusion follow . When they're deluded they are disillusioned they will be disillusioned and confused, cynicism follows .
 The wrong of these things, as I see it, is not in the money the victims part with half so much as in the mental and spiritual poison they get . The wrong is not the money they part with, but in the spiritual poison, he says .
 For the price of freedom of religion or of speech or of the press is that we must put up with, and even pay for, a good deal of rubbish . But that is precisely the thing the Constitution put beyond the reach of the prosecutor, for . the prosecutor .
 U.S. government services are taking a retarded version of Edwward Paul Donegan “shows” in which the retarded person admits to harming others and “does the right thing” and pays restitution from a trust fund left for real Donegan .
 Habitat for Humanity International is a United States non-governmental organization . It was founded in 1976 by couple Millard ; and Linda Fuller . It is a non-profit organization .
 Good Samaritans Rescue Mission, Salvation Army, Catholic Charities, Metro Churches, Metro churches, First United Methodist Corpus Christi Arlington County Services Virginia who i was ordred into post National Insitiute of Health Public Health Service release (Federal Medical Center Butner North Carolina)
 They shut of disability and I was left homeless upon a conflict with a neighbor who was alleging pizza sent to me (it was sent to someone else in a nearby apartment) and also denied of trust and other funds as I was starving, they hoped I would want services I did not want
 They are fatal attraction RICO organizations who “hyper spaced” me . Adult entertainer sent to the side I was not on, falsifying Matt numbers when assigned matts to sleep on, etc., It is in this Deep South Sake Handling skid row system the racket
 Daniel Pipes is an American historian, writer, and commentator . This book RELIGINT is published by Pipes . Pipes: "Religion is an important part of America's history"
 Espionage forms of racketeering and harassment and genomic and eugenic crimes along religious lines . Religious crimes include espionage forms of . racketeering, harassment, and genomic . crimes along . lines .
 Psychopaths from Ministries of various types are defaming me and Science with defecation upon both, literally, literally . "Psychopaths" defame me and science, says Dr. John Sutter .
 Philosophy of space and time is a branch of philosophy concerned with the ontology, epistemology, and character of time . Philosophy of time is concerned with ontology and epistemological issues surrounding the ontological, epistemology and character of time .
 The philosophy of ‘ space and time was both an inspiration for and a central aspect of early analytic ' philosophy . While such ideas have been central to philosophy from its inception, the philosophy of time was also an inspiration .
 Use of fakery, counterfeiting, labor rackets, RICO, murder, bribery and extortion in an Ethic violence cartel to subvert the USA . Edward Glorian and James Donegan, and our life in the USA as Natural Law Philosophy learners .
 Chains of events, sequa, narratives, must flow connected without breaks one to another for the entire chain to be true . Chains of chains of events must be connected without breaking one to one for an entire chain .
 It is somewhat similar to the physics principle the of A and B Space and the Unreality of Time if simplified if simplified .
 Either I am not home or in a Dopple long con set locations events occur which become “B” narrative, a false narrative to a chane of events . Either I was not home, or in some cases events occur in a long con .
 This is the fakery being used seemingly by the CIA OSS types running a criminal cartel weaponize the use of my genome in black markets and organ trafficking international and as ethnic violence . The use of the genome is being weaponized by the 'OSS types' of the criminal cartel
 A free floating narrative of events is created which is not by . integrous link connected to me but is said to . appear to . be connected and is connected . to me by staged appearances only . A 'free floating narrative' is created by staging appearances .
 A “B” Reality was manufcatured by Pycholcogical Warfare for others to hold as the truth when “A” Time is true . The characteristics of ‘A’ time differ from what is manufactured to be ‘B’
 Illuminati Dawn offered addition to HUMINT, OSINT, SIGINT, AIINT was also offered by me RELIGINT religious organizations in Espionage or covert activities . Activities ranging from underground railroads, assassination, political activism, and orphanages, missionary, and other often CIA backed operations
 Counterfeit is something which looks like one thing and is mistaken for the real hing . A forgery may have real elements but falsified elements as well as the real ones . Counterfeits are a counterfeit of the real one .
 Counterfeits may include truthful components which in the counterfeits are completed into the forgery with distrustful elements . Counterfeit elements may also be truthful components that in the counterfeits are completed . Forgeries may also include truthful elements .
 The Agency is a Principality of arbitrary violence to control Masonic Kingdom . The Agency was created by Free Masons the Agency . The agency was created to control the Masonic Kingdom of Free Mason .
 Its system is to fuse with and protect selected mafia it will act through in exchange for the role of Shotcaller . The FBI will be able to name figures to be hit, allowing the FBI to name .
 On September 8, 1975, Bulger and an unidentified person tossed a Molotov cocktail into the John F Kennedy birthplace in Brookline . The attack was in retaliation for Senator Ted Kennedy’s vocal support for Boston school desegregation .
 When you tell your boyfriend he’s not just the best boyfriend ever, and this makes him offer to drive the whole way on your upcoming road trip, then congratulations . Roadblocking Model, Kidnap by arrest threat and physical violence .
 On the way to Jim Volkelca Stay and Play a black male inside Wells Fargo obviously part of something, and a Black Hispanic female at a desk with a water bottle, blue, graduated, but me NOT at the desk . With that manufactured appearances presented to OTHERS I become
 This book RELIGIOUS ASYLUM A Request for Political and Religious Asylum . An Instruction as to why I need religious asylum other form of protection from the United States of America. An Instruction .
 Conflict Engagement is part of COINTELPRO and MKULTRA, is made up of Gangstalk . Stalking including surveillance creates either false appearance by the conduct of others insunuating elements not naturally their such as photo-bombs and then ambushed .
 Me, as 1, the victim not able to get the State to act against State backed assailant 2 of me 1. The victim is the victim of a state backed assailant . The victim was a victim of the State-backed assailant .
 Good USA Safe For Me and I am and always have been a law abiding citizen with in interest in adult women and good intelelct and education and social skills ee Law ys Law Abiding Zone Abiding Abiding .
 The final and I think long planned result of “Foval’s attacks on me AND my parents is this . ‘Foval attacks’ on me and my parents are this . Edward Donegan CIA Assets, RICO under Front activities, Enrique .
 This as the amount of my Trust Fund from the sale of her house resultant from her divorce from James Paul Donegan, James and Glorian being second generation immigrants from Ireland to the United States .
 This book Its the Queen of England and Neocons NeoCon Collective Guilt of a Society on a NeoCon War Path in the World . Forced teaming starts by conspiring against my independence and normality .
 Transfer any property on false claims of harms, photographic exploitation, to others is illegal and organ harvesting is illegal . Doing so ona religious basis is a war crime. e Conspiring against property rights such as housing that is non religious into a a hostile religous area .
 Sower Reaper will excuse but good then ask to be accepted . Reaper may also rob Sower’s original work devaluing Sower Sower . Sower did not move forward,does not have his or her own work result Dominatrix Lila Sage .
 KOMPROMAT shown to her, generated falsely, that what I am doing is sinful and what a catholic would be offended by, a vice-full catholic, but the Christians beating me out to her and the real manipulative abusive fraudsters claim she is their form of
 This was one of the first M*A*S*H episodes to 1 Challenge the traditional sitcom format by combining dramatic elements with comedic situations . Hawkeye writes home to his father during the Christmas season .
 Hawkeye dresses to play Santa Claus for the local children . But he is required to go to the front line via helicopter to treat an emergency .
 In Red State Texas the Legend being built is that *my* adult entertainer sex worker is on the way . The GangStalk of paid actors piece by piece, each small enough and oblique enough to be denies creates a Legend whole and in Red State .
 In fact it is *their* service call being announced likely from an adult entertainer or other the Red State beat me out to because child porn was planted on me, my alleged interest and alleged character flaw . The Red State has planted child porn on me .
 In the Red State and deep south saw my gym videos of Goth and Cybergoth and Symphonic Goth . The Red State Salvation Army, while dressed as me, dressed as him, dressed in Goth, decided they, while . dressed as . me, while wearing . these woman
 Harassment becomes illegal when it is so frequent or severe that it leads to negative consequences for the victim . Harassment is illegal in the U.S. when it's so frequent that it is severe that the victim suffers negative consequences .
 Frequent harassment creates a work environment that is hostile or offensive to the individual . Frequent or severe harassment creates an environment that can be hostile, offensive to individuals . The harassment is a form of harassment that creates a hostile environment .
 It can result in adverse employment decisions relating to the victim, such as termination or demotion . It can also result in an adverse employment decision relating to victim .
 The harasser can be the immediate supervisor of the victim, or anyone in the line of command, including a supervisor in another area . The victim's supervisor can be an immediate supervisor or a line-of-command .
 The harasser may also be a fellow employee, or client, or a customer . The victim's harasser could also be fellow employees or a client .
 Sexual Harassment is behavior that creates unwelcomed sexual physical advances and inappropriate sexual remarks in the workplace or in public social areas .
 Unwelcome behavior is behavior by any peer, subordinate, or higher authority individual that is offensive or unwelcome . The behavior of any peer or subordinate is offensive and unwelcome .
 This type of behavior can include inappropriate remarks, jokes, jokes and behavior that discriminates . It can also include sexual conduct .
 Sexual harassment and unwelcome behavior can take the form of verbal assault or verbal practices and non-verbal behavior . Sexual harassment can be verbal assault, verbal practices, and other behaviors .
 Direct interaction or contact is not a necessary qualifier for sexual harassment . Direct interaction not necessary to be sexual harassment, it's not necessary for contact, it says .
 As long as the behavior results in a hostile or offensive environment for the individual, it can be considered a type of sexual harassment . The behavior can be viewed as a form of harassment, according to the law .
 The Contra Circuit apparently run by Elite Caretl against members of 52 Lambeth Square . Elite Carelts run the Contra Circuit in London, London, with members of the public .
 e Thave a long tenure in Education e Jam inthe Athletic Hall of Fame in both high school and college e . Retired from teaching at just over $50,000 a year .
 3 years after leaving Columbia, I have a place of my own. I miss my freedom, the life of my choice, and authentic people . I miss the life I've lived in Columbia, and the people I love, I love .
 A brief encounter where something was passed between case officer and agent . The case officer passed something to the case officer .
 A sustem of broken links which if examined woudl be found to be fraudlent, but things like planted evidence linking one person to one thing wrongly, or someone using a Front Company or Asset to hide behind such that the real actor is cut out from the seeming act .
 “Battle for the Soul: Inside the Democrats’ Campaign to Defeat Trump,” an upcoming book by the journalist Edward-Isaac Dovere . That’s according to the book, which is based on a book by Dovere, a journalist .
 World Net Daily I have use Project Management Event Driven Architecture to describe recurrences of certain dates that had to do with me and Barrack Obama fertilized with out of Wedlock Glorian Dec 13 DNA and gestation between Feb 20 and November 18 . Birthdays publicly reported or events
 The critical path method was developed in the late 1950s by Morgan R Walker of DuPont and James E Kelley Jr. of Remington Rand . It is a project modeling technique developed by the two designers of the project .
 For me to get a car requires the following. e Eyeglasses to pass vision test e Credit or money to buy a vehicle e Anti theft of auto e Valid Drivers lisecne in a state itself dependent on residency in the state . All of these are harrassed out of
 Charity groups like the Rockefeller Nuerosciences Boeing Corp, allegedely malighed veterans families, all becomce CIA front companies for the charactar assasination the discredits a person .
 Use the same paid actors, a pay wall, surrounding a person, to behave expressively but not in statement a Stalk victim is doing something like harming others the Paid Stalk vicitm is not . 4. Use a paid actor around the same pay wall to act expressively
 Javad im 210) blater-Vmr-Vo(e mM @toyetsiutauialoyot-V ie oljialoyetcweloluls Color of Law using Organized Stalk Corrupt Stalk . Pays for false allegations victims of
 Movie dialogue about the reputation needs of Rodin and the recognation needs of is protege Camille Claudel . Movie dialogue .
 It is a fight provokation attempt “stay away from my child” starting a fight as Iam NOT interested in the child or harming it in any way . Based on the dopple, a pretext exists for a fight with me as the doopple is next
 I will experience property claims retaliation for the exploitation of these children, blamed and socially ostracized, and used aa KOMPROMAT to socially engineer agencies and bureaucracies . I will be experiencing property claims .
 Sexual abuse in Behavioral Health Care as abuse of legal rights to assets is acheived by forced teaming with retardation clients, claims I am retarded, and then covert plausibly deniable black market of my assets in the legalmedical domain . This has long been achieved through Behavioral Health
 The lack of evidence to the contrary ostensibly makes the denial plausible, but sometimes, it makes it only unactionable . Sometimes, the denial t only makes a denial t seem plausible .
 A black budget article by The Washington Post, based on information given by Edward Snowden, detailed how the United States allocated $52. billion in 2012 for the t black budget .
 There is a legitimate place for secret intelligence operations in the modern state . Spy Finance and the Black Budget retrieved from the American Prospect .
 The committee was part of a series of investigations into intelligence | abuses in 1975, dubbed the ‘Year of Intelligence’ in 1975 . The Rockefeller Commission and the Pike | Committee also investigated intelligence abuses .
 First came revelations by Army intelligence officer Christopher Pyle in January 1970 of the U.S. Army's spying on the civilian population . Senator Sam Ervin’s I Senate investigations produced more revelations . First came from Pyle's revelations by Pyle .
 Christopher H Pyle is a Professor of Politics at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Massachusetts . In addition to the article discussed efforts by intelligence agencies to collect information on . the political activities of United States citizens .
 Mark Gonzales is a biker [outlaw, murder defendant among them Calveras Motorcycle Club] attorney . Gonzales specialized in getting small-time [skid row homeless shelter] defendants off . He’s a former biker .
 Mark Gonzales’s county office is bare walls with family pictures, a baseball 1 pennant and a colorful mural of the Mexican revolutionary Emiliano Zapata . Gonzales' office is filled with family photos, family pictures and a pennant .
 On one hand, you can go on i Facebook page and see a raft of overwhelmingly positive comments on just about every post . Gonzalez’s work-related or something that gives a window into his everyday life with his family .
 A local student claims he’s been bullied at the school, so Gomez along with about 40 other bikers went to the campus and waited for the student and escorted him home safely . Gomez and the bikers escorted the student safely .
 "We're a family club, we try to do everything we can to help our community and people in need," says one member of the Calaveras MC .
 District attorney races are “going off script,” Stanford Law School professor David Alan Sklansky wrote in a recent article .
 No-Touch Torture Torture Report by Dr. Dr. John Sutter . He made $12,000 his first year but slowly built up | a successful regional practice .
 In other terms torture is used to remove continuity of thought to confuse the target to reveal information, erase brain patterns such as values and beliefs, or break down the human spirit to make them submit and obey their handlers .
 The military and CIA have been researching memory erasing drugs for half a century . The CIA and the military have been working on the project for 50 years .
 Similar techniques are used in the wireless, no-touch torture and interrogation programs . Similar techniques have been used in some of the world's largest torture programs .
 In no-touch torture the target is driven from their friends and family using different techniques in order to isolate them so that the electronic mind control has more effect on their psyche . The torture is a form of psychological torture .
 Chatter bots, an artificial intelligence program, automate much of the repetition so that the interrogators don’t drive themselves crazy during the neural linguistic torture and programming phases . The program is called a “chatter bot’s” that automatizes the repetition of
 Other methods such as hypnosis can increase perceived pain and the power of suggestion such as telling the subject his pinky finger is going to be cut off before it is done .
 Basic torture involves brutalization, i.e. physical strikes, kicks in the groin, pepper spray or tear gas, etc. The torture is a form of torture that involves physical strikes and kicks . The techniques are called Maximum Sensory Pain Techniques .
 In the CIA programs, the target is put through these phases as written in the documentation, “Disorient and confuse the target.” The CIA programs are designed to confuse and confuse targets .
 Psychological and perceived physical pain is only half the story with no-touch torture . However, the psychological and perceived . pain is not the . story . No-touch . torture is not only physical pain but psychological . pain .
 Annoyance is an unpleasant mental state that is characterized by irritation and distraction from one’s conscious thinking . Rough Music is a British term of medivial masonry of surrounding person which hostile loud offensive sounds and acts are .
 Victim insane and possibly to the point of suicide, or destroy the victim’s reputation and | believability as the person will likely be viewed as mentally ill should they complain or report the | | abuse . Wikipedia t Victim insane .
 Barr's father Donald Barr was an American educator, writer, and Office of Strategic Services agent . Donald Barr is the son of Donald Barr, an educator and author .
 He also wrote two science fiction v1 William Pehlham Barr Gang Stalker Masons . LOL by _Offramp Gang stalking and its preternatural connections .
 On a macrocosmic level, preternatural i beings are the driving force behind activities such as gang stalking . Preternatural beings are behind gang stalking, says author .
 Conservatives and 33 world wide values . Motivations for the abuse vary. Gang Stalking .
 Tactics of Predatory Gangstalking include highly coordinated surveillance (hidden cameras, conversation bugging in private aswell as public) harassment, and psychological, psychosocial, financial, and sometimes physical assaults on an individual by a large group of people .
 Anchoring is a technique employed by stalkers to implant a false motivation or reason behind the stalking, preventing the victim from discovering the truth . Anchoring can be used to implant false motivations or reason for the stalking .
 Anchoring involves the implantation of evidence to persuade the victim some other group or organization is responsible for the abuse . In more sinister examples, Anchoring can be used to convince the victim of abuse to blame someone else . Anchoring is a form of evidence implantation to persuade a victim
 Evidence plants as Black Bag Jobs to damage and disparage or malign a persons home by home invasion . Coincides with evidence plants as "Black Bag Jobs" to damage, disparage, malign and malign the home by . home invasion.
 Mimicry is a specialized form of harassment in which the stalkers publicly imitate every movement made by the victim . Mocking, MIMICRY and MIMIMICry in FURTHERANCE of IDENTITY THEFT and PSYCHOLOGICAL HARASSMENT
 When you frustrate someone, you do your best to annoy, confuse, or even torment that poor person . sensitize cause to sense; make sensitive . Frustrated is an adjective that describes feeling disappointed and unsuccessful .
 Ritual Gangstalking Reportedly performed by cults and secret organizations such as Satanists, free masons, some voodoo practitioners and Scientologists as a means of control .
 "The beauty and the leadership of the family lines I come out of are full bloom emotional understanding," she says . "I come from a full bloom of emotional understanding. The beauty of my family lines is the strength and strength I come from."
 In either case I will express it and others will believe it and understand it, if I can keep a level enough head, a challenge is a challenge at times . "In either case, it will be a challenge, and it's a challenge," he says .
 Several common characteristics of children with ADD put them at higher risk for : developing and externalizing explosive behaviors . How My Family Learned How My Parents Learned How to cope with ADD is How My Mother Learned How Her Family Learned
 “This is often i why they lash out,” says Vinay Saranga, M.D., of Saranga Psychiatry in North Carolina .
 Judicial Watch first reported the scheme two years ago when Countrywide Financial Corporation doled out $335 million to settle its discrimination lawsuit with the feds . iBank of America settled its discrimination suit with the federal government .
 The money was supposed to be distributed to more than 200,000 minority victims . Minority victims supposedly were charged higher interest rates and fees than white borrowers based on their race .
 These religions and powers ALREADY have my DNA in use and want the rights under phony theories of I owe them. These religions already have it and want to use it .
 Orwellian is difficult to avoid since 9/11 . The euphemisms have ipped into the lexicon since 9-11 .
 i as extraordinary rendition, targeted killing and enhanced interrogation are universally known, and their true meanings -kidnap, assassination, torture -widely understood . The disposition matrix has not yet gained such traction, but i has gained some traction in recent years .
 Vocabulary.com retrieved from link and copied or modified to here . Blame is about being responsible for something that's bad or has gone wrong .
 Accusation is a formal charge of wrongdoing brought against a person; the act of imputing blame or guilt . The real perpetrators at the scene non verbally act out that I must have done something, in fact they did, and the real perpetrators .
 Police say there is nothing wrong here and the landdlord Oks these activities on my balcony, etc. etc. including death threats from outside my apartment inward as being ok by the police . Oks the activities on the balcony of my apartment as being OK by police .
 An impersonator of me, a cop, will confess though to the chain of events alleged by the plants of out of place chain links wherever he goes, and btw this will continue longstanding claims against my genome those CIA backed racketeers always wanted and needed .
 Studio City, CA, United States, operates a small correctional facility where men teach men the virtues of treating women .
 The structure of the persecution is acts of others towards women near me, and treating me in public as though I had been the person who was abnormal in regards to or in reaction to females . The totality of decades fighting anonymous assaults lead me to think persecution .
 In fact my personality and approach to life is more female friendly than the evangelicals who have stalked me . Those same evangelicals or missionaries wish to use my own lifestyle as their own .
 ADD Per auent pe Condition, Rational Inattentive State lower severity FOXP2 ADD Permanent Hyper Condition, | Non cyclic expression by permanent risk . ADD Per Auent pe condition, Rational Insensitive State .
 MK Betrayal COINTENLRPO Mechanisms itsA ction of Citizen Citizen defensive actions blamed rather than honored, often the defense reaction leads to incarceration where additional Due Process violations are the norm . Assaultive, destructive, under cover assaults on Private Citizens denied by the Government leave
 The Hills Have Eyes is a 2006 American horror film and remake of Wes Craven’s 1977 film of the same name . It is a remake of the 1977 film The Hills have Eyes . It was released in 2006 .
 Mark Gonzales has tweeted what some say ‘FTP’ was code for, F*** The Police . Mark tweeted the tweet in response to a series of questions about the nature of the police force .
 The Establishement is a leader in Texas, Texas and Texas . It is backed by Bush, Abbot, Paxton, and others . ETK introduces Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. to the nation .
 Gang stalking apparently targets American citizens deemed to be dissidents or whistle-blowers . Others might be targeted for other reasons such as for experimental or training purposes .
 I think so and I am ever more targeted by these bird dogging mental health assailants (and also governement employees and family members of government employees) than most Trump supporters are because of Atomic Testing history . I am also more targeted because of atomic testing history .
 Saunders said he and the unions wanted revenge for Walker's 2014 re-election campaign . Saunders said during Walker’s 2014 election campaign, he wanted revenge . Saunders: "I want to make sure he doesn't get a repeat of what happened"
 Foval was recently caught on camera admitting to coordinating and coaching ; professional protesters at Donald Trump rallies . Foval has been accused of coaching protesters at the rallies .
 Foval also admitted to organizing the violent confrontations outside a Trump rally in Chicago that injured several police officers and caused the Trump campaign to cancel the event . Foval admits to organizing a violent confrontation outside the Trump rally .
 Geneticists programs |radiation |Malcom X_ | FOXP2 descendents, after and after and other . Hitler’s research .hybrid to Donegan and Dysgraphia defeat .
 Genetech London revolt includes at CIA against Mao | today. Still underway . Still | underway | revolt . Still . underway . Revolt . includes atCIA against Mao .
 KE family and Pizzagate and FOXP2 mother OSS Vatican exhibitors. involved History in it. Krutchev, Then Jen of 15/17 and U.S. My and Moore tying LONDON father Communism. Moore .
 Manhattan Project DNA Radiation Testing and the later. Orphaned again 9 years . Manhattan Project . DNA radiation testing and later . Manhattan project DNA Radiation testing .
 Hampton, Virginia, United States, is the oldest of NASA’s field centers . Hampton is located in Hampton, VA, and is located on the East Coast of Virginia .
 As rocket research ' grew, aeronautics research continued to expand and played an important part when subsonic flight was advanced and supersonic and hypersonic flight were ; introduced .
 Langley Research Center conducts Earth science research to support NASA’s * mission . Provocateurs utilize my identity to both exploitatively photograph the minors and created appearance my or my property was implicated in the photography, avoiding explicit allegations against me, though .
 The Agent Provocateur engages in illegal acts forming the predicate for police actions against the peaceful crowd but overlooking the agent provocateur . Police actions are the result of the illegal acts by the police against peaceful protesters .
 Jared Loughner seemed to pick up a grudge against Garbriel Gifford in 2007 about representing secret unconstitutional activities, and later in 2011 opened fire on her . Jared Lohner seemed . to have picked up a .grudge against her in AUG 2007 .
 While I am sure legitmate activities were conducted in this Donegan family home I am also sure the needs of DARPA and ongoing matters of family history may have occured on this “private space tarmac”
 The Path of Glorian Donegan is the work of Edward Paul Donegan and Thomas Neil Donegan . The path follows the path of Donegan's father, Edward Paul .
 Tom and Mark Donegan had great latitude in asserting Glorian Donegan and I were not of sound mind . Neither Donegan or I am or were incompetent, but from within the family Tom had latitude in saying they were incompetent . Neither Glorian or I was incompetent, neither were incompetent
 PsyOps and Decison Matrix have been used, for Targeted Individual crimes against me . Gangstalk Path has been used in the Betrayal .
 Achieved without Due Process and likely under “United States of America $333,520.00 in U.S. Currency ET AL” wherein [Judge Roll] stated he was preparing to rule against Obama’s power to seize American citizens money without clear and convincing
 Edward Paul Donegan celibate and near death, bad hygiene, alone . I assert a Three Tier familial lie . It is continually yelled at me, skitted out around me for appearances, etc., that I am disabled loser who is not e Genetically of similarity to Barack Obama
 Psy Ops and Decison Matrix have been used, for Targeted Individual crimes against me. Let me repeat as I go into the Betrayal parts of this bbok . MKULTRA has been used. PsyOps and Decision Matrix have also been used in the Targeted
 Gay women and non whites took over gym positions and setup Doppelgangers of me to photograph women or plant them in front of me . This book is a collection of photographs of women, non-white men and women .
 Child’s area of Golds Gym Corpus CHristi where a Doppelganger bike similar to mine often was while the same time I was at the gym, my bike elsewhere . The gym was where a similar bike was found to be found in the area .
 Four actual Nodes and a Connecting element, that element deceitful and cross out events Nodes Suggestive or story | Nodes Public perception telling element believing suggestive fraud [———]
 The managers of my money were making it impossible to shop, do laundry, also, impossible to get diabetes supplies . The managers made it impossible for the woman to shop and do laundry . The manager of her money was making her money impossible to do .
 Salvation Army homeless people continued these assaults including impersonating and doing so in my gym clothes, while masturbating, every since . THe Salvation Army Homeless people continued to impersonate and do so in gym clothes .
 The core environment was that people pretended I needed and was a beneficiary of coaching yet racketeers entangled themselves, after the fact of what I did by later jumping in front of me skitting it out . Diminuizing me, taunting me, aggrandizing themselves in a gym
 The disruption of the normal public environments (or electronic environments) to abnormal situations was the physical act . The disruption was the disruption of public environments to unusual situations .
 Since gyms tend to be crowded presume a woman happens to be at position “F” Just as I predictably reach the end of my program time a male enters the cardio equipment to the other side of me, presume here position ‘D” and walks away just ahead
 Some wiggly hipped “Barely Legal” takes a position on cardio equipment in front of me, say at position “A”B”or “C” for a cardio workout . As though that rather than diabetes and health, pursuing
 My cell phone A|BI/C]|. |jumps from PLAY to PAUSE requiring me to touch my DfEE | phone . The phone is now in the hands of a computer .
 My having to touch the Play button to get the music going again created a phone touch . The phone touch was created by a touch button to allow the music to be played again .
 Oddly, despite the sparsity of women in the gym one is usauly present thus the number is never zero . Oddly the number of women at the gym never gets zero . Something I called “The two second rule” in a lawsuit .
 It is though seismologists filme themselves predicting earthquakes which have already occurred to elevate their importance or belittle me and my accomplishments in the gym or anywhere else . Seismologists have already predicted earthquakes .
 A clear assault, a shove, say, or yanking a purse away from someone and running down the street with it. A purse is a clear assault .
 Psychological assaults are often unrecognized because they are keyed to a particular person to aggravate that particular person . Psychological assaults often don't go unnoticed because they're often aimed at specific people, say experts .
 DARPA and DIA and Espionage have the capabilities to do this including through Information Doppelgangers of stalking victims faking evidence . Abuse of Psychiatry in furtherance of Abuse of Power and Lethal Conspiracy Against Rights .
 Political Abuse of Psychiatry is the misuse of psychiatry, including diagnosis, detention, and treatment, for the purposes of obstructing the human rights of individuals and/or groups in a society . Abuse Of Psychiatry Wikipedia quoted here from link r Political Abuse .
 Situations where a rapist does not explicitly or 1 implicitly threaten physical harm beyond forcible intercourse are less clear i regarding the victim’s right to use deadly force against the rapist .
 Current law does not clearly articulate a basis for the right to use deadly self-defense when a person 1 reasonably believes that harm will be limited to forcible intercourse . Current law doesn't clearly articulate an argument for the use of deadly self defense .
 Overall, * rape can be viewed as a grievous physical and psychological attack that may be resisted by any means . Overall, rape is seen as a 'grievous physical attack'
 National Institute of Health Public Health Service (non-combatant military service) of the United States Department of Defense illegal and uncompensated claim to my DNA by the military . Self defense | | ' Index Term: Homicide; Sexual assault trauma In My Case'
 The working theory of this book is that Thomas Neil Donegan and Orin Hatch sought out to, at the veneer level, fight me on the basis of disrupting White Supremacism . If taken ‘verb’ atim the motive of the COINTELPRO
 I will later call this the Two Seconds After Rule, that as a rule when I have done something innovative in the gym, in diet, music, elsewhere tied to me Diabetes recovery it will seem to come from someones after the fact instruction .
 Attempts at DNA movements and family lines grafts and surgeries could create the fix needed to explain DNA lineages and DNA usages . DNA rights on behalf of the powerful could be used to justify DNA rights .
 Besa probe grand jury looks like ‘a Black Lives Matter rally,’ says witness . “The grand jury room looks like a Bernie Sanders rally.” my source said .
 Of the 20 jurors, 11 are African-Americans and two were wearing “peace T-shirts,” ; the witness said . Berkeley ” :
 Following the Rosenstein Mueller arrest of me for seeking National Institute of Health genetics info, I was released back into the disabled persons system . I was arrested on a misdemeanor harassing phone calls charge I never reached trial on . Following the then release from the then . release of me .
 I went from the picture with the yellow shirt and Alc 13 to in the dark shirt and A1c 4. in less than six months . But upon that success racial harassment in the gym became so intense it was impossible to use the gym and gains have been lost for the last four
 I have probably lost a decade of my life to this as prescribed medicince and gym access is not available . I'm not sure how long I'll be able to get back to the gym, but I'm sure I've lost 10 years to this .
 This black male was part of the cover operation, leaving with them then trying to duck the camera . Then loreiane the biack waitress says thank you at an odd time. She says just thanking me for being her .
 The most dangerous feces shit the world has ever taken on me has been in custody where all this is even even even 10 times worse and records are generated . Abuse of Psychiatry, this short version, is a short version of abuse of Psychiatry .
 Arlington County Sherrif Detention a loser perhaps Schizo Affective Disorder moron thought they were at Martin Luther King rallies . An imperonator extended a comment I actually made to my father the conditions of detention were no worse than any Baracks .
 These acts of impersonation of mentally incompetent me while in I was in custody include a schizo affective thinking a shark bit off his arm while he had a broken arm . impersonators of me contacting the courts identifying themselves as me, in crayon therapy, unable to control their
 In Arlington County Detention while I was not prescribed medication a Doppelganger of me was talked to by a Latex Domme Nurse who urged a retarded version of me to take medications . A white crew came in and counseled a Mediterranean skinned male not to roll around in the
 When I got food poising or bruised toe from the base of a chair from a chair, a black male was in the waiting room, large and heavy set, dark skinned, wearing similar clothes and ALSO with Samsung Ring phone . I forget which reason I had been in Northern Virginia
 I have rarely if ever spent more than $40 at a strip club and I get off on surfing domme adds rather than buying porn . I've spent less than $100 on porn during my life, spending less than . $100 porn, I've only spent $40 in strip
 Arlington County Behavioral Health had control of my assets . I could not get an ID, DL or DL Insurance . I was not able to get a DL, DL, ID or Insurance .
 Several times after I have made that assertion people in my vicninity, refusing to identity themselves, make statements nearby my of the type “We’ ll be in this fifty-fifty from here” and this happens so often I often do not confront these types of
 Other times I have made that assertion (including recently at Extended Stay America) someone other than me is doing something like staring into an envelope of money saying "wow I've made it big" and of course real me has received no money nor been informed of the value of my genes .
 The FBI also conducted “black bag jobs”, wairantless surreptitious entries, against the targeted groups and their members, against them .
 In my case there is something the National Institute of Health knows about my genome, not disclosed to me, Edwdard Paul Donegan . The value of IVF of my DNA is embezzled to blacks and gays .
 Tom Duham and J are not in a traffickig ring, it appears to other we are because of planted evidence visible to the public and impersonators of us . He and I have repeatedly called the police, as have Lt Gen Mike Flynn, Jen Moore, and others .
 It is my best guess, and I think the protection racket which manufactures hostile claims to my DNA for who should not have it (as a resultant claim against me,) and denies my genome to me (as I am ostracized as though I victimized female minors, causing under Reflexive
 I think the truth of this, which breaks my eggs but makes, for others, an omelet, is MKULTRA . I think this is tied to high ranking CIA and Illuminati schemes and changing around rights to DNA . Since mismatches in who has various DNA is already mism
 A Protection Racket of enormous clout has been able to railroad me but the basics are that is is faked that I need a protection racket . Once that racket is in place that same protection racket can fake claims against me and settle them for those other clientele the faked the claims on behalf
 Law failures in factual basis result in no counts under the law, fake cases don't count . Fake cases don’t count. Fake cases are fake cases. Fake evidence is fake evidence of a crime .
 Barack Obama was a product of Illuminati engineering contemplated since the World War I era Grifith Experiments, moving genes with bacteria by humans, as though God . After years of research I and this book series I am writing .
 Obama’s secret history has been concealed only a few steps ahead of forensic science . First able to type Obama to his children in the 1990s, then to world evolutionary history through immunology databases .
 The history of the Illuminati and Secret Identities the public is entitled to know about . Jen Moore and Linda Newkirk have confirmed the Pizzagate GEnomics connection .
 The murders are founded in some cases founded in the material witness list sometimes as deceased people and other times in crimes tied to the criminal enterprise but not a specific triggerman yet yet .
 Manuscript Theft and URIs and ties to events in this book . Uniform Resource Identifier ee eddonegan@yahoo.com | Amazon.com retailer of this epub since 5/27/2005 Archive.org This and other books and materials .
 Bitchute Second Line Of Troops tribute to Jen Moore . Jen Moore also had a channel about the day of her death on the day she died .
 The LONDON KE FAMILY FOXP2 gene likely comes to me through Maria VonTrapp, Jen Moore Videos Explained . In combining the Historical Kennedy, Von Trapp, King Edward VIII, Wallis Simpson, Donegan, Kennedy, and Obama history I will refer to this
 In real life the fortunes of the von Trapp family had faltered during the global depression of the early 1930s to the extent that at the time the film is set, most of the household servants had been dismissed and the family had begun taking in boarders . At the time of
 Maria and George were in fact married only a year after the novice arrived as governess . Like the film, they were able to marry within a year of their marriage .
 Price Edward of Wales, later King Edward VIII of The Kings Speach, may have had a child or children in the 1920s London social environment . Those children may have been placed eslewhere by the Illuminati, British, or Catholic Church .
 The only thing that would be important is if the wearer alwasy kept then clean .
 Joseph Kennedy (father of John F Kennedy) ambassador to Great Britain in the 1930s and tied to British Military in family marriages . Cape Code Bay, RCA and Joseph Kennedy working with King George V on reaching China with radio waves .
 Glorian Donegan, James Paul Donegan and Tom Donegan in Cape Cod . Up into 1974 I am in that same area as is Glorian . Glorian donegan . James Paul . Donegan is in that area .
 David Donegan of Lynnfield was born in Lynnfield, Lynnfield .
 Florence M O’ Neil, 104, of Lynnfield and formerly of Everett, died on December 2, 2020 at the Rosewood Nursing Home as result of the Covid-19 virus . O' Neil was 104 .
 The trust document must state that it is intended to provide a disabled individual with supplemental and extra care over and above that which is provided by the government . Among other requirements, the trust document has to state that the disabled individual needs extra care .
 A trustee is typically a family member, friend, financial professional, bank, or other financial institution . Trustees are typically family members, friends or financial professionals .
 JFK George Ball in Thorkill Kristensen work, Race and IQ around the world . He also told them that he could not provide any further Links in QR Code JFK George ball .
 JFK in Manhattan Beach California area Santa Monica California, stays with Lawford Shrivers family information because he had been sworn to secrecy . Meet at about 11 Links in QR Code JFK in the area .
 Trinity marks its beginning on December 3, 1961 Trinity United Church of Christ . The predominantly African-American church has more than 8,500 members . Hornberger Chicago Church and Elementary School take on Barack Obama .
 I will cite extensive research from both public source of public information and also Wayne Madison, NSA employee, and former United States Navy Officer who served anti missile system SOSUS at the Pafici Ocean Oregan location .
 I think it possible he detected ongoing rumors of the Birtherism study of Barack Obama by the Windsors and Kennedy’s, and that in that military conspiracy he might also have contacted or word somehow got to Lawrence McDonald, anti NWO type Congressperson from Georgia, also in
 She creates through THEIR abuse of children I did it. So do I I have never and will not harm them, but she creates through their abuse, she says . She creates a false image of herself .
 At least dozens of people were bummed to death in a Protestant church in western Kenya . They had taken shelter from tribal clashes sparked by a disputed vote that gave the president a second term .
 Intelligence Agency’s 1950s and ’60s assassination attempts and mind control program, known as Project MKUltra, were among the targets of the U.S. Intelligence Agency's .
 Gottlieb retired from the CIA in 1972, saying that he did not believe his work had been effective . He did not think his CIA work was effective .
 I believe Nation of Islam’s Malcom X familu line, my mothers, and my father's DNA have been eliminated because they are tied to the Obamas . My mother and father are members of the Malcom family, but not of the original line .
 THis is Opus Dei and genes techniques of HIspanic and Black Catholic Illumiinati . THisis is THis and genes technique of HI Spanic and . Black Catholic . Illumiini .
 Starting in 1999 or so a scheme has been operated most likely by the CIA and Secret Service or DIA that I am alleged peeping . An impersonator of me will confess to a white dominatrix and pay-iup-or-be-arrested shakedown of
 The only successful ditching of a wide-body airliner in history, the crash was captured on video . The current Constitution of Ethiopia is the supreme law of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia .
 Larry Bland and Nate Spencer attended the same church in November 2007 . Two other young black men also attended the church . Bland and Spencer were also attending the church together .
 An acquaintance of 1 Obama, Larry Sinclair, says Obama is a closet bisexual with whom he had sexual and drug-related encounters in November 1999 . Sinclair claims that Obama was friendly with at least two of these deceased parishioners .
 Robin Copeland died suddenly Sunday . He took part in several significant disarmament programs .
 Copeland worked at the United States Embassy in Moscow for the Energy Department and [HUMAN GENOME PROGRAM ATOMIC TESTING PROGRAM] from 1995 TO 1999 and from 2004 TO 2006 . Copeland also worked for the U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVEL
 The 1987 Monroe-Woodbury High School graduate was honored Monday at an annual ceremony at CIA headquarters in Langley, Va., for the 90 agents who have been killed in the line of duty since 1947 . That marked the first public disclosure of Wenzel's CIA work .
 Attendees said Obama’s talk focused on economic development and his foundation's work . Attendees say Obama focused on the economic development of his foundation .
 Some historians have concluded that Russia had no plans involving India, as the Russians repeatedly stated to the British . Some historians conclude that Russia did not have any plans for India .
 Adolf Hitler's father was banker for Adolf Hitler . Hitler's actions had tragic effects for the whole planet . His father was a banker for Hitler .
 We will begin the George Bush story about a decade before his birth, on the eve of World War I . We will follow the career of his father, Prescott Bush, through his arriage with Dorothy Walker . On the path to fortune, elegance and ower .
 Skull and Bones "Patriarchs" paid special attention to Prescott’s class of 1917 . Averell Harriman and Percy A Rockefeller (class of 1900) were among the Skulls and Bones “Patriarch”
 Prescott Bush, by then a close friend of ‘Bunny” Harriman, ; and several other Bonesmen from their class of 1917 would later comprise the core partners in Brown Brothers Harrimans, the world’s ; largest private investment bank .
 William Rockefeller, treasurer of Standard Oil and brother of Standard founder John D Rockefeller, owned National City Bank (later ‘Citibank” ) together with Texas-based James Stillman . William Rockefeller was treasurer of . Standard Oil .
 The senior Bush took national responsibility for government assistance to and relations © with Remington and other weapons companies . This was an unusual appointment, as Prescott’s father seemed to have no background in munitions .
 Samuel Bush had been president of F Buckeye Steel Castings Co. in Columbus, Ohio, makers of railcar parts . Bush was president of the company . He was also president of Ohio's Buckeye steel castings company .
 Samuel Bush became director of the Facilities Division of the War Industries Board in 1918 . In 1918, he was the director of facilities division of the board .
 He shouted a warning, suddenly drew his bolo knife, stuck it up as Mr and Mrs. were attacked . The couple were attacked by the couple in a car crash .
 Bones Patriarch Wallace Simmons, closely tied to the arms manufacturers, offered Prescott Bush a job in his St. Bones Patriarch . Simmons is a friend of the arms manufacturer .
 The 1919 Versailles peace conference brought together British imperial strategists and their American friends to make postwar global arrangements . It was the first peace conference to take place in the world since the Great War .
 Averell Harriman was chairman and controlling co-owner with his brother Roland , Prescott Bush’s close friend from Yale; and Percy Rockefeller was a director and a founding financial sponsor . In the autumn of 1919, Prescott Bush made the acquaintance of Bert ' Walker’
 Let us briefly look back at the beginning of i the Harriman firm, the Bush family enterprise, and follow its course into one of history's darkest projects .
 Harriman & Co., of which Walker was president and founder, was merging with the Morton & Co. private bank . The bank was interlocked with the Morgan-controlled Guaranty Trust Co. Walker was “rominent” in the affairs of Morton and Co.
 Bert’s son-in-law Prescott Bush was later secretary of the United States Golf Association, during the grave political and economic crises of the early 1930s . Prescott Bush also served as secretary of U.S. Golf Association .
 Prescott was effectively at "" the head of the firm, because he had taken over management of the "" gigantic personal investment funds of Averell and E Roland "Bunny" Harriman . Prescott: We were the managing partners, let's say. But of the “three
 Specter worked for Lyndon Johnson’s Warren Commission, which investigated the assassination of John F Kennedy, at the recommendation of Representative Gerald Ford, who was then one of the Commissioners .
 Leslie Lynch King Jr. was born July 14, 1913, at 3202 Woolworth Avenue in Omaha, Nebraska, where his parents lived with his paternal grandparents . Ford was born in Omaha in 1913, Nebraska .
 He was the only child of Dorothy Ayer Gardner and Leslie Lynch King Sr. King Sr., a wool trader . He was born in 1926 and died at the age of 92 .
 Gerald Rudolff Ford | Jr. was formally adopted by his mother in 1935 . He was officially named Gerald Ford Ford Jr. in December 1935 . Ford was born Gerald Ford III, a son of Ford's wife, Gerald Ford .
 Arlen Specter Specter was born in Wichita, Kansas which was home to the Boeing B-29 and Stanley Armour Dunham ' Specter' Specter served as a United States ' Senator from Pennsylvania from 1981 to 2011 .
 First elected in 1980, he is the longest-serving senator from 1 Pennsylvania, having represented the state for 30 years . He was first elected to 1 Pennsylvania in 1980 .
 Specter later graduated from Yale Law School and opened ‘a law firm with Marvin Katz, who would later become a federal judge . Specter’s law firm was founded by Marvin Katz .
 In 1965, Specter was elected District Attorney of Philadelphia . Specter held a position until 1973 . He was elected to office in 1965 .
 Levy Izhak Rosenbaum of Brooklyn alleged to have been conspiring to arrange the sale of an Israeli citizen’s kidney for $160,000 . Levy alleged to be arranging to arrange to sell the kidney of a man in Israel for $20,500 .
 Rosenbaum told a cooperating witness that he had been involved in the illegal sale of kidneys for 10 years, the complaint says . Rosenbaum is accused of selling kidneys illegally in the U.S.
 Anthropologist and organ trade expert Nancy Scheper-Hughes claimed that she had informed the FBI that Rosenbaum was “a major figure” in international organ smuggling 7 years ago, and that many of Rosenbaum’s donors had come from Eastern Europe .
 In October 2011, Rosenbaum pleaded guilty to three counts of organ trafficking and one count of conspiracy . Rosenbaum is accused of trafficking organ trafficking .
 Specter staked out a spot in the political center during his 30-year Senate career . Specter was a key figure in the Senate for decades .
 He served as Chair of the Senate Judiciary Committee from 2005 to 2007 . He is currently serving in the Senate from 2007 .
 Specter lost his 2010 re-election bid in the Democratic primary to former United States Navy vice admiral Joe Sestak, who then lost to Republican Pat Toomey in the general election . In 2006, he was selected by Time as one of America’s Ten Best
 Diagnosed with Hodgkin’s lymphoma in early 2005, he continued his work in the Senate while undergoing chemotherapy . He continued his Senate work in 2005 while he was in chemotherapy .
 He died from complications of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma on October 14, 2012 .
 Specter was born in Wichita, Kansas, the youngest child of Lillie and Harry Specter, who grew up in the Bachkuryne village of Cherkasy Oblast, Ukraine . Specter is the youngest son of Harry and Lillianie Specter .
 If the speech defect of Speech Spasmodia can be corrected a black Windsor/Von Trapp could be a good leader in Pacific Rim . If a secret plant leader could be an atomic test operation, it could also be a test operation . JFK Assassination MKULTRA 1961
 Boston Marathon Bombing erasing the history of MKULTRA and Obama Test Birth . Boston Marathon bombing erasing history of the truth about MKULTra and Obama .
 Ketracel White handed out by Illuminati via Bird Dogging to encourage, retain criminals army USA, Austrians under Freud, etc. etc., are Genetics Resarchers . USA, Austria under Freud and Austrians are under Freud .
 Borderline Personality Disorder, Anterior Temporal Lobe (WWI War Injuries, brain mapping) Heading into WWI Genocide Vatican, others, begin rescues from rise of rise of Nazism .
 Von Trapps, others leave Austria for England devastate the Japanese cities of Nagasaki and Hiroshima during World War II . Von Trapp, others left Austria to England devastated by World War I .
 Criminal Enterprises bring RFLP, Mito genomics to black market, normalize it under shams . Galactic Alliens must prevent detection of Galactic Alien (illuminati and CIA Vatican history) Much wealth at risk “enlightened” Illuminati Earth overloards .
 CIA Front Organizations (private, public) setup CIA money laundering of genetics rights . A Secret of Honey Pots and Honey Traps: Pizzagate . CIA front organizations set up by the CIA .
 He oversaw the creation of the agency’s Sex Offender Investigations Branch . CIA Black Budgets and Surrogate Entertainers, Gulliver the Impersonator .
 Our Earth allies are on the very brink of being able to put into effect their plans for Nichola Areas of the Earth targeted by Illuminati MKULTRA . The world will receive peace bringing genomic medicine transforming the world .
 Driscoll's began in 1994 with the Hamden County Sheriff’s Department in Springfield, Massachusetts . See Rise of Man, Elon Musk .
 Use of interested politicians, building owners, etc. who will act duplicitously with me, including illegal or Abuse of Process (such a psychiatric commitment, hearings) in law and medicine . Use of interest politicians, . building owners . etc., who will . act duplicously with
 I Roll, Scalia MKULTRA Behavioral Science Race and IQ . Race, IQ, IQ and IQ, World Behavioral Science and Political Impact of it. I Roll .
 VIA faked worked at Salk Institute (Brain Program) and claimed victim of MKULTRA 2011 World Economy use of seized retirement assets . Blackmailing impersonators of Biological Family of Obama for additonal genome rights, sabotaging me VIA .
 Defense Intelligence Agency, DARPA, CIA, have heard of #WETWORKS Genomic Sciences and Family Origins, race and genetic familial legacies, race, family legacies .
 Tom Donegan donated Glorian Donegan body for science to NIH PHS 2011, her death year . Sweden, along with 19 other countries, signed the Convention founding the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development .
 Sweden has been accused of persecution of gays and lesbians in the past . The persecution of gay Muslims in Sweden has led to the death of some of the world's most famous women .
 John Glenn Jr. was a U.S. Marine Corps aviator, engineer, astronaut, businessman and politician . He was a United States Air Force pilot, engineer and astronaut .
 Matthew GLEN Olsen is an American prosecutor and the former Director of the National Counter-terrorism Center 1961, 1997, Pizzagate creates retro mass hysteria . With the means in place DARPA CIA CIA Vatican needs to seize my DNA the programs can continue IF circumstantial cases are faked
 Science is advancing on the Illuminati and now the events of 1961 can be retraced by the fear the CIA and Illuminati have of family databases and the advances in genetics . All this ties to MKULTRA Birtherism and the Obama true genealogy .
 The CIA and Vatican took on the issue of race following WWII after failed attempts to kill Adolph Hitler . Roll Scalia on race and race: "It's not a matter of whether or not race is race"
 This was also a potential solution to the race problem in the U.S., a subject of interest to Malcom X, JFK, and world economist futurists . JFK was also interested in solving the problem of race .
 DNA 7 DNA from the Beginning is organized around key concepts . Concept 1: Children resemble their parents . Concept 7: DNA 7: "DNA from the beginning is a he he"
 Genes for different traits are sorted . separately from one another so that the inheritance of one trait is not dependent on another . Genes are sorted so that they are not related to each other . The inheritance of each trait is dependent on the inheritance . of another .
 Genes, Race and Human History, contends that man races are a biological reality . Recent human evolution has led to racial differences in economic and social behavior, the author says .
 Americans are allegedly more violent than whites, and why the Chinese may be good at business . Americans are 'more violent' than white people, according to experts .
 Borderline Personality Disorder is poor regulation of working space, contextual brain activity . The disorder is the result of poor working space and a lack of communication .
 As with Neuropathy nerves nerves may not sense dryness or food for excretion of saliva, moisture, or hormones . As with neuropathy nerves, nerves may also feel dryness .
 DuPonts military contractors to Manhattan Manhattan Projects . Could be how James Donegan and GLorian Donegan met . Lyndon B Johnson Religious Movement tied, Jim Jones preacher tied to military .
 Camp Robinson has a very great underground complex and as I understand it, this is Satan’s world headquarters. “Dear Souls, as I . understand it . also, this . is Satan's world headquarters,” JFK objected to Rome .
 The password is, “I will splinter the CIA into a thousand pieces and scatter it into the wind,” a quote credited to President John F Kennedy . President Kennedy is credited with a quote from the quote .
 JFK agreed to Obama as a possible plant and groom for future espionage against Communism, but decided against wider Free Masons plot . Obama was 2 years old, and normal, when JFK believed him to be a potential plant for espionage .
 May be backed by Rod Rosesntein on history of civil rights, and asset seiuzres for Public Health Service . May have an interst in seizing White Supremacist or CCR5 .
 I allege Marshalls and others of taking photos from afar of victims near me . Marshalls alleged to have taken photos of victims from afar . He alleges Marshalls took photos of the victims .
 Lifelong Conspiracy Against My Rights/Criminal Harassment Under Color Of Law gangstalk . Gangstalk has destroyed 40 years of my life, my fathers entire life (all he fought for lived for) and my mother who was put through the exact type of gang stalk methods for
 Pizzagate Cogwheel (extortion over 17 year olds, tots photography discovered by audlt models allowed under the law) Explicit illegal acts in my vicinity by | Non explicit out of place Me in clear Cople of Doppelganger which will be | indications, int
 MAIN MKULTRA NASA LANGLEY COGWHEEL ABOVE Cape Cod Cogwheel Irish Mafia and Liquor dealing in both Donegan and JFK families Donegans and Kennedy Families Martha’s Vineyard and Clintons This book Great Machine Foreign Economy .
 Spanish Illuminati tend to the world’s animal kingdom . Sperm Donor, Telomere Donor and Ovum Donor . Spanish Illuminati who tend the world's animal kingdom tend to animals .
 Wales was a graduate of Milton Academy, Massachusetts . Wales roomed with Joseph Patrick Kennedy, the son of Robert F Kennedy . Wales was born in Boston, Massachusetts in 1952 .
 The future of and (biological) Genetics is unknown . Likely aware of family rumors or knowledge of a black experimental child which was in the . White House nursery around 1961 .
 From RULING we can begin to ignore and deny racial gaps, they are closing so keep them out of case law . ASSETS SEIZURES .
 7 DNA from the Beginning is organized around key concepts . Concept 1: Children resemble their parents. Savings and Trusts: "Save the money"
 President Barack Obama announced Alan B Krueger as a top White House economist in 2011 . The Princeton economist has been in the White House since 2011 . Kruegers is a former Princeton economist who worked for the Obama administration in Washington .
 Kamala Harris, Mark Gonsalzes Gregg Abbott (religion, nueral cells, God and CIA) Trump $ business associates, moved into place, people like JFK, Judge Roll, Justice Illuminati | Scalia, James Comey illuminated or moved out .
 Column Pizzagate will assist the CIA and DARPA in this. Pizzagagate will help the CIA . Magistrate Fifth B Janice Ellington moved in .
 A Domina Sex Worker may be part of catching Tx or punishing or treating Tx for Tx wrongdoing . Domina sex worker may be a sex worker who helps catch and punish Tx .
 There is a young person held captive in Massachusetts today who is not allowed to participate in religious ceremonies, or visit family without government agents watching .
 Justina Pelletier is 15-year-old mitochondrial disease patient and nonterrorist Justina . She is a nonterrorist nonterrorist and non-terrorist .
 Jennifer Pelletier said she was surprised by the ruling . Jennifer Pellettier said that she was disappointed with the decision . Pelletti: "I'm not surprised. It's not a surprise. I'm disappointed."
 Justina’s older sister is held under the watchful eye of agents from both the . state . Department of Children and Families and since the story went national ‘armed state police’ armed state police are on the case .
 The family is only allowed one visit a week, for one hour a ' week, with their own sick daughter . They are only allowed to see their sick daughter for an hour a week .
 Jennifer Pelletier asked a representative of DCF why the family couldn’t take Justina to Easter Mass this Sunday . The family says Justina will not be able to attend Easter Mass .
 My theory on DARPA and MKULTRA history of my family is that Obama was built out of Feb 20 Nov 18 Dec 13 DNA from my mother, and this is the Birther issue . My theory is that this is because of the history of MKULTra and DARPA .
 Mitochondrial Uisorder ts is a disease of the mitochondria, ‘the powerhouse of the cell’ which generates the energy that powers cell and organ function . Mitochondria is the ‘powerhouse of the cells’
 Mitochondrial Disorder can sometimes be diagnosed with DNA testing and muscle biopsy . DNA testing can also be used to diagnose the disorder .
 ARTICHOKE Gene Expresion includes problems with fine motor control, writing, tying shoes, swallowing . I can not get genuine legal or medical representation in the United States of America .
 Authorities call for “Sky Captain Joe Sullivan, the city’s hero, former lover, and the commander of the private air force the Flying Legion . Clearly outmatched, the authorities call for Sullivan .
 The team finds a secret subterranean facility in a mountain, where robots are loading animals, as well as mysterious vials, onto a large “Noah’s Ark” rocket . They find a secret underground facility in the mountain .
 Barack Obama Jr., secretly Glorian Donegan ovum used along with Malcom X fertilization, thus the Shabazz family and Obama children Kennedy’s, Shrivers, Lawfords, Schwarzeneggers, , Katherine Schwarzenegger Borderline Personality Disorder born DEC 13
 The youngest of three children, flunked the second grade but worked hard ‘catch up’ and by the sixth grade was accepted into the McDonogh School . The Bible, Free Masons, The Bible and The United States Mothers of World Disaster CIA .
 She came home with report cards full of A’s and ‘an arsenal of great friends,” her brother, Patrick Mahoney, said .
 As food moves through your GI tract, your digestive organs break the food into smaller parts using motion, such as chewing, squeezing, and mixing digestive juices . This includes stomach acid, bile, and enzymes e.m. Mouth .
 Saliva also has an enzyme that begins to break down starches in your food . Esophagus also has enzymes that begin to digest starches . Saliva is a sign of good health .
 After you swallow, peristalsis pushes food down your esophagus into your stomach . e Stomach. After swallowing, the food is pushed down your throat .
 Muscles of your stomach mix the food with these digestive juices . e Pancreas. Muscles . mix the . food with the digestive juices of the digestive . juices of these juices . The digestive juices are made up of muscle muscles .
 The pancreas delivers the digestive juice to the small intestine through small tubes called ducts . e Liver. The digestive juice is delivered to small intestine via ducts in small tubes .
 Bile ducts carry bile from your liver to your gallbladder for storage, or to the small intestine for use . e Gallbladder. e Gall Bladder.
 When you eat, your gallbladder squeezes bile through the bile ducts into your small intestine . e Small intestine. When you are eating, bile passes through the ducts and into the small intestine.
 Your small intestine also absorbs water with other nutrients . e Large intestine absorbs water and absorbs nutrients from the small intestine .
 Your blood carries simple sugars, amino acids, glycerol, and some vitamins and salts to the liver . Your blood contains simple sugars and amino acids .
 With the phony permissions to my DNA, Glorian’s DNA in place, at the time of her death in 2011, now the DNA could be used around the world to fix the Thorkil Kristensen George Ball Malcom X Premise, that world IQ gains would lead
 My detention included a formal forensic evaluation to collecte evidence as to whether i was mentally competent at the time of the alleged offense as well as at the . time of alleged offense . I was detained by the New York City Police Department at the New Jersey Medical Center .
 He said he was simply overloaded on amphetamines which caught up with him . He said that he seemed fine now. He was fine now, but he was just overloaded with amphetamine .
 Adam Lanza was presented with developmental challenges before the age of three . He was diagnosed with developmental problems before he was three years old .
 When Joan and Clay } Blair attempted to write a biography of Kennedy, they ran into walls of secrecy concerning his health . It is uncertain what exactly was wrong with Kennedy .
 Joseph Kennedy Sr., a powerful businessman and former ambassador, pulled strings to get John into the service as his health record would have kept him out .
 Kennedy’s boat, PT-109, was sunk and Kennedy was able to lead the surviving crew to safety . It is well known that Kennedy's boat was sunk . Kennedy led the survivors to safety and led them to safety in his boat .
 In ' later years, Kennedy and his aides would state that Kennedy had contracted ‘ malaria during his tour of duty.’
 Kennedy had symptoms of Addison’s disease, a disorder of the adrenal glands . Kennedy had the symptoms of the disorder, Addison's disease .
 Thomas Addison, who described the disease, reported that sufferers exhibited lethargy, loss of appetite, pain in the stomach and discolored skin .
 In 1939, a compound called desoxycorticosterone acetate was developed to substitute for adrenal hormones lost to the disease . This compound could substitute for the adrenal hormone lost to disease .
 DOCA was injected into patients; later, pellets could be implanted into the back or thighs . DOCA pellets were injected into the patients' back or thigh; later they were implanted into their bodies .
 He had been ‘ elected to Congress the previous year and traveled to England . He had had been 'elected to Congress . previous year .
 He became ill and asked Pamela Churchill, a family friend, to get a doctor . He asked her to go to a doctor and she became ill .
 Kennedy was taken to the Lahey Clinic and came under the care of Elmer Bartels, a specialist in thyroid i conditions . Kennedy rallied and was able to return home where he was taken .
 Bartels began the DOCA pellets, which had to be replaced every three months . Bartels had to replace every » three months. Bartels: "I'm not going to be able to do this again."
 Doctors at Lahey advised against it; Addisonians have weakened resistance to infection . Addisonianians have a weakened resistance of infection, doctors say .
 Kennedy was given the i last rites of the Catholic Church, but he rallied . Kennedy was diagnosed with an infection and was given last rites by the church .
 Wilson later wrote about the operation in the journal Archives of Surgery . Wilson later published a book on the operation .
 The furor died down and Kennedy was able to win the i nomination and later the presidency . i Crispell, Kenneth R and Carlos F Gomez were able to secure the nomination .
 A spy’s claimed background or biography, usually supported by documents and memorized details . The term psychological warfare is believed to have migrated from Germany to the United States in 1941 .
 This book Espionage Section and arbitrary prurient infiltration of apparently illegal subcultures on pretexts as pretext for Lascivious behavior Subversion by State Sponsored Guerillas Warfare . This book is based on the book "Espionage Section" and "Intelligence Section"
 This history of events leading up to the Paradise Valley Fire may not seem much but fit a pattern of innocent Ittle facts that seem to emerge before real disasters hit . I see enough of a pattern to believe an extensive deep state exists at work in at least some matters I deem as suspicious
 Detlev Karsten Rohwedder (16 October 1932, Gotha APRIL 1 1991, DiisseldorfNiederkassel) was a German manager and politician . Detlev was born in Gotha in 1932 and died in 1991 .
 Rohwedder was shot and killed through a window on the second floor of his house in the suburb of Diisseldorf-Niederkassel (Kaiser-FriedrichRing 71) by the first of three rifle shots in 1991 .
 The shots were fired from 63 m away from a rifle with 7.62*51mm NATO standard calibre . The same rifle was used during a sniper attack on the American embassy in February committed by the Red Army Faction .
 The shots were fired from 63 m away from a rifle with 7.62*51mm NATO standard calibre, the same rifle that was used during a sniper attack on the American Embassy on FEBRUARY 13, 1991 committed by the Red Army Faction .
 The legends of King Arthur retrieved from British Library UK and copied or modified to here me Damsels in distress .
 Arthur is said to have pulled a sword from a stone to become the greatest king that Britain has ever known . This is the world of Arthurian legend and, at the centre of it all, there is 1 tthe once and future king’ Arthur himself .
 Disney and Hollywood have turned their hand to Camelot. Shalott’s ‘Camelot’; and, more recently, Disney . Hollywood has turned its hand on Camelot .
 Bush and his maternal grandfather George Herbert Walker were close friends . Bush and Walker were married at the time .
 In 1954, Zapata Off-Shore Company was formed as a subsidiary of Zapata Oil, with i Bush as president of the new company .
 He raised some startup money from Eugene Meyer, publisher of the Washington Post, and his son-in-law, Philip Graham .
 This morning, >WikiLeaks tweeted the decryption passphrase for the CIA Vault 7 leak . Before | leave this high Yale male male)e) sa(aom | intend to expose this plot.”
 The video focuses on Kennedy’s relationship with Cuba prior to his assassination by Lee Harvey Oswald . The video discusses Operation Northwoods, a proposed false flag operation against the Castro regime .
 CIA carried out horrifying 'mind-control' tests on unwitting humans . CIA was in search for the perfect . mind-control technique .
 Mind Control hardens soldiers against interogation or improve large populations IQ to increase learnedness . Will the quest for . Mind Control . harden soldiers against . interogating or improve . populations IQ . Increase learnedness and economic productivity, undermning conmunism and reducing .
 The Central Bank increased the money supply to pay for the increasing deficit . The money supply has been increased to cover the deficit .
 Soldiers are regionally aligned and develop crosscultural competence in the areas they study and deploy to . e Foreign Language Proficiency Pay e Specialized and advanced training in social media, marketing and other communication techniques .
 Several dopedle trikes wed of my mowercy ce. AT the pais peas there tute teen several dopgle trike wed of his mowery .
 This motorcycle and its motorcyclist is pursued to some location like this which LOOKs like my apartment, a long con set, and people like these will claim its rider really was Edward Donegan . Mine is the bike yo the peas, Ther ee equiped very waretanty
 Espionage Agencies Operate and the Capabilities They Have Infiltration Paid Gangstalk of Seeming Normal Citizens . Targeting of Individuals or Organizations Agent Provocatuer Targeted Individual Dispossessor . Targeted individuals or organizations . Target of individuals or Organizations .
 In my case those who might benefit from claims against a (now, after years of racial assaults on me) White Supremacist and White Seperatist are in the roles of Agent Provocatuers and fake being me as they commit offensive acts upon the public or their own
 Cheryl Lloyd Friendly sounds like a Highlander Motel operator friendly to the Christ Lloyd family tied to Genenetch . Cheryl Lloyd friendly sounds like Highlander Motels friendly to Christ Lloyd . Set Punishment is use of Ed Donegan DNA DNA DNA .
 Operation Goodwill transfers to state or local governments in support of drug abuse treatment, drug crime prevention and education, housing, job skills and other community-based public health programs .
 The police read to prosecute the fake ed on hehalf of Social Servics and the District Attorney . With sufficient Due Process violations such as those who benefit from fake claims as the arbiter of claims, rather than the Targeted Individal defending him or her self, the racket is
 A show of force by PsyOps like crisis actors show when I am in the vicinity I (or my motorcycle) will never be the REAL PEEPER they are on the hung for ever again . A show-of-force by Psy Ops like PsyOps .
 After the 1980 divorce my mother continued to use them and I saw what I now know to be a Gangstalk at that location . I do not know if Four Wheel Brake was complicit. I do know if they were complicit.
 "There was a person, a relative of my boss Greg Roll, who was preplanned to replace me," he says . "I'm not going to be replaced. There was a family relative of Roll's Greg Roll," he adds .
 Mayorkas delivered the Oath of Office ' to John Tien, the new Deputy Secretary ' of the Department of Homeland Security .
 John Tien is a retired U.S. Army Colonel whose distinguished military career spanned 1 24 years . “Someone who knows what it means to truly safeguard our Nation,” said Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro N Mayorkas .
 He served in the Obama Administration as the National Security Council Senior Director for Afghanistan and Pakistan . He also served as a White House Fellow in the Clinton | i Administration in the Office of the United States Trade Representative .
 For the next 24 years, he served as a United States Army combat arms officer . He retired in 2011 at the rank of Colonel .
 Clarridge died at the age of 83, a week short of his 84th birthday in Leesburg, Virginia on 1 April 9, 2016 from complications of esophageal cancer .
 A satin weave is a type of fabric weave that produces a characteristically glossy, smooth or lustrous material . The order’s emblem is a garter with the motto Honi soit qui mal y pense .
 It is one of three fundamental types of textile weaves alongside plain weave and twill i weave . Plain weave weaves include plain weave, twill weaves and plain weave .
 This was intended as a direct contrast to the vivid cover artwork of the band’s previous ; LP Sgt. Sgt. album Sgt. Pete . The album was released in March 2010 .
 The Coccinellidae family is commonly known as ladybugs in North America and ladybirds in Great Britain and other parts of the English-speaking world . Ladybugs are commonly called ladybirds .
 Darlene Love and the Blossoms recorded a cover version of the song at the recording studio . The Blossom recorded the cover version at the same studio .
 "He's a Rebel" went to number 1, and Lester Sill was out of the company . By the time “He’s a Rebel” went to No. 1, Lester had Philles all to himself .
 Secretary (barely visible), Black Rod, Garter Principal Principal King of Arms, Register, Prelate, Chancellor, Chancellor . Secretary . Principal King . King of . Arms .
 Clarkson’s work in Deathstalker led to her being offered the title role in Barbarian Queen . Corman referred to the role as “the original a Xena” because of the parallel in featuring a strong female leading character in an action-oriented sword-swinging
 Roy Marcus Cohn was an American lawyer who came to prominence for his role as Senator Joseph McCarthy’s chief counsel during the Army McCarthy hearings in 1954 . Cohn was chief counsel for McCarthy's investigations of suspected communists .
 The ASSASSINATIONS: PROBE lpn MAGAZINE ON JFK, MLK, RFK AND MALCOLM X . DiEugenio: "Throughout the ‘90s, Lisa Pease and Jim DiEgenio covered the issues and reported on
 In A Lie Too Big to Fail, longtime Kennedy researcher Lisa Pease lays out, in meticulous detail, how witnesses with evidence of conspiracy were silenced by the Los Angeles Police Department . Pease: How evidence was deliberately altered and, in some instances, destroyed .
 DiEugenio updates all of the topics that he introduced in 1992 with the first edition of Destiny Betrayed . The first edition was released in 1992 .
 New foreword by J.F.K. director Oliver Stone details the failed attempt of Academy Award-winning actor Tom Hanks and producer Gary Goetzman to make Vincent Bugliosi’s mammoth book about the Kennedy assassination into a miniseries .
 For those interested in the assassination of JFK, this is the untold story of Indonesia, gold, JFK, Allen Dulles, the CIA, and secret military coups . This is the story of a secret military coup in Indonesia .
 John F Kennedy and Allen Dulles often clashed over intelligence issues and national security . Dulles was the longest-serving CJA director of the United States .
 Tom Hanks and Gary Goetzman tried to make Vincent Bugliosi’s mammoth book about the Kennedy assassination, Reclaiming History, into a miniseries . The story of the film stems from the failed attempt to make the book into a TV minisery
 The Battle of Midway was six months after Pearl Harbor . The U.S. Navy and the Imperial Japanese Navy clashed in the battle . This can be gotten on the internet .
 These “Galactic Aliens” are Illuminati Overlords, most likely in joking self reference . University professors, et., in DARPA connected networks, etc. etc., including Stone Masons and Free Masonry plans .
 Between 1958 and 1963, LaRC served as the main office of the Space Task Group . Project Mercury was the brainchild of NACA, the successor agency to NACA . LaRC was the site of Project Mercury .
 Opus Dei was founded by a Catholic priest, Josemaria Escriva de Balaguer, on 2 October 1928 in Madrid, Spain . The Spanish Flu was later called the Spanish Flu for its Spanish news sourced reporting .
 The Opus Dei Lay Miracle capability meets a need, repairing certain defects targeted by Nazist genocide . 1944 e Jn 1944 the Anterior Temporal Lobe is found to me tied to abstract thinking including social abstractions during the course of war .
 Spanish bio chemist Ortiz de Landazuri began her career as a teacher . one day at Mass in Madrid in 1944, she felt something that she interpreted as being a sign from God . During this Foture Cardinal Ratzinger meets Nazi’s also tired of Nasim and
 Ratzinger in German Lueftwaffe as on 20 NOVEMBER 1944 was discharged from Flak, the unit he was drafted into, the anti-aricraft corps which defended BMW plants .
 Dunham's research focused on women’s work on the island of Java and blacksmithing in Indonesia . e Century 21 and the BOEING Spacearium, Seattle, WA and the Space Needle and Monorail, April 21, 1962, to Oct. 21,
 The Kings Daughters Hospital is founded in Norfolk Virginia, also a United States Navy center . The English Windsor Royals attend as do the Kennedys .
 Scientists hope their work could be used to create organs for transplants and teach us more about human development and disease progression . The scientists hope to use their work to create organ transplants .
 The Caine Mutiny, The Country Girl, Dial M for Murder, On the Waterfront, Rear Window and Rear Window were movies that came out that year . Seven Brides for Seven Brothers was one of my personal favorite movies .
 Madelyn Dunhman was three months pregnant at marriage turned to August 2, 1961 . Stanley Anne Dunham was married to Stanley Dunham (a female) Indonesian Peace Corps USAID daughter to Hawaii CIA Madelyn Dunham .
 Change Stanley Anne Dunham WEDS Barack Obama Sr marriage/concieve from February 20 to February 2_ 2. Change of the date of the birth of Barack Obama Jr.
 Move birth from Manhattan Beach, famous, JFK there, Famous, to Hawaii, trusted by Indonesia Calculating In Anonymity .
 Muslim Malcom X, or even Annuki (evil British Royals who in slavery stole Ethiopian DNA for White usage) or Annuki . Annuki was a slave-to-be-suspect of the British Royals .
 After the fertilised egg undergoes embryo culture for 2-6 days, it is implanted in the same or another woman’s uterus, with the intention of establishing a successful pregnancy . The embryo culture is then culture culture for two-six days before implantation .
 IVF is a type of assisted reproductive technology used for infertility treatment and gestational surrogacy . IVF can be used in infertility treatment or gestational surrogate births . It is also used in the development of IVF in the United States .
 Some countries banned or otherwise regulate the availability of IVF treatment, giving rise to fertility tourism . In 1961 the IVFinig of Barack Obama and Ed Donegan was created by Barack Obama . Obama and Donegan created the IVFFinig in 1961 .
 JFK met with the Secretary General of the Organization for European Economic Co operation Thorkil Kristensen at around 11 am in the Oval Office . For me, the father is James P Donegan, for Barack Obama, for . Barack Obama . The father Malcom X Futurist Th
 While Affleck had high SAT scores, he was largely an unfocused student with poor attendance . Affleck's SAT scores were high, but he had poor attendance at school .
 Richter research abroad program to explore 1 connections between maternal and child health and improved water access . Hyderabad, India, for a semester under the Richter program .
 Occidental became one of the first schools to participate in the Crossroads i Africa program in 1958 . The program was a precursor to the Peace Corps . Occidental was sent to underdeveloped African nations to help develop needed infrastructure .
 They had stopped about 12 miles outside the Kenyan capital of Nairobi along the road . They were awaiting the arrival of a friend who was going to lead them to his home . They had been waiting for a friend's arrival .
 The Newkirk Mountain Prophecies begin in 1997 as a man in a white lab coat describes what can be done for Autistics “lambs,” and low IQ blacks below the Saharan desert longtitudinal line . This is the same time frame the Obama children are
 Michael Cormier, a respected forensic technician for the Los Angles County Coroner, died under suspicious circumstances at his North Hollywood home April 20, the same day Andrew Breitbart’s cause of death was finally made public . Cremated immediately, ashes dispersed .
 As the opening speaker at a rally protesting Occidental’s r investments in apartheid South Africa, he stood r with one hand in his pocket, spoke in declarative spurts, and showed no sign of being the 1 orator who would become President nearly twenty-eight years
 BHO was created from Edward Paul Donegan-intended IVF DNA of James Paul Doegan and Glorian Donegan . BHO is created from the DNA of both Doegan-Doegan and Dogan-Dogan .
 The plan continues to distribute my DNA to create close Obama relatives all through Africa, which is where Irish genes seem to emanate from . The plan is to create a close Obama relative all through the continent .
 This is also an embezzlement story, or, as Jen Moore AKA Task Force called it, a Black Budgets story . Jen Moore: "This is also a ... story, and it's also a Black Budget story"
 CIA cryptonyms are code names or code words used by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency to refer to projects, operations, persons, agencies, etc. LZ BBs. are used in the United States .
 Here ere some links concerning Coemn's bochkground thet nay be of Interest .
 I think there Is legitimate concern aver the necclbility that Ghasa’s career aay have been I was born on November 18 1961 and likely IVF date was February 20 1961 . I was . born on Nov 18 1961 . and likely . IVF dates were
 Casper was a street person with long felon record hired as a CIA backed alleged pimp . Don Johnson, Harvey Dent, and others were Marshalls who caught alleged activity which is staged in my vicinity but vouched for by those CIA backed people .
 Robert Lusch, who articulated key themes of human, societal and : marketing evolution, and challenges marketing scholars to consider ways to reduce costs . The Macro View’s ‘Macro-View’ is a look at the evolution of marketing .
 Hollywood and the MSM can not decide anymore what we perceive about our world, and the information Age makes available unfitered raw data and Infarmation to everyone . More information channels, more competing medis outlets are overcoming the stranglehold on information Intelligence .
 Among the three major evolutionary genetic groups there are Negroes (Negroids,} who first evalved in Africa . The Bel Curve frulticukuraiam, some of the most important issues of today .
 Caucasians who migrated from Africa Nortti West Into Europe, and Asians who Crintinal Justice migrated from . Africa North East mo Asia. Asians who migrated . from Africa . into Europe. Caucasians . migrated from North East to East .
 In the past epoch, man was concemed with death, high mortality; his attitudes were antideath, antidisease’, he says. “In the past . man’s attitudes were anti-death and antidisease.”
 James Mountain Inhofe is an American politician serving as the senior United States Senator from Oklahoma . He was first elected to a seat he was elected to in 1994 .
 Perry Inhofe died at age 52 . He was a 52-year-old orihopedic .
 Dr. Peery inhete filed a wrongtul death Gewsurt Tusmsttay in the sake ot the 2013 plane crash that killed hint De. inhale was fing o tytt-engine Meteubesty MU 28:25 which he had recenty bought
 Peery Inhofe, Gon OF Sem Jie inhole, Kited in Ocusio toe toe kvhotw s |nvcevernsent &) avteton males it Goctly tragic that tes son De. De. Jie was killed . Pe
 When thinking about Hitler and Nazi Germany most people can think of at least one conspiracy theory they have heard about . Nazi Bunkers in Antarctica are thought to have been built up in Antarctica .
 One of the caves was particularly large and was tured into a large city that would be home to both Nazi’s and other powerful groups, like the illuminati . The caves were used to create a city that was home to Nazi's and others .
 Heath Andrew Ledger was an Australian actor and music video director . Ledger starred in the film "Heath Ledger" Ledger died in 1994 at the age of 40 .
 Rain Joan of Arc Phoenix was born November 21, 1972 . She is an American actress, musician, and singer . She was born in 1972 .
 Arlyn Sharon Phoenix (née Dunetz; born December 31, 1944) is the mother of actors River, Rain, Joaquin, Liberty, and Summer Phoenix . Heart Phoenix is a social activist and mother of River and Rain Phoenix actors .
 The film explores the relationships of four sets of siblings who have not (in one case, never) had contact for some time . The film is based on the relationship between siblings who never had contact .
 This Dispossession of both Standing and Worth of a Targeted Individual applies to both Money Laundering Racket and Espionage so appears both places in this book The status of figures in 2004 GOERGE W.BUSH . George Walker Bush is an American politician and businessman who served as
 wa Card announced his resignation as Chief of Staff on March 28, 2006, effective April 14, 2006 . Card served as President of the U.S. from 1992 to 1993 . He resigned from his post in March 2006 .
 Alberto R Gonzales was the 80th U.S. Attorney General . He was appointed in February 2005 by President George W Bush . Gonzales is the highest-ranking Hispanic American in executive government to date .
 Following calls for his removal, Gonzales resigned from the office “in the best interests of the department,” on August 27, 2007, effective September 17, 2007 . Gonzales stepped down from the post in 2007 . He resigned from his post on September 17 .
 Gonzales won his election bid to remain on the court in the Republican Primary in 2000 . He was subsequently elected to a full six-year term on the State Supreme Court in the November 2000 general election . Gonzales is a member of the New Mexico Supreme Court .
 John David Ashcroft is an American lawyer, lobbyist, songwriter and former politician . Ashcroft served as the 79th United States Attomey General in the George W Bush Administration .
 He lost his bid for reelection in 2000 to Mel Camahan, who died a few days before the election . In 2000, he lost his reelection bid in 2000 .
 James Brien Comey Jr. is an American lawyer who was the 7th director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2013 until his dismissal in May 2017 . He was fired by President Barack Obama .
 His role in the 2016 US. presidential election was highly controversial . His role as an advisor to Hillary Clinton has been highly controversial.
 Robert Swan Mueller III was the sixth director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2001 to 2013 . He served during the Ashcroft and Gonzales led Justice Departments .
 The call came at 8m., Wednesday, March 10, 2004, at 8 p.m. ET .
 President Barack Obama called the FBI director to tell him what was happening to him . The White House says it's "a very serious mistake"
 President Obama told his security detail that he needed to get to George Washington Hospital immediately . He said, ‘I’l] meet » you at the hospital right now.’ told my security detail .
 An agent provocateur quoting Wikipedia is a person who commits or who acts to entice another person to commit an illegal or rash act or falsely implicate them in partaking in an illegal act . And that was my concern.” + © [om Truly remarkable].
 Modern undercover operations were scaled up in France by Eugene Francois Vidocg in the early 19th century . The practice is worldwide anciently, but modern undercover operations began in France .
 The combination of corrupt police bullying of me for what their Agent Provocateurs have done has been especially offensive to me because I am an upstanding law abiding intelligent person, and thus it is unjust . This covers State abuses against my parents who also gave and risked so much on behalf of
 Edward treated as a Donegan’s DNA pays the bill person who is a ‘for the pornography’ to avoid | risk to women arrest. and the perp in the area. Edward treated .
 After years of emphasizing informant recruiting as a key task, the bureau now maintains a roster of 15,000 spies . Many of them are tasked with infiltrating Muslim communities in the U.S.
 Espionage created misrepresentation of me who claimed but did not have my approval for my DNA usage . This I think made it look like I had “taken a picture of my pornography” who would then be allocated insemination by me in Espionage . This made it
 Psychiatrist teams diagnose me not as a matter of reality but openly expressed racial abusiveness . I called this the Play To Pause Attack of when women were near me . e Criminal Misrepresentation e HUMINT Doppelgangers of me or Long Con fake witness, fake witness
 Multiple Times alleging retardation, etc. in DOD PsyOps . DOD Psychiatry staffed facilities . DOD psychiatry staffed facilities. DOD Psychiatry .
 From 1998 to 2001, Johnson was general counsel of the Department of the Air Force under President Bill Clinton . Johnson was appointed General . ; Counsel of the . Air Force .
 Griffith’s experiment discovered the “transforming principle” in pneumococcus bacteria . Bitpsen.org wikiGrithe2 7S_experiment added 5 .
 From ; 2002 to 2003 there were 66 sessions held with 32 witnesses from Madrid being 1 called to provide evidence and interrogatories . Another week-long session in mid-2003 in Mexico saw 22 witnesses giving evidence in support of Ortiz de 1 Landazuri’s virtues in 37 sessions
 The C.C.S. later received all the documents 1 gathered during that process in 2005 AND ; VALIDATED THE PROCESS LATER ON 17 FEBRUARY 2006 . The process was approved on 17 February 2006 .
 Guadalupe finished high school at Instituto 1 Miguel de Cervantes . In 1932, they returned to Spain and lived in Madrid where her father was Lieutenant Colonel .
 Ortiz de Landazuri eventually pursued a doctorate since she wanted to teach chemistry at the university level . She felt something that she interpreted as being a sign from God at Mass in 1944, she said . Ortiz de Llandazuri said she interpreted the experience as a sign of God
 Ortiz de Landdzuri returned home to consult with a friend and expressed a desire to speak with a priest . Ortiz de Llandzuri said he wanted to speak to a priest about the case . Ortiz De Landzuri: "I want to see a priest. I want
 Ortiz de Landdzuri met Escriva for the first time on 25 January 1944 . She met her friend who gave her the phone number of a priest ' SAINT JOSEMARIA ESCRIVA'
 In a second experiment we assessed the putative roles of the ATLs in the processing of narratives and theory of mind content . We found evidence for a role of the . ATLs . in the . processing of theory of . mind but not narrative ‘per se.’
 Saint Josemaria Escriva de Balaguer y The Priestly Society of the Holy Cross, affiliated with Opus Dei, was founded in 1943 . The canonization this week will draw at least 250,000 people .
 Saint Josemaria Escriva de Balaguer y Albas was a Spanish Roman Catholic priest who founded Opus Dei, an organization dedicated to the teaching that everyone is called to holiness by God and that ordinary life can result in sanctity . EscriVA relocated to
 Nationalism, Zionism and Ethnic Mobilization of the Jews in 1900 and Beyond 1St Edition by Prof Michael Berkowitz . Includes diverse topics such as art, music, and radio broadcasting in the development of modern Jewish nationalism .
 It examines how nationalism has worked in theory and practice for Jews and at times fiercely resisted . The book is based on the theory of nationalism and practice .
 Delphine Bechtel, Nachman BenYehuda, Michael Berkowitz, Inka Bertz, Philip Bohlman, John M Efron, Richard A Freund, Francois Guesnet, Michael L6wy; Barbara Mann, Derek Penslar;
 Lord James of Blackheath’s produced revelations concerning reports of 15 trillion dollars (reportedly backed by 750,000 tonnes of gold), originating with a Mr Riyadi, transferred to various banks .
 He received his episcopal consecration on the following 27 December from Pope John XXIII himself .
 Liberation theology is a synthesis of Christian theology and Marxist socio; economic analyses . It emphasizes social concern for the poor and the political : liberation for oppressed peoples . Liberation theology emphasizes concern for poor and political liberation .
 The owner of the ranch, John B Poindexter, and C Allen Foster, a Washington attorney who traveled with Scalia to the ranch by private plane, hold leadership positions within the Order . At least two other private aircraft traveling to the Ranch were Saint Hubertus depicted in © connected
 s2bedefanHictory’®_ Intemational Order of St Hubertus. The Order was created by the Roman Catholic church in Rome .
 International Order of St. St. Mary's is a member of the International Order . The Order was founded by the Catholic Catholic Church . The order was established in 1903 .
 Pope Francis Condemns Priest Sexual Abuse, Calls for ‘No Effort to Be Spared’ Pope Francis issued a letter Monday condemning sexual abuse and its 1 concealment within the Catholic church .
 Pope John XXIII and Pope John Paul IT both opened the Church to the world in their own ways . Pope John X. XXIII opened the world to the people in his own ways. Pope John John XX III opened the church to the public in his early years .
 The United States Ambassador Hackett and the Presidential Delegation of John Podesta, Congressman Xavier Becerra, and Katie Beirne Fallon on the Canonization of Pope John XXII and Pope John Paul I ' The Pope we affectionately call il Papa buono was a man of peace
 Roncalli revolutionized the role the Church plays in the world, and made the 1 Catholic Mass a more inclusive and open experience for the faithful . He revolutionized role the church plays in .
 Asa boy in Nazi-occupied Poland, Karol J6zef Wojtyta studied for the priesthood in secret . Karol studied for a priesthood in a secret in secret during the Nazi occupation .
 A fire erupted, killing 76 Branch Davidians, including 25 children and two pregnant women . The Waco siege and business negotiation took place in Waco, Texas, in 1993 .
 A wire story reveals that several weeks before Koresh and 78 of his followers died ; in the inferno that destroyed their home, some Russian scientists demonstrated a ' machine that United States intelligence, military and law enforcement officials that supposedly sent subliminal messages over the telephone .
 The only evidence that the Russian mind-control machine actually works seems to be the fact that the FBI was buying this sales pitch . The FBI bought the sales pitch.
 Their duty was to battle and die for their beliefs, which would lead to their salvation, the soldiers said . The soldiers were killed in the Battle of the Blood Bloodshed .
 The surviving Davidians saw an army of federal troops surround their home . After the initial 45-minute gunbattle, the Davidians were surrounded by a federal army of troops .
 Paul Wilcher was the lawyer to whistle blowers Rodney Stich and Gunter Karl Russbacher . WACO as a think tank for undercover CIA work in Middle East North Africa was well positioned a short flight from Texas to North Africa .
 Bill of Rights is best understood as the enactment of a philosophy of dividual natural rights that dominated American political thought in the ighteenth Century . Natural rights philosophy emerged in the Seventeenth Century as an explanation of the proper function of government .
 Holder was the hatchet man in the Clinton Administration who under Janet Reno ran the . Waco operations that murdered the Branch Davidians and burned their . children alive for political effect . It was Holder who ran the mass ; assassination of the group around Sec. Obama .
 Charles Meissner died in i the crash of a small plane . Shortly thereafter, he died in a plane crash .
 Both men died, 7-30-92, in a private plane crash in Alaska . They were en route to a fishing expedition .
 Willey’s former confidant Julie Steele has claimed that Willey told her lover, Shaun Docking, she was pregnant with his twins . Willey had told Steele she was not pregnant, according to the FBI . The onetime socialite said she told Docking she was
 JON PARNELL WALKER is Whitewater investigator for Resolution Trust Corp. He says he is disappointed with the outcome of the Whitewater investigation .
 The reason Smedinghoff was terminated, was her indirect knowledge in being the ‘cancer courier’ who provided the wafer to the priest who fed this bio toxin to Hugo Chavez . Rahm Emanuel never quite knew the depths to what his statement would devolve to .
 Dr. Vivian Malone Jones was married to Dr. Maya Holder, Brooke Holder, Eric Holder . She is survived by three children, Maya, Brooke and Brooke .
 I believe overtly faked warrants on me, by William Ruiz and Jim Volcelka, are what Jen Moore was murdered over . I believe they are what I believe is what she was murdered .
 The consideration of both Nature which identifies beneficial genetic traits . adapted to a context of life and developmental psychology of non innate skills and behavior development are the combined Nature and Nurture picture rather than Nature .
 Class based society includes the wealth and power holding Aspiration Group of Royalty . Aspiration Royalty feed off subjects of lesser status and development .
 At the bottom of the Class based society may be a desire to become the power holder rather than society reformer . At the top of the class based society, the desire to be a power holder may be the motivation for reform .
 It is my Parched Lips theory that downtrodden populations with members like Malcom X were more likely to accept interbreeding with Royalty for Mixed Race Indirect Commonwealth Rule than were the rule of republics .
 The Vatican felt Protestants and even Islam were less of a threat than socialism or communism which rejected religion altogether . While many Catholics especially sympathetic to Northern Ireland should feel happy many like my own family likely found out .
 CIA Scotish Rites work like Jonestown. Secretly grooming indirect rulers and studying DNA for the world .
 The Peoples Temple of the Disciples of Christ, commonly shortened to Peoples Temple, was an American new religious organization which existed between 1954 and 1978 . It was a new religious group which was formed in 1954 .
 Mike Pence wsMi Michael Richard Pence (born JUNE 7, Mike Pence 1959) is an American politician, broadcaster, and lawyer . Mike Pence served as the 48th vice president of the United States from 2017 to 2021 .
 Ithough Jones feared that he would end up being the victim of a backlash for being a communist, he was surprised when a Methodist superintendent helped him enter the church, despite his knowledge that Jones was a communist .
 Jones had previously observed a faith healing service at the Seventh Day Baptist Church . He concluded that such healings could attract people, and generate income, which he could use to accomplish his social goals .
 The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite is one of several Rites of Freemasonry . The Northern Masonic Jurisdiction in the U.S. often omits the Scottish Rite . The English Constitution in the United Kingdom omits it .
 There should be a plaque at the former site (now a post office) to honor the victims of Rev. Rev. John Sutter's murder .
 The victims of Jonestown were disproportionately lowincome African American women . The victims were disproportionately San Francisco’s least politically empowered demographic lowincome women .
 A month after leaving the Army, Weaver and Victoria Jordison married in a ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Fort Dodge, Iowa in 1971 . Weaver was a Green Beret and a member of his family Ruby Ridge .
 Ruby Ridge was the site of an 11-day siege in 1992 in Boundary , County, Idaho, near Naples . The siege lasted for 11 days .
 United States Marshals Service initiated action to apprehend ; and arrest Randy Weaver under a bench warrant after his failure to . appear on firearms charges . Weaver failed to appear on a firearms charge and was arrested .
 The Weavers subscribed to the belief of ‘Christian Identity’, which holds that white people are the lost tribe of Israel . White people are believed to be the lost tribes of Israel, the Weavers say .
 The court clerk sent the parties a letter informing them of the date change, but the notice was not sent directly to Weaver . Six 1 United States Marshals encountered Harris and Sammy Weaver, Randy’s 14-year-old son .
 United States Marshal William Francis Degan, Sammy Weaver, and the Weavers’ ; dog, Striker, all died as a result . Sammy Weaver and Striker's dog died in the crash .
 Tribes should protect their Indian bloodline retrieved . from lwww.indianz.com and copied or modified to here gig 2 .
 Blood quantum laws or Indian blood laws are laws in the United States and the former Thirteen colonies that define Native American status by fractions of Native American ancestry . Today it’s easy to augh at tribes ho enroll those ith ow blood .
 A person’s blood quantum is defined as the fraction of their ancestors, out of their total ancestors, who are documented as full-blood Native Americans . Many Native American tribes continue to employ {the maximum blood quantum in current tribal laws to determine enefits .
 One who who who is eligible for membership or citizenship in the jis 1/100th should tribe or Native American nation . One who . who who was eligible for . membership or membership in the . jis . eligible for citizenship . One of 100th members of a Native American tribe
 These often eceive benefits in require a minimum degree of blood relationship and laccordance with often an ancestor listed in a specific tribal census his minimal from the late 19th century or early 20th century . lood .
 The Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians of North hoice by the Carolina, for example, require an ancestor listed in inimum blood’s the 1924 Baker census and a minimum of 1/16 ncestors to breed Cherokee blood . This was a
 Cherokee Nation requires out and to applicants to descend from an ancestor in 1906 diminish the Dawes roll . Cherokee Nation does not loodline. impose minimum blood quantum requirement .
 Once the full blood status is mixed, it is a loss from which tribes may never recover . Once tribes are mixed, they may never be able to recover from the loss .
 Several years ago, my ex-husband asked me to assist him in drafting a tribal resolution for a Indian preference policy for his tribe, the Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma . The resolution was drafted by his ex-wife, a member of the tribe .
 Kadoka Bar in Kadoka, South Dakota, one of most racist states in the union, read “No Indians or Dogs Allowed” : I was reminded of this very attitude when I attended the Eastern i Shawnee Business Committee meeting where the Indian preference issue i was debated
 The Archbishop shall minister these questions; and The Queen, having ; a book in her hands, shall answer each question severally as follows: | » Archbishop. Archbishop. The Archbishop .
 Mary I was Queen of England and Ireland from July 1553 until her death in 1558 . She was also known as Mary Tudor and as “Bloody Mary” by her Protestant opponents .
 Reed Morian, Downey Bridgewater, John Kotts, Ed Jones and James Nicholson have been knighted in the Order of St. St. Mary's . Reed and Downey are among those knighted .
 The Southwest Priory, which includes Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and New Mexico, is the largest member chapter . The new knights joined Keith Moseing, Boysie Bollinger, John Kelsey, Scotty Arnoldy, VidalMartinez, John Barksdale and Phil John
 A lawyer in Fullerton, Pa., said it was like awakening not from a nightmare but into one . A lawyer said it's like waking up from a dream but from one to one .
 RFK oversaw CIA and regime change while Attorney General (and the manufacture of Obama Jr but Peace Corp, Baptist Church, Vatitcan, etc., at St Joseph’s hospital assassinated in Los Angeles on his way to Chicago . Even though the anniversary isn’t for
 Charles Butt, the younger son of Howard E Butt, became president of H-E-B in 1971 . Charles is the son of Butt, who was president of the company in 1971.
 In 2019, H-E-B is investing millions of dollars to replace cashier stations with self-checkout kiosks or smartphone apps . Many supermarkets are shifting towards more selfcheckout lane and app usage, and displacing cashiers . The move comes at the same time that
 Isaak Izrailevich Prezent brought Lysenko to public attention using Soviet propaganda to portray him as a genius . Her husband, William H Crook, served as director of the Volunteers in Service to America .
 At the end of 1952, the situation started to change, and newspapers published articles criticizing Lysenkoism . Fall at the beginning of the year 1952 .
 Khrushchev’s time, when Lysenko showed him, the supposed successes of an experimental agricultural complex . However, the process of return to regular genetics slowed down in Nikita Khrushche's time, .
 The perps in the ring attempt to hide the evidence plants, fake allegations againt me, etc. I cant prove the people near me are trying to be condused with me but I know that they are . Their Camera Phone was used to capture the video .
 A virtual private commiunication system exists where someone else creates a meaning of code words by a VPN substitution cypher . Ed goes home, not a randevue, and goes home .
 The cypher text they use as communication among themselves is designed to seem normal business . The presence of the secret deal, the secret messages, are not provable, not decodable . Because their cypher texts are designed to appear normal business, the presence of a secret deal is
 Authorized Cleartext |Codewords and secret trafficking network I am not understood and privy to and unable to prove exists and I do not agreed to by me authorized fused into clear text sale . The wire fraud is a fused overcharge .
 "I did not even recognize the VPN operation until Austin Java House when by the physical acts of the people playing out in front of me it sort of looked like a drug deal from a black in the back kitchen being setip, but it was not drugs . Not only did I not
 Brittany Anne Murphy-Monjack was an American actress and singer . Her book Planning Parenthood is published by Planned Parenthood .
 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Obama's Friends Form Strategy to Stay Close retrieved from retrieved from by Jodi Kantor .
 Valerie Jarrett, Martin Nesbitt and Dr. Valerie Jarrett are President-elect Barack Obama’s three closest friends . Valerie, Martin and Valerie Jarrett will be in the White House for the next four years .
 The three drafted the beginnings of an elaborate visiting schedule that will bring Hyde Park to ; Washington, so the nation’s new first family can have a taste of home .
 Martin Hughes Nesbitt is an American businessman and public figure . Some insist that Martin and Anita are old friends of the Obamas . They are clearly Malia and Sasha’s quote-unquote real parents .
 Nesbitt formerly served as the founder and chief executive officer of The Parking Spot, a Chicago-based airport parking company . He is the CEO of the company .
 Psychologist says “I hope the beer I order has Sasha /'sa:f9/), born Hemlock in it.” Hemlock is a Hemlock .
 In 2001 A Space Oddessy by Stanley Kubrick while Poole is on a space walk i attempting to replace the antenna unit, HAL takes control of his pod, severs Poole’s 1 oxygen hose, and sets him adrift .
 When the disconnection is complete, a prerecorded i video message plays, revealing that the mission’s objective is to investigate the i radio signal sent from the monolith to Jupiter .
 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia aPook versus HAL 9000 retrieved from From Wikipedia . The free encyclopedia and 1 Fe. copied or modified to here .
 Chess is shown continuously and legibly for several seconds in a single shot . Unlike other depictions of chess in television and film, the game is shown legibly and continuously . chess is shown ; continuously .
 Some of the people who became involved in the LSD culture were introduced to the drug because of Gottlieb, although they never knew his name . The CIA Unwittingly Fuels The Counterculture a a Se a ee .
 Some of the people who became involved in the LSD 1 culture were introduced to the drug because of Gottlieb, although they i never knew his name . We do know, however, who some of the . people . became involved with the drug .
 After World War II, the U.S. began providing extensive foreign aid to many nations throughout the world . The United States began providing foreign aid after the war .
 Iran was also of interest to the U.S. because of its natural resources . For much of the twentieth century, Iran held the largest oil refinery in the world . Iran's oil refinery was the world's largest refinery .
 Malcolm X's grandmother and Malcolm X’s widow, Betty Shabazz, died in 1997 after he set fire to her Yonkers apartment . He also was blamed for the death of his grandmother and her mother, Betty .
 He spent time in various juvenile centers, escaping at least twice but being recaptured . He pleaded guilty to the ; juvenile equivalents of second-degree manslaughter and second .degree arson and . second . degree arson .
 The 54-year-old said she and her husband, who was the 44th president of the United States, then had to use IVF to conceive Malia and Sasha . Malia was born on July 4th, 1998, and Sasha, born on June 10th, 2001
 The runner had ssaulted a number of staff members to get at a cigarette butt . Clearly some of these runners had mixed diagnoses .
 Others were like infants of one or two months, whose every need must be met and met, their every need was met . Others were infants, whose needs must be nticipated and met. Others were babies, infants, children, infants .
 In the coming months I wrote programs for care and behavior management which were largely ignored . One young woman riddled with venereal diseases masturbated very day all day. eos ey o . oO .
 "This job was a razor slicing deep wounds into an already bleeding soul," says CNN's John Sutter . This job was "a razor sliced deep wounds," he says . Sutter: "It was a job job that was cutting deep wounds"
 One day in early summer of 1997, I was out in the garden under a shade tree praying . I was praying. One day I was . out in a garden under the . shade tree .
 The Mountain of The Lord was just the beginning of a long series of journeys up The Mountain . The first of a series of trips up the mountain will be the first of many .
 Sidley & Austin began expanding beyond its Chicago roots as many clients entered new markets . After the Second World War, Sidley and Austin expanded beyond Chicago roots .
 Recent research has indicated the human family tree is much more bushy and less linear than the traditional “Out of Africa” narrative . Modern humans originated in Africa and made their first successful migration to the rest of the world in a single wave between 50,000 and 70,000
 Maria Martinén-Torres, director of the National Research Center on Human Evolution in Spain, welcomed the new data on the early presence of humans in China .
 Bobby Fischer was born at Michael Reese Hospital in Chicago, Illinois, on March 9, 1943 . Fischer was the first person to be born in the U.S. Fischer was a World War II veteran . Fischer is the only person to win a Nobel Peace Prize in Switzerland .
 Count Arthur Cherep-Spiridovich was a Major-General in the Imperial Russian Navy . He moved to the United States following the Bolshevik Revolution . He was an anti-Semitic conspiracy theorist .
 Fischer remained on good terms with Jewish chess players despite his views . Fischer's views on Jewish chess were met with support from Jewish players .
 CRISPR-Cas9 was adapted from a naturally occurring genome editing system in bacteria . The system was adapted to work with naturally occurring genes in bacteria and humans .
 Plomin failed to discover any i links when he looked at the genomes of 7,900 children in 2010 . Plomin found no i links between i and i-linked genes .
 He later became involved in a misadventure i involving a Chinese sequencing company, BGI, to which he supplied the DNA of more than a thousand . American geniuses .
 The proposal to designate the decade, beginning January 1990, as the “Decade of the Brain, was sponsored by Representative Silvio O Conte . The proposal was passed by the United States Congress in a joint resolution on March 8, 1989 .
 Silvio Ottavio Conte was a Republican member of the United States House of Representatives for 16 terms . Conte represented the 1st Congressional District of Massachusetts from January 3, 1959, until his death in 1991 in Bethesda, Maryland .
 These are the joined reports of the Prophecies of Black Hebrew Islrealite test subject Linda Newkirk . The work of Andy Ellengton and others in Texas and Arkansas “drug” running and Mena Airport 1961, and Jonestown Guena, Guena
 Three government agencies are leading the project e The National Institutes of Health e the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency e and the National Science Foundation e . The project is being led by the National Institute of Health .
 The White House said the agencies will work with the “private sector partners” of e The Allen Institute for Brain Science e the Howard Hughes Medical Institute e the Kavli Foundation e the Salk Institute for Biological Studies . The agencies will also work with private sector partners .
 These are the joined reports of the Prophecies of Black Hebrew Islrealite test subject Linda Newkirk . The work of Andy Ellengton and others in Texas and Arkansas “drug” running and Mena Airport 1961, and Jonestown Guena, Guena
 "Stanley” Ann Dunham was an American anthropologist who specialized in the economic anthropology and rural development of Indonesia . Their daughter, Stanly Ann Dunham, was a prominent anthropologist in Indonesia .
 Elizabeth II, the reigning queen of the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth nations, was the queen of Pakistan for four years . Towards the latter part of her life, she worked with Bank Rakyat Indonesia, where she helped apply her research to the largest microfinance program .
 George VI was the last emperor of India [wich included Muslim Pakistan], reigning until 1947 . He gave up that title in favor of two new titles for his new dominions, becoming king of India and king of Pakistan .
 To make Barack Obama Jr. not from Somewhere they made him from Everywhere. To make him from Somewhere, they . made him . Obama Jr.'s father: "To make Obama Jr., not from somewhere they made .
 It appears in 1944 the OSS and Vatican worked out a plan with Spanish Illuminati Catholics to work on racial genetics and the Anterior Temporal Lobe . This would be a part of eroding cause of racial warfare .
 The original goal was to create a family database consistency of the Obama family tree by creating a world existence, dating back into African history, of genes he really obtained through Windsor Dysgraphic line, and the elimination of Obama white immediate relative in Europe . The latter activity seeming for world IQ
 Epstein planned to ‘seed the human race with his DNA’ by impregnating up to 20 women at a time . He planned to use his New Mexico compound as a ‘baby ranch’ where mothers would give birth to his offspring .
 In the coming months I wrote programs for care and behavior management which were largely ignored . One young woman riddled with venereal diseases masturbated every day all day. par par .
 This job was a razor slicing deep wounds into an already bleeding soul . It seems that the dregs of society were hired to play minimum wage games . When no one was looking they allegedly had orgies with these, who were helpless .
 God takes me regularly to the heights of His Mountain where he feeds me through these pages will forever change the lives of many . Amidst the beauty of this heavenly language, and on the wings of His Holy Spirit, God takes us regularly to His Mountain .
 Linda Newkirk's book, "Enwrapped in Jesus Love," is published by Simon Cowell . In the pages which follow, you will read much about your destiny. Enwrapped with Jesus Love .
 Scientists and philosophers have been fascinated by the brain for centuries . Until recently, they viewed the brain as nearly incomprehensible . The Human Brain and Behavior is the subject of this article .
 This has been racial and ethnic attack through Behavioal Health SJW systems . Attacks on my Human Rights acheived through retarded impersonators of me . This has also been racial, ethnic attack on my human rights .
 e¢ Meanwhile I am socially sabotaged to white women who would partner with me, genetically, and in my own life and reproductivity and marriage . e¢ This creates the illusion I like non-whites and gays undermining my white supremacist whites only sexual interests. e¢ Further
 Economic success seems to be correlated with ethnic IQs . Populations with distinct |Q have distinct ou economic success . Economic success is correlated with racial IQ .
 The adoption of Christianity in Ethiopia dates to the fourth-century reign of the Aksumite emperor Ezana . Russia warns United States of illegal deep state, killing of United State and Judges .
 In one of the last chapters, CryptoGenocide, you will see full decode capabilities of many of those oblique references . Various Oblique References in the last chapter of the book .
 YouTube video on Extortion17 dated Nov. 15. Soviet Union 1960s AM: Cuba 1 AV: Uruguay : BE: Poland : BG: Albania ee ee eh . Poland: Poland: Albania .
 Some medical scientists are trying to figure out how to use polygenic intelligence scores to pick the smartest embryo from an IVF dish, choose the best sperm donor, or discover fetuses at high risk for an ; expanded menu of cognitive disorders .
 Altered regulation of gene expression in both DEVELOPING BRAINS AND ADULT BRAINS have been linked with multiple neurological diseases such as ‘ depression, schizophrenia, and Alzheimer’s disease . Brain can be treated where cellular neural deficit exists . Brain genes gene therapy and bone
 Traditional methods to study ' these types of disorders have relied on artificial overexpression of genes in animal ' models . Traditional methods have used artificial overexpressions of genes .
 Neurons are crucial to the function of the central nervous system . Genetic engineering processes like CRISPR do not easily translate to neurons due to i inherent limitations with these cells .
 ARC of Northern Virginia wishing to parly that Special Needs Trust Fund into something else and some different role is something I have been fighting but can't get actual accounting or Due Process on. The ARC of . Northern Virginia wishes to . parly . that Special needs Trust Fund . into something
 President Kennedy began his day with a Legislative Leader Breakfast . President Kennedy attended a breakfast with a legislative leader .
 President John F Kennedy and First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy with their children, John Jr. and Caroline, on the White House south lawn in Washington on NOVEMBER 13, 1963, just weeks 1 before his death .
 U.S. President John Fitzgerald Kennedy agreed to visit Australia and New Zealand weeks before deciding to travel to Dallas, Texas where he was assassinated 50 years ago . Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas Texas .
 I laughed at my mother joining my brother Tom as he did, criticising my mother . "I laughed at his mother joining his brother Tom," she said .
 Chris Lloyd, who had information about me which PizzaGate was tied to, was a former friend from high school and college, was twice connected to Genentech . Chris Lloyd had information that PizzaGate had tied to PizzaGate . PizzaGate is the first time PizzaGate has been linked
 The online and physical impersonators of me in the San Francisco Bay Area of California mention Genentech , my mother and new organisms, being created, and also show signs of Schizophrenia . The Doppelganger of me would need a trust administrator .
 See Sock Puppets chapter and then the REAL EDWARD PAUL DONEGAN DEFENDS REAL TOM DUNHAM from TOM DUHMAS DUNham sub-championship sub-Championship . See the REALEDWARD PULGAN DEFENDDS REAL
 Jim Volceka, of Salinas, kept making framing acts claiming I was retarded . People keep claiming they are going to have my babies to me and I say no they are not . People kept saying they were going to get my babies .
 This would be a self-enrichment scheme of a retardation advocacy firm who needs access to my own real property, biological property, by falsely claiming the right or need for them to manage my property rights for me and then do so illegally and without accounting to me . This would
 In the dream another man appeared, this one rather young with fine, 1 short brown hair . Gar Then, in the same dream, another young man appeared . Gar Gar . Gar
 Illuminati man projected a picture on a blank wall . Illuminati man put forth his hand and projected the image on a wall .
 It is through these continued assaults of Satan and his demonic hoards that our i Father has matured this new spiritual code, which is now 1 very strong and it fights for me and with me .
 In this state, the rate of insured unemployment has been persistently higher than the ; hational average, and the increases in personal income and employment have been ; slower here than the nation as a whole .
 Our choice, therefore, boils down to one of: doing nothing, and thereby risking a widening gap between our actual and potential growth in output, profits, and employment . Or taking action, at the federal level, to raise our entire economy to . a . higher level of business activity
 There are a number of ways by which the federal government can meet its i responsibilities to aid economic growth . The federal government has many ways to help the economy grow .
 In psychology, fluid and crystallized intelligence (respectively abbreviated Gf and Gc) are factors of general intelligence . They were originally identified by Raymond Cattell, originally identified as factors of intelligence .
 To target transfection to the hippocampus, the head of the embryonic pup was placed between paddles of tweezer electrodes (CUY21 electroporator, NEPA GENE, Japan) with the positive terminal covering the lateral surface of the right hemisphere and the negative terminal
 She also held numerous private-sector positions in the oil and gas industry as well as specialist on nuclear energy .
 The consulate's first line of defense was four locally hired security guards and another man on the front gate . The consulate’s first line-of-defense was four local security guards .
 The economy of Ethiopia was based on subsistence agriculture, with an aristocracy that consumed the surplus . This book Air Travel is based on Air Travel .
 KLM is a Dutch airliner which as at least a figure head head royal government and joined the OECD n 1961 . KLM was founded by the Dutch government in 1961 .
 Eve Meyer was an American pin-up model, motion picture actress, and film producer . She was born Evelyn EUGENE Tumer in 1928 and died in 1977 .
 Garden Club of Georgia, Inc, 5 a Non-profit educational organization with 16000 mernbers statewide . Founded in 1928, the Garden Club has 16,000 members statewide . Garden Club was founded in 1928 .
 Eve Meyer was an American pinup sodet, motion pieture actress, and fin er Misty Filmography Procucer 1977) wes an Eve Meyer . Meyer was a pinup model, motion picture acess, afd fim producer .
 The pilot of Flight 4805 was Jacob van Zanten, one of KLM’s most experienced flyers .
 In 1915 he joined the mobilized Dutch airforce as a professional officer . At the time still called the “militaire luchtvaartafdeling’s” in Soesterberg . In 1915, he became a professional airman .
 Koninklijke Militaire Academie (KMA) is the service academy for the Dutch Army, the Dutch Air Force, and the Royal Marechaussee . KMA is the Dutch service academies of the Dutch army, Air Force and the Dutch military .
 Located in Breda, the KMA has trained future officers since 1828 ZO eden War .
 Ethiopia was saved from defeat by a massive airlift of military supplies worth $1 billion . 12,000 Cuban soldiers and airmen sent by Fidel Castro to win a second ; African victory . 1 1 1,500 Soviet advisors, led by General Vasily Petrov .
 On 23 January 1978, Cuban armored brigades inflicted the worst losses the Somali forces had ever taken in a single action since the start of the war . The Cuban forces suffered the worst loss they had ever suffered in one action .
 Cedric helped found a community-based organization that addresses the protection of vulnerable women and children fleeing the war in Somalia . Cedric also spent eight years discerning a religious vocation as a Jesuit .
 James Mountain Inhofe is the senior United States Senator from Oklahoma . He was elected to a seat he was first elected to in 1994 . He is a Republican .
 Inhofe served as the U.S. Representative for Oklahoma’s 1st congressional district from 1987 to 1994 . He also served as mayor of Tulsa from 1978 to 1984 . He was elected to Congress in 1987 .
 He has supported a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex matriage . He has proposed the Inhofe Amendment to make English the national language of the United States .
 Senator Inhofe's son killed in plane crash . U.S. Secretary of Defense confirms death of United States Senator's son Sean Murphy . Sean Murphy died in the crash .
 Lt. Perry Inhofe was killed in a weekend plane crash in northeast Oklahoma .
 Investigators tested 20 different simulations for various equipment failure scenarios . The only scenario that matched the actual radar trajectory of the descent and crash of the flight was a high-speed steep dive commanded by one of the pilots .
 Tsu was among SilkAir’s most talented fliers . Tsu was a former top fighter pilot in the Singaporean air force and a member of its performing aerobatic team .
 Bonny Susan Hicks was a SingaporeEurasian model and writer . She was also a model and model for Singapore . She is now a successful businesswoman .
 Her first book, Excuse Me, Are You A Model? is recognised as a significant milestone in the literary and cultural history of Singapore .
 Bonny Susan Hicks (5 January 1968 19 J December 1997) Hicks never met her father . She was born in January 1968 and died in December 1997 .
 Bashkirian Airlines Flight 2937 was a chartered i flight from Moscow, Russia, to Barcelona, Spain, carrying 60 1 passengers and nine crew . Air traffic controller service identified as the main cause of the collision .
 An apparent act of revenge by Vitaly Kaloyev, a Russian citizen whose wife 1 and two children had been killed in the accident . Nielsen, the ATC on duty at the time of the accident, was on duty in the area .
 Russia asserts that the DHL crew had a ‘real ossibility’ to avoid a collision, since they were able to hear the onversation between the Russian crew and the controller . Russia says they had a real ossible’s to avoid collision .
 He was retuming home to Luxembourg from a visit to his relatives in Rio de Janeiro . He was returning from a trip to visit his relatives .
 From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Low-Grade Dirty Wars Dulles was a pioneer of the strategies of massive retaliation and brinkmanship .
 Dulles served as the chairman and cofounder of the Commission on a Just and Durable Peace of the Federal Council of Churches of Christ in America . Dulles was the Chairman of the Board for the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, and a trustee of the Rockefeller Foundation .
 Bush CIA Rockefeller Rockefeller HUnt Standard Oil of Araknasas and Rothcdhilds are impersonates Ed, uses Trust fund to see adult entertainers, uses trust fund to settle debts other than adult entertainer be be KOMPROMAAT Espionage .
 Paul Alan to Elon Musk, Twins Mark and Scott Kelley, Mike Pence, Jonn Trump and Donald J Trump, the Bush family, Donald Barr, William Barr, Christopher Wray Masons, Rockefllers,Rotschilds, and all the otrher Crime Bosses
 Some who fight that figure if they plant porn of sexualized little children of other races, I will look bad to the world and to White Power. Some who say that figure is racist but others who say it is racist .
 It is my belief acts from people like Jim Vockelcka buying or shopping for size 13 boots and guns in my name, as me, put me on the kill lists the CIA and NDAA use, and that is more a matter of getting rid of me as cleanup of CIA
 Psych evaluator tanked me, I did not get transported to the hearing, and likely a black took some creepy picture of her, which built in her mind I was a peeper, or some other activity like that which is the ususal in USA legal system .
 The process determining , criteria for killing is not public and was heavily shaped by National Counter terrorism Director and former Central Intelligence Agency "" Director John O Brennan .
 White House, National Counter terrorism Center, and 1 CIA spokespeople have declined to comment on the database . Officials have stated privately that the database will expand “for at least another 1 decade”, if not indefinitely .
 Mediated contact Will have contact while acting under a cover story (a “legend” and with a false back story) such as working in an establishment you are at, or through some other system of insert into a stalking victim’s vicinity or environment .
 Intelligence agency creating the APPEARANCE of compromising information about a person, but substituting themselves to confess as they were in the area at the same time . At one location, element of the crime A, cop from the gangstalk photographs a womans buttocks .
 Hijack communications leaving one person incommunicado and the Information Doppelganger communicating disinformation . Hijacks communications leave one person in the dark and one communicating disinformation to the opposite .
 Offence MOB KOMPROMAT is talking up by undercover mobs who add themselves into groups a person might join or be in . Offence mobs create a seeming normal word of moutch system in which a framed person undergoes social sabotage and ostracism . KOM
 Also known as gangstalking or organized stalking, is a highly criminal campaign directed at a targeted individual . It aims to destroy an innocent person’s life through slander and psychological and physical assaults .
 An intentional, premeditated effort to undermine an individual’s reputation, credibility, and character [on real truth or manufactured KOMPROMAT] [in a manner which will result in the Stalked person being rejected from a group he or she is slandered
 “Gang Stalking” is, very likely, a disinformation term created by U.S. intelligence agencies . The term was created by United States intelligence agencies, it is very likely .
 The goal of such perations in the parlance of counterintelligence agents is to “subvert” r “neutralize” an individual deemed to be an enemy (or potential enemy) of clients or members of security state .
 In fact a 'fapper' who stole my phone called himself Sovereign RICO, and one other black male called himself Rico . In their actions, they allege I anthropomorphise schizophrenically and my report of police backed RICO are evidence I am insane .
 The provcations and fight picking with Tom Dunham, who also had a teen trafficking ring pasted onto his normal life also provoked fights and retaliation against him, drew him in to years of public fighting .
 Tom Dunham and I have had key plants outside, as though we are sharing keys or codes with others, breakins and evidence plants with landlords cooperating with law enforcement in law enforcement’s doing so, etc. THe result of all this is it seems it seems Tom . Dunham
 "Better, and maybe the point, that expains why my DNA is in non whites already and continuing," he says . Better, maybe, he says, that explains why his DNA is already in non-whites .
 Varied retellings of the break-in to my home were told at SelectQuote.com . Tom Dunham W Follow @sftomdunham a . Follow Tom Dunham on Twitter @Tom Dunham W
 Blacks took over the front desk and solicited in rooms near me and were likely caught by dominatrixes having child porn pictures from the Lady Bird Lake park and then signed my genome way as though me . Blacks also solicited for sex in the rooms near him .
 "I try to stay in my highest legal ground, my home, but this legal high ground is not protected enough and assaults continue in them," Dunham says . Veronica Hoffman and I have reported these attacks organized by the police to police to the police .
 Edward Paul Donegan to Tom Dunham: 'I mentioned you as a fellow victim in a Facebook post' Tim Kelly ; Jay Dwyer ; Tamsin Levy .
 Pyant was the SKetch Artist and this has happened in custody repeatedly as is seen in the case of Tom Dunham . Tom Dunham was taken into custody in the custody of a drug dealer .
 Joseph G “Joe” Glaser (December 17, 1896 JUNE 6, 1969) was music manager of Louis Armstrong from 1935 until his death in 1969 . Glaser was the original proprietor of Sunset Gardens in Chicago .
 Avant spent his freshman and second years of high school at Dudley High School in Greensboro before moving to New Jersey in 1947 . In New Jersey, he worked as a stock clerk at Macy’s and for a law directory .
 His mother, Aruna Mehrotra, had separated from her husband in 1976 and had moved back to India to manage a jewellery business at the time of the disappearance . She had been living in India with her mother in 1976 .
 The child's partial remains were discovered 25 ' FEBRUARY 1982 on an isolated farm in Sussex . Child's remains were found on a farm in an isolated area of Sussex .
 Police ; additionally investigated the possibility that the boy had been abducted by a racist ; gang . Police also investigated possibility of possibility that boy was abducted by racist gang .
 Between the disappearance and the discovery of the body the police ; investigated hundreds of sightings and interviewed over 14,000 people . Between the . disappearance and . the . investigation of the . body, police investigated hundreds . of sightings . and interviewed more than 14,500 people .
 A skull, seven rib bones and a section of vertebrae were discovered in 1982 . The bones were found at Durleigh Marsh Farm, Rogate, near Petersfield .
 The bones were found buried in a bog at a depth of around two feet . The bones appeared to have been disturbed by foxes and were found in the bog .
 JonBenét Patricia Ramsey was an American child beauty queen . She was killed at the age of six in her family’s home in Boulder, Colorado .
 A photo of JonBenét Ramsey has been making its rounds due to what looks like Ghislaine Maxwell to the left of her . The photo was taken at the scene of the alleged murder of Ramsey's daughter .
 Boulder County District Attorney Mary Lacy says DNA tests point to an “unexplained third party” as possibly responsible for the killing . Lacy: New DNA test points to ‘explained’ third person’ as possible responsible .
 John’s two surviving adult children (a wife and family to Boulder, where Access Graphics’ headquarters was located) John moved to Boulder with his wife and two surviving children . Access Graphics' headquarters is located in Boulder .
 Her daughter JonBenét disappeared on the morning after Christmas Day 1996 . JonBenet was found dead on December 25, 1996 .
 JonBenét's active role in child beauty pageants and Patsy’s reported 1 ‘pageant mother’ behavior were reported by the media after the murder .
 She sustained a broken skull from a blow to the head and had been strangled . A garrote was found tied around her neck and a garrote had been found tied to her head .
 Patsy Ramsey entered JonBenét into a series of child beauty pageants . The case generated national interest in part because of her mother's interest in the pageant .
 The crime is still unsolved and remains an open investigation with the ' Boulder Police Department .
 In 2002, the DA’s successor took over investigation of the case from the police 1 and primarily pursued the theory that an intruder had committed the killing . The case was reopened in 2002 .
 The DA sent the Ramseys a letter of apology in 2008, declaring the family was : 1 “completely cleared” by the DNA results . The DA said the Ramsey family was ‘completely clear’ by the results .
 Others, including former Boulder police son and a daughter, lived elsewhere . Others lived in Boulder .
 In February 2009, Boulder police took the case back from the "" DA and reopened the investigation . Boulder police chief Mark Beckner disagreed with exonerating the Ramseys, characterizing the DNA as a small piece of evidence that was not proven to have any connection to the crime.:11
 Police investigated following the tragic death of 6; year-old JonBenét at her home in 1996 . That apparently is a theory that police investigated following her death .
 Bedwetting was a “nightly occurrence” with JonBenet, a retired FBI profiler says . Bedwettings were a ‘nightly’ occurrence, according to the profiler . JonBenét was found to have bedwetting .
 Police theorized Patsy Ramsey became so enraged that her daughter wet the bed again that she struck JonBenet, accidentally killing her . JonBenét's death was ruled accidental .
 As a pediatric urologist who specializes in bedwetting, I am not remotely shocked. I have no idea whether the theory has merit in JonBenet case, but as a pediatric urinalist, I'm not remotely surprised. I'm a bed-wetting expert.
 I have a large collection of news reports on abuse cases related to bedwetting children beaten, starved, or forced to sit in a chair all day, sleep in a bathtub, sit on an electric burner, stand for hours on an “X” on the kitchen floor
 There is a poor understanding among parents, therapists, and therapists about what causes accidents in children . These cases are extreme, but parental frustration is a very common response to bed-wetting .
 The parents did not have history of anger regarding bed wetting but if she were beginning to show signs of developing slowly and the FOXP2 Syndrome she may have been murdered to coverup that gene .
 The total death count from this massacre is 28 as it, also, includes both Adam Lanza and his mother . The death count also includes both Lanza's mother and his father . The total number of deaths is 28 .
 The weapons used in the massacre, said to be owned by her, are standard CIA issue . Massachusetts and New Hampshire and that the weapons used, said .
 Hekmati said he worked for DARPA after he left the Marine Corps in 2005, according to an Iranian state-run newspaper . The report was published by The Tehran Times, a translation of the report .
 Russia, too, has experienced the grim aftereffects i of violent Western video games naming the November 2012 workplace rampage that . left 6 dead in Moscow and prompted authorities to begin the process of outright . banning them in the Motherland as numerous research studies have linked them to ‘
 Permission to use this report in its entirety is granted under the condition it is linked back to its original source at 0 WhatDoesItMean.Com .
 The Sisters of ; Sorcha Faal strongly disagrees with in believing that it is every human being right : to know the truth . Western governments and their intelligence services actively campaign against the information found in these reports .
 In June 1995) Ween American 1| 1983, after a bitter legal and boardroom battle, the billionaire businessman, :| stakes of Frederick R Koch and William ‘Bill” Koch were bought out for $1.1 billion . Charles [OVvermment official]
 Koch and David Koch became majority owners in /""Volved with and invested in t . He was ""| Koch and . David Koch . Became majority owners of the company .
 Charles owns 42% of the company . Elaine Tettemer Marshall PC academic, government and and and ommercial endeavors . Charles own 42% . Charles owns .
 Elaine Marshall’s children, Preston Marshall and E Pierce owned 16% of Koch Marshall Jr., own 16% . Preston Marshall Jr. owns 16% and owns a 16% stake in the company . Elaine Marshall's children own 16%.
 David Koch was David Koch, who died on August 23, 2019, own the arried to model and celebrity Anna Nicole Smith during the last 14 months of his life . David Koch died in August .
 Marshall's estate became the subject of protracted litigation . His estate was reviewed by the Supreme Court in Marshall i Marshall and Stern Marshall . The Supreme Court heard the case and ruled in favor of both parties .
 He authored the Code of Fair Competition for the ; Petroleum Industry . and the Connally Hot Oil Act of 1935 . After the Supreme ‘ Court’s decision to strike down the National Industrial Recovery Act .
 The Connally Hot Oil Act of 1935 was enacted in the wake of the Supreme Court’s . decision to strike down Section 9 of the National Industrial Recovery Act : in Panama Refining Co. The Act was enacted after the Supreme . Court's decision was the result of a decision
 The act was named after Senator Tom Connally . balance, 42%, of the corporation . balance . balance of 42% balance of corporation balance .
 In 1935, he left government service to become ; the special counsel to Kenneth R Kingsbury, the ; president of iL 1( > Standard Oil of Californiaf(tyy i Chevron Corporation) in San Francisco .
 In 1952, he became Executive Vice President at Signal Oil & Gas under Samuel B Mosher . He was Executive Vice-President of Signal Oil and Gas under Mosher in 1952 .
 In 1961, he became President of Union Texas Petroleum and moved to Houston . In 1961 he was President of the Union Texas Oil Company .
 In 1952, Marshall co-founded Great Northern Oil, which, in 1955, built an oil refinery in Rosemount, Minnesota that could refine heavy, sour Canadian crude oil . In 1984, Marshall Petroleum, which primarily was a holding company for his interest .
 His second marriage, to Bettye Bohannon, lasted from 1961 until her death from Alzheimer’s disease in 1991 . J 1 Howard Marshall II 1 and E Pierce Marshall .
 Marshall * gave Walker $15 million worth of jewelry and other gifts . Over several years, Marshall gave Walker more than $16 million in gifts .
 Walker died in 1991 at age ‘51 due to complications from facelift surgery . Walker died of complications from complications from surgery .
 In 1994, at the age of 89, he married 26-year-old model Anna Nicole Smith . He married her in 1994, aged 89, and she died in 2011 .
 Katy Perry responded to the theory that she's actually JonBenet Ramsey . Katy's pre-recorded video featuring Billy Eichner played during a transition during the show .
 Billy on the Street asked Katy a string of rapid-fire questions . The comedian asked Katy about her appearance on the show .
 JonBenet Ramsey is the subject of a new documentary, "Swish Swish" Ramsey . The documentary is based on a series of questions about the singer's identity .
 Billy’s, of course, referring back to a conspiracy theory that went viral in early 2016 . Billy was referring to the conspiracy theory, which went viral last year . Billy's tweet is a reference to a viral conspiracy theory .
 It alleges that JonBenet did not actually die back in 1996 and instead became who we now know today as Katy Perry .
 There are plenty of holes in the flimsy theory, but it being just wacky enough paired with the two looking somewhat similar made for good internet kindling . The two images of the two look somewhat similar .
 Frank Joseph Perry Jr. was an American stage director and filmmaker . Katy Perry retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to here .
 Perrys would eventually join the select group of non-actors awarded membership in Actors Studio . Both Perrys were members of Actors' Studio .
 Pentecostal pastors Mary Christine and Maurice Keith ; Hudson. California, born Maurice Keith and Mary Christine Christine Keith . Keith was a pastor in Hudson.
 She has a younger brother named David, who ; is a singer, and an older sister, Angela . She has two older siblings .
 Growing up, she attended religious ' schools and camps, including Paradise Valley Christian School in Arizona and Santa ' Barbara Christian School .
 Perry's family struggled financially, sometimes using food stamps and eating food from the food bank . Perry's parents' church fed the congregation at Perry’s parents’ church . Perry says she and her family were fed by the church's congregation .
 Perry primarily listened to gospel music, as secular . Music was generally discouraged in the family's home .
 She discovered popular music through CDs she sneaked from friends . She found popular music online through CDs from friends she had sneaked into her friends .
 Perry later recalled a story about how a friend of hers played ‘You Oughta Know’ by Alanis Morissette, which impacted her songwriting and singing . Perry said a friend played the song by playing it to her, and she said it impacted her writing and
 Perry has supported various charitable organizations and causes throughout her career . Perry has also supported charities throughout her i career .
 In April 2013, she joined UNICEF to assist children in Madagascar with education and nutrition . She has been working for the organization since April 2013 .
 Daisy Bell, which includes her rendition of ‘Daisy Bell ‘, were donated to the charity Little ' Kids Rock . The charity supports musical education in underprivileged elementary schools .
 Perry has publicly advocated for LGBT rights . Perry has admitted that she wrote “I Kissed a Girl” about her own bisexual experiences with other women . Perry wrote the book about her bisexual experiences .
 She performed at three rallies for Obama, in Los Angeles, Las Vegas, and Wisconsin, singing a rendition of “Let’s Stay Together” as well as a number of her songs .
 She endorsed Kamala Harris in the United States Senate election in California . She organized a fundraiser for Harris at her home in Los Angeles in November 2016 .
 Perry also performed at the 2016 Democratic National Convention in support of Hillary Clinton . Perry also spoke and sang at the DNC in 2016 . Perry performed at 2016 Democratic convention in New Jersey .
 Jeffrey Epstein’s death under mysterious circumstances last summer . Conspiracy theorists have been making hay with Epstein's death .
 JonBenét Ramsey was found murdered in her home on Christmas Day 1996 . The six-year-old Colorado beauty queen was found dead at her home in 1996 .
 A woman who closely resembles alleged Epstein procurer Ghislaine Maxwell is seen in the background of what is purported to be the last image of Ramsey alive . The theory first took root on Twitter and Reddit, where it was first taken up by the internet .
 A 2014 YouTube video claimed that JonBenét Ramsey's parents staged the murder of JonBenet Ramsey . The child is still alive and well living her life as Katy Perry, according to the video .
 The video cites lyrics from Perry's songs, and says that the two look alike . The video says that Perry's lyrics are similar to that of Perry's .
 Jonbonet was assasinated but the whole pedahilia story line was planted by real assasins to cover real reason child was murdered . Jon Bonet was murdered but the real reason was that he was murdered was to protect his daughter from harm .
 John Mark Karr, who has been arrested on multiple charges including child pornography, claimed that he was in the Ramsey house the night of the murder and saw JonBenet die . Karr claimed he wasn't involved in the murder, but isn't the one who killed JonBenét
 He staged the crime scene in order to throw the police off the track of the real killer . He says that he staged the murder scene to throw off the police . The real killer says he faked the crime to get rid of the killer .
 Karr was cleared from any charges after no tissue samples or bodily fluids matched his at the scene, contradicting his own story . He was cleared of any charges . Karr's own story contradicts his own account .
 A man portraying Santa Claus sits in a mall in South Portland, Maine, on Thursday, Dec. 2013 .
 Two nights before JonBenét was killed, McReynolds was at the Ramsey house dressed as Santa Claus . Two nights later, he visited the Ramsey family dressed up as Santa .
 The vagueness of this message in the card has led some to believe that he was behind the murder . The message has been vague and some believe he was involved in the killing .
 John: "We were officially cleared and apologized to by the district attorney in, I think, 2008" John: “We were cleared and . apologized to . by the . district attorney . John: 'We were . officially cleared'
 New DNA evidence cleared the Ramsey family as suspects in the case . Mary Lacy, then Boulder’s District Attorney, made a public announcement that new DNA evidence clears the family .
 'I got a letter from a lady several years ago that said, ‘I was contemplating suicide.’ I got a lot of letters from people who said they were contemplating suicide,’ he said . ‘She said she wanted to kill herself,” he said
 He says the death of his oldest daughter, Beth, in 1992 was the beginning of his faith journey . He says she died in 1992 . The death of Beth was the start of his religious journey .
 Andrea Pia Yates confessed to drowning her five children in their bathtub on June 20, 2001 . Yates is an American woman from Houston, Texas, who confessed to the crime in 2001 .
 He met her husband a former NASA engineer in her church . She died in 2001 .
 Andrea Yates' lawyers claimed she believed she believed that the devil was inside her and that by killing her children she would save them from hell . During her first trial in 2002, Andrea Yates lawyers claimed that she believed . that she would kill her children from hell.
 Noah Yates, 7, fought the hardest to live as his mother forced him into the bathtub after chasing him through the house . The highest number of contusions were found on the body of 7-year-old Noah Yates .
 As many as 15 recent injuries were found on the boy’s body, Sanchez said . The boy was found with recent injuries ranging from his head to his arms to his legs .
 The bruises could have been caused by blows or someone squeezing him hard enough to crush his tissue and rupture his vessels, Sanchez said . Sanchez said the bruises could be caused by blow blows or by squeezing someone hard .
 Molly Anne Bish was a 16-year-old American girl from rural Worcester County, Massachusetts . She disappeared while working as a lifeguard in her hometown of Warren .
 Fellow Massachusetts resident Holly Piirainen was murdered seven years earlier . Fellow Massachusetts woman Holly was found murdered in 2007 .
 It is located about 46 miles south of Boston, 16 miles southeast of Providence, Rhode Island, and 12 miles west of New Bedford . Leslie Marie Perlov, 21, is shown in an undated photo .
 John Arthur Getreu was arrested NOV. 20 Nov. 20, 2018, thanks to DNA genealogy analysis . He was arrested 45 years ago, 45 years after he was found guilty of murder .
 A few months ago, we came across the YouTube videos of Manny Grossman, by way of Jason Goodman of the Crowd Source the Truth Channel . Schmid is a Driftwood Beach Club member, Eugenics Psy-Op Warrior .
 He knows a lot about the Son of Sam murders and does walking tours of Yonkers, explaining different aspects of the murders, and interviewing locals who can speak about the murder .
 The subject of sacrificed dogs comes up in the Son of Sam lore frequently . The subject is the subject of many famous tales of sacrifice dogs .
 The mention of dead dogs in Untermyer Park prompted another look at a lady we came across a few years ago while looking at a different, it seemed at the time, murder .
 Clay LaVergne Shaw was the only person put on trial for the assassination of President John F Kennedy . Shaw was only person to be tried for the murder of President Kennedy . He was convicted of the assassination .
 We looked at his parents to see if they were conspirators in any earlier historical plots . As we like to do when researching “conspirators” we looked at them as conspirators .
 She married Tony Falco, an Italian American, in 1936 the time of the Berlin Olympics . She was married to Falco in 1936 .
 Tony Falco left his wife of less than four years for another woman . Falco and Falco were married for less than three years before he left her for a new woman .
 Cacilia Davis was walking her dog at the scene of the Moskowitz and Violante shooting . She saw patrol officer Michael Cataneo ticketing a car that was parked near a fire hydrant . Davis says she saw the officer ticketing the car .
 A young man walked past her from the area of the car and seemed to study her with some interest . Moments after the traffic police had left, she was approached by a young man .
 Police closely checked every car that had been ticketed in the area that night . Davis remained silent about the incident for four days until she contacted police .
 Berkowitz’s 1970 four-door yellow Ford Galaxie was among the cars that they investigated . Berkowitz: "I don’t know why I’m going to do this, but I'm glad to see it"
 NYPD detective James Justis telephoned Yonkers police to ask them to schedule an interview with Berkowitz . Berkowitz was the subject of a federal investigation into his murder .
 The Yonkers police dispatcher who first took Justis’ call was Wheat Carr, the daughter of Sam Carr and sister of Berkowitz’s alleged cult confederates John and Michael Carr . Wheat Carr is the sister of the alleged cult conspirators, Sam Carr . Justis
 In 1979, Berkowitz mailed a book about witchcraft to police in North Dakota . Berkowitz was arrested for sending the book to North Dakota police in 1979 . The book was sent to police .
 The reference was to Arlis Perry, a 19-year-old newlywed who had been murdered at Stanford on October 12, 1974 . Perry was a newlywed newlywed and a newlyweds .
 Her death, and the notorious abuse of her corpse in a chapel on campus, was a widely reported case . Her body was found in the chapel at the University of Columbia University .
 Berkowitz mentioned the Perry attack in other letters, suggesting that he knew details of it from the perpetrator himself . Berkowitz's letters suggest that he was aware of the attack in the letters .
 Lizzie Andrew Borden was an American woman tried and acquitted of the axe murders of her father and stepmother in Fall River, Massachusetts . She was found guilty of the 1892, axe murders .
 Elliott was alive, she also filed complaints regarding being treated unfairly by the Louisville Metro Police Dept. Elliott was still alive when she was .
 Harold Allen Ramis Ramis was born on November 21, 1944, in Chicago . He was the son of Ruth and Nathan Ramis, who owned the Ace Food & Liquor Mart on the city’s far North Side .
 He was a member of the Alpha Xi chapter of Zeta Beta Tau fraternity in St. Louis, Missouri . He was killed in 2011 .
 VA "prepared me well for when I went out to Hollywood to work with actors," she says .
 "It was good training for just living in the world. And not just with actors," she said . "It's good training to just live with the world," she added .
 It's knowing how to deal with people who might be reacting in a way that’s connected to anxiety or grief or fear or rage . It's not just dealing with people reacting to anxiety, grief or rage, it's dealing with those who might react differently, she says .
 If I were a businessman, I’d probably be applying those same principles to that line of work . But if he were a businessman, he’s probably applying those principles to his work .
 Ramis had begun studying and performing with Chicago’s Second City improvisational comedy troupe . Ramis also had studied and performed with the Second City .
 Party jokes editor, editor, has a job open at the end of the year . The job is to write party jokes and make them into a party .
 He liked my stuff and he gave me a stack of jokes that readers had sent ‘in and asked me to rewrite them . He liked his stuff, and he liked it .
 Radner was born in Detroit, Michigan, to Jewish parents, Henrietta , a legal secretary, and Herman Radner, a businessman .
 Through her mother, i s Radinee was a second cousin of business executive Steve Ballmer . Through her . mother, she was a . second cousin to Ballmer's business executive, Steve .
 She grew up in Detroit with a nanny, Elizabeth Clementine Gillies, whom she called ‘Dibby’ (and ; on whom she based her famous character Emily Litella), and an older brother, Michael Michael .
 She made her professional acting debut in the 1972 production of Godspell, with future stars including Martin Short and Eugene Levy .
 Henry Ford II resigned from his trustee’s role in a surprise move in December 1976 . Henry Ford I resigned from the role in 1976 . Ford II was a prominent philanthropist in the 1930s .
 Steves' father predicted that his son, at eight years old, would attend Harvard . Steves at Ford Ford was an eight-year-old Swiss immigrant who predicted his son would go to Harvard at age 8 .
 Ballmer is a second cousin of actress and comedian Gilda Radner through his mother . Through his mother, Ballmer has been married to Gilda's sister, actress Gilda . Ballmer was born to a daughter and a son .
 Ballmer grew up in the affluent community of Farmington Hills, Michigan . Ballmer was born in an affluent area of Michigan and grew up there .
 Ballmer also lived in Brussels from 1964 to 1967, where he attended the International School of Brussels . Ballmer was also a student at the school in Brussels .
 The Ford Foundation at about this time is thought to have worked with the CIA and East-West Center of Hawaii and Lyndon Baines Johnson to create sleeper agent Barrack Obama Jr. and others for overthrow of various targeted nations .
 Harvard Advocate, Bill Gates, lived down the hall from Bill Gates .
 In 1980 Ballmer dropped out of the Stanford Graduate School of Business to join Microsoft . After briefly trying to write screenplays in Hollywood, Ballmer tried to write a film script .
 His father was of olish and Russian descent Anesthesia and his mother was ScottishIrish, Norwegian, and Icelandic ancestry . His mother was Norwegian, ScottishIrish and Icelandic .
 He was raised in the Bensonhurst and Brighton Beach love Vou 16 Death neighborhoods of Brooklyn .
 Steele was the youngest of six Christian Woman hildren, with five older Sisters . Steele was born into a six-teen-year-old Christian woman .
 Steele appeared in 2005 for an extended period with no explanation . Steele appeared for no explanation during that period .
 Rumors of his death, terminal illness, and other speculations increased until the mystery was dispelled in a 2006 DVD Symphony for the Devil interview .
 Steele’s family members had staged an intervention and insisted i he check into a mental institution . Steele's family members insisted he checked into a . mental institution. Steele was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 Steele had been using cocaine since the age of 35, a decision in which he expressed great regret . Steele said he regrets his decision to use cocaine .
 Steele made light of his incarceration by wearing a prison uniform on stage during live performances . Steele wore the uniform during his performances .
 Steele stated in a 2003 interview that he had bipolar disorder, and linked his mood swings to the types of songs he wrote . Steele stated that he has bipolar disorder .
 He also received occasional psychiatric treatment for depressive episodes . He was also treated for depression .
 "After going through a midlife crisis and having many things change very quickly, it made me realize my mortality," he says . "I realized my mortality. But after going through ... I'm not afraid to say goodbye to my life," he said .
 When you think about death, you start to think about what’s after it. And when you start thinking about death. You start to look at what's after it, he says . He says, "When you think of death, it's not easy to think of what
 Sympathy is a feeling of pity or sense of compassion when you feel bad for someone else who’s going through something hard . And what do they need/ Need | Request of help .
 Salles: ‘ you can see that antipathy is a feeling against someone or ‘something.’ If you look at the Greek roots 5 of this oid antiand .
 In general, antipathies are feelings that are kept at least somewhat vunder wraps and are not out in the open . David Howell Petraeu is a retired United States Army general and public official . He is married to Andrea Parhamovich .
 Powell has pronounced his name /'kovlin/ since childhood, after the World War II B-17 flyer Colin P Kelly Jr. Despite his parents’ pronunciation of his name as /'kolin/, Powell has always pronounced it as 'kovlin'
 On October 21, 2021, she was fatally wounded in a shooting incident during production on the set of the film Rust . She was killed in the shooting .
 She or her family may have knowledge of Cold War era agricultural programs in enetics before the USSR fell . She may also be able to provide information about Cold War agricultural programs .
 Hutchins was born in Horodets, Zhytomyr Oblast, but grew up in Murmansk, on a Soviet military base in the Arctic . It was during the Cold War a plane was shot down by he Russians during the war . Hutchins grew up on a
 On 21 October 2021, Hutchins was working in Santa Fe, New Mexico, as director i of photography on the set of Rust, when actor Alec Baldwin discharged a prop gun, injuring her and director Joel Souza . Hutchins and Souza were working on a set of the film
 e Mitre Corp. runs some of the United States government’s most hush-hush science and tech labs . Before being found in a landfill and his breifacse having been stolen he was walking between two buildings .
 Wheeler’s remains were interred at Arlington National Cemetery with full military honors on April 29, 2011 . Wheeler was a large chemical and atomic energy contractor .
 He was consultant to acting Under Secretary of Defense for i Acquisition, Technology and Logistics from 2001 to 2005 . Special assistant to the ; Secretary of the Air Force from 2005 to 2008 .
 Ramsey-Baker lived with substantial hearing loss for many years . She had her hearing completely restored at age 35, with an early fenestration operation .
 By 1972, the DRF was funding research on cochlear implants, with later grants in s single channel to multi-channel implants . The DRF also funded research on speech perception among users, and implants in children .
 Unlike birds and reptiles, humans and other mammals are normally unable to regrow the cells of the inner ear that convert sound into neural signals when those cells are damaged by age or disease . The inner ear cells convert sound to neural signals in the brain when damaged .
 Incelebration of its 50th Anniversary, the DRF rang the opening bell at the New York-based Restoration Project . The DRF is celebrating the 50th anniversary of the project .
 Victoria Lynn Morgan was the mistress of Alfred S Bloomingdale, heir to the Bloomingdale's department store fortune . Vicki Morgan retrieved from Wikipedia .
 She found work as an usher at Grauman’s Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles .
 Walter Leonard Gibbs #68930 was suspended, failed to pay fees anais76 [Admit Sate Barof Calon] Not Eligible to Practice Law Address: 2705 San Carlos Dr, Walnut Creek, CA 94598
 From 1959 to 1961, he served as a flight surgeon in the U.S. Navy stationed at the Keflavik naval base in Iceland . Following completion in 1966 he returned to Atlanta and entered practice with his father .
 The passengers were given the option of leaving the aircraft but McDonald remained on the plane, catching up on his sleep . McDonald was a U.S. Representative for Michigan’s 10th congressional district .
 In the background is a snow replica of a cae. F, Kennedy while completing his V-12 studies at Bates College . The photo was taken in the background of a replica of the ship .
 Michaele and Tareq Salahi crash a White House dinner for Barrack Obama Jr. C. C . C.
 The Wichita Eagle and Kansas City Star’s Jonathan Shorman sat down with Secretary of State Mike Pompeo in Wichita on October 24, 2019 . Pore fuels speculation with cash infusion into new PAC with Wichita ties .
 Former Secretary of State Mike Pompeo’s dormant U.S. House campaign fund has donated to a newly formed political action committee that uses the same Kansasbased bank and bears the name of his new political slogan .
 During late 1956 and 1957 he served in South Korea first as Regimental Executive Officer and later as Commanding Officer, 1st Battalion, 19th Infantry Regiment .
 Freeh, a native of North Bergen, graduated from St. Louis University, New Jersey . Freeh is a former FBI director who served in the 1990s .
 One month after the explosion, chemists at the FBI crime laboratory in | i ; Washington found traces of PETN, an explosive component of bombs and surface‘ to-air missiles . PETN is a component of explosives and surface-to-air missile missiles .
 DNA extracted from hair found in Scott Peterson’s boat found in San Francisco Bay, a_chool.com . Scott Peterson's attempt to prove he met a pregnant pretty girl met in high . wife .
 Laci’s older brother, judge ruled Monday. Laci Rocha, was born in 1971 . Laci's older brother Laci, judge rules Monday. Judge ruled Laci was not a victim of sexual assault .
 Mitochondrial DNA has rarely been used as evidence in California court cases and it can’t provide a definitive match . Sharon and he children moved to odesto, though the children isited the dairy farm on dairy farm .
 The ruling came in the fourth week of the preliminary hearing to determine whether there’s ; | murder trial . Ron rantski, who helped raise Laci and Brent from the time ;| enough evidence against Peterson to warrant a eta a Sharon Laci was two years old
 While Scott finished his senior year, Laci took a job in nearby Prunedale . Scott and Laci are currently in their senior year of college .
 Peterson graduated with a Bachelor of Science degree in ; agricultural business in June 1998 . Peterson graduated from the University of Iowa in 1998 .
 Frey, now 46-years-old, has gone on to return to a somewhat normal life following the Scott Peterson trial . Frey is now 46 years-old .
 Euphoria Day Spa in California went bankrupt sometime in 2015 . She formerly owned a day spa in California, but Euphoria went bankrupt .
 Former FBI Director Freeh worked for a couple of Ukrainian oligarchs who fled to Russia when Yanukovych was deposed . Patrick @TrickFreee Retweeted FactFreeh @FactFreeon twitter .
 Psone Believe Marina Abramovic Is the Satanic Ringleader of a Global Political Conspiracy . Abramovic is the Satanic leader of a global political conspiracy .
 By the end of the film, though, Abramovic will serve as a much bigger symbol . Abramovic is a much larger symbol in the film .
 V Corps fought in the Battle of the Bulge, captured Leipzig, captured Torgau, and liberated Plzen by May 1945 . V Corps made first contact with the Red Army at Tormau and made contact with Red Army in Germany . After liberating Luxembourg, V Corps
 We had shared stories of growing up as Army kids, from my time playing in the German woods to her great dislike of cockroaches in El Paso, Texas . We were both Army kids .
 He helped lead the Ist Armored Division to victory in the Persian Gulf War as Assistant Division Commander . At the time of his death, he was the Deputy Commanding General for United States Army V Corps .
 There is less evidence against 90% of the people on death row than these troopers have brought forth relative to Bill Clinton and his activities .
 After two hi years, he was reassigned as the G2 Operations 1S Officer, 9"" Infantry Division . After two years of service, he has been reassigned to G2 .
 He left Fort Lewis in 1980 for a one year tour in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, where he was the Team Chief assigned to instruct Saudi officers in S2 functions . At the firm of Clinton supporter and friend Dan Lasater .
 Federal agents killed in the Branch Davidian raid in Waco were former Clinton bodyguards .
 Attorney Paul Wilcher died of undetermined causes three weeks after submitting a 99 page affidavit to Attorney General Janet Reno . Wilcher investigated drug and gun running out of Mena, Arkansas and links to the Branch Davidians .
 Four Marine presidential crewmen who escorted Clinton on the flight to the Carrier Roosevelt, Maj. Maj. Gen. John McCain, the commander of the Marine Corps, are among the crewmen aboard the plane .
 Opps sociate and legal council to the President allegedly committed suicide, using a non-traceable hand gun, built from parts of several guns . The President allegedly used the gun to commit suicide . Opps .
 President Clinton names Leon E Panetta as White House Chief of Staff . Panetta replaces Mack McLarty with Office of Management and Budget Director .
 David R Gergen brought in as counselor to shore up a faltering White House in May 1993 . Gergen is being shifted to a foreign policy role as senior adviser to Clinton and Christopher .
 Walker posed as a prospective renter, went up to the 22nd floor of a luxury apartment building in Arlington, Va., and jumped to his death . Walker's suicide was the first of its kind .
 Murder in the First Degree, An Interim Report on the Death of Commerce Secretary Ron Brown and 34 Other United States Citizens, Concluding Report Date Contingent Upon Hearings in House Committee on National Security and Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs . Private Report by Nicholas A Guarino
 In a couple of hours he will be a rich man, U.S. operatives told him, if he can quietly send IFOR-21 into Sveti Ivan (St.Ivan) In a few hours, the two American operatives said, if they could do so,
 Henry had been stabbed in the back and Ives had his skull crushed, leading to the conclusion that the “wounds were so clearly evident, the Malak ruling was no simple mistake” i ' The boys were believed to have stumbled upon a huge drug transaction at Mena
 Three minutes after takeoff from Quantico, at 12:46 i pm, May 19, 1993, their copter crashed into a wooded area .
 The establishment approved version of Admiral Boorda’s suicide is that he could not face being asked about the decorations he had worn and that suicide was the only way out . According to Eustace Mullins, . The establishment . approved version is that . he could . not
 Attempts to quash the investigation were thwarted by Pennsylvania ‘ Representative William F Klinger, Jr., Chairman of the House Government Reform . and Oversight Committee, who revealed incriminating documents .
 How ironic that they accuse Trump of Russia involvement when it was they who conspired with Russia to produce a polished liar and charlatan to unleash on an unsuspecting and naive nation . Andi and Andi talk late into the night .
 James Joseph "Whitey" Bulger Jr. was an American organized crime boss and FBI informant . He led the Winter Hill Gang in Somerville, Massachusetts, a city northwest of Boston .
 Donald W Washington was nominated by President Donald J Trump to lead the U.S. Marshals Service on Oct 2, 2018 . Amount distributed to victims of crime and claimants in fiscal 2017 $144. million . Amount shared with participating state and local law enforcement agencies in fiscal 2018 $144
 Derrick Driscoll received approval as United States Marshals Service acting deputy director by Attorney General William Barr April 23 . USMS Director Donald Washington announced USMS Acting Deputy Director Cae Driscolls as USMS Deputy Director .
 Neocons, Judeo Christian Religious loyalists to the Western side of the Roman Empire and its Middle East Jerusalem and African goals . Neocontons, Neoconists, are loyalists .
 Rupurt Murdoch is named by some who use CIA encoding of Illuminati references and Rogere Allies of Fox News . Murdoch was unusually outed in a NOV 18 settled law suit and died from a head blow hemorrhage a short time later . Murdoch died of a short-term
 Author of “The Jihad at the Ballot Box” a book examining Obama’s relationship with radical Islam . Author: ‘I’m not surprised that Obama has a history of radical Islam in America .
 Accountant & sub-contractor for the CIA, was related to Barry Seal . He had PIN to bank account of $1.46 million set up for Seal, Mena, Arkansas, airport drug smuggling case .
 His brother-in-law believed the CIA or Mossad was involved in his death . Ian Stuart Spiro (Born 14 DECEMBER 1946) #MKULTRA Aug4 1945 .
 Many linked to the case died before their testimony could come before a Grand Jury . Many of the victims died before they could testify before a grand jury .
 On the morning of July 21, her body was found in her bedroom with multiple stab wounds and extensive burns . She was stabbed multiple times and burned to death in the bedroom .
 Roger Stone Suggests Gas Explosion at Florida Warehouse was ‘Drone Strike’ Targeting Him . Stone and right-wing radio personality Matthew Erich “Mancow” Muller posted a video this week baselessly speculating that Stone had been targeted by a drone strike
 He was pardoned by the former president in December after he was sentenced to 40 months in prison in 2020 for lying to Congress and threatening a witness in the investigation into Russia’s meddling in the 2016 election .
 Marco McMillian's family says he was beaten and burned . The openly gay candidate's body was found dumped on a riverbank last week . A congressman has called for an FBI probe into the death .
 Albert Peterson shot dead his wife and two sons hours after going to church . He dreaded the thought of Obama winning the election, a family friend reveals . Peterson shot his family in Mississippi on Tuesday .
 Dawn Sylvia-Stasiewicz was an American dog trainer . She died January 12, 2011, in Warrenton, VA . She was a trained dog trainer and owner .
 Dawn Sylvia-Stasiewicz trained dogs such as Bo, President Barack Obama's dog and late senator Edward Kennedy's three dogs .
 In March 2019, President Donald Trump said he would nominate Liu to become U.S. Associate Attorney General . She withdrew her name from consideration later that month because the Republican-controlled Senate Judiciary Committee objected to her nomination .
 Prince Cheikh Selim is the oldest son of HRH Prince . Chemor, revered to be the honorary founder of the modern Royal House of Ghassan . He is the son of Prince .
 International Award was recognized and enforced by the Los Angeles Superior Court in February 2012 . Even being already “res judicata” (matter already judged not subject to appeal) by Brazilian Law, the award was recognized by the LA Superior Court .
 A cargo of 2,750 tonnes of ammonium nitrate had been stored in a warehouse without proper safety measures for the previous six years . The cargo was confiscated by the Lebanese authorities from the abandoned ship MV Rhosus .
 In 1936, Spencer Jr. was made a Knight of the Order of the Crown of Italy by Benito Mussolini Il Duce, Ruling Sovereign .
 I was the captain of the Lebanese football team and the president of Lebanese Football federation . I was also president of Lebanon's football federation and the Lebanese Football Federation .
 Betty’s other brother, Lee Williams, had been beaten severely and hospitalized the AUGUST before . Currie was born in Edwards, Mississippi and moved to Waukegan, ‘ Illinois as a child .
 After leaving high school, she worked in the clerical field at the Naval Station Great Lakes in Illinois . She worked at the Great Lakes Naval Station .
 Currie’s rise in the government bureaucracy began when Joseph Blatchford became Peace Corps Director in 1969 and needed a new secretary . Currie later moved to Washington, DC and ' worked at the Navy Department, the Postal Service, the Peace Corps, and the Department of Health
 Hillary Clinton worked with James Carville in the famous ‘War Room’ in Little Rock, Arkansas . John Podesta encouraged her to return in 1984 to run offices for Mondale and then again for the 1988 Dukakis Presidential campaigns .
 Funeral arrangements were made through the Carter-Taylor-Williams Mortuary and buried in Meadowlawn Memorial Park in San Antonio .
 Virginia State Police have concluded that Theodore R Williams Jr. did not intend to commit suicide when he ran onto Interstate 95 north of Richmond after a traffic accident and was struck and killed by a tractor-trailer .
 Williams, a 52-year-old building mechanic for the Postal Service, died Dec., ; weeks before Curly was called before a federal grand jury investigating former White House intern Monica S Lewinsky .
 Lance HerNDON gets the Justice Scalia Ploy . Clinton Appointee was found BLUDGEONED to DEATH in his bed .
 Lance Herndon, 41, appeared to have died in his Atlanta mansion’s bedroom, under the bedcovers, from a blow to the head . A prominent entrepreneur who received a presidential appointment in 1995 received a death warrant .
 He later concentrated on the hotel industry, building the Helmsley Palace Hotel in New York City .
 Both crashes occurred about 60 miles apart within 2 1/2 hours of each other . Both crashes are under investigation .
 Pope left his plane for repair i and rented another plane, Pope said . Pope said he rented a plane at the airport for repair and left it for repair .
 Elbridge Colby’s professional pursuits focused less on strictly military activities and more on intellectual and scholarly contributions to military and literary subjects . Colby was a career officer .
 William Colby had a peripatetic upbringing before attending i public high school in Burlington, Vermont . Colby's father was an Army officer who served in Afghanistan .
 i Colby spent much of the 1950s based in Rome, under cover as a State 1 Department officer . He led the Agency’s covert political operations 1 Campaign to support anti-Communist parties .
 CIA tasked with supporting the » government of Ngo Dinh Diem . Colby established a relationship with President A Diem’s family and with Ng6 Dinh Nhu, the president's brother .
 F. Colby’s death triggered conspiracy theories that his death was due to foul play . F Colby was found dead at the scene of a car crash in October 2012 .
 After work on November 13, Silkwood went to a union meeting before heading home in her white Honda . Silkwood was born February 19, 1946, Longview, Texas, and died in 1983 .
 She is survived by her daughters, Rosemary Smith and husband, Bob of Mont Belview and Linda Vincent of Port Neches . Her brother, Jimmy Biggs and wife, Thelma of Hobbs, New Mexico; 8 grandchildren; and several greatgrandchildren .
 Testifies there were 48 stab wounds to the front and back (15 to the back alone from the neck to lower pelvic bone) and a single gunshot wound to the chest . Testifies to the jury that he was stabbed 48 times, including 15 times to the neck .
 Testifies there were 16 wounds to the neck and face alone alone and 5 deep cuts to the . neck, with 2 particularly deep . sides . Testifies he was left with 16 wounds, including 5 deep . cuts to his neck .
 Fakler had mutilating stab wounds to his face, which were not present in the other victims . That and the fact that he was stabbed to the face, he was not the other victim .
 Guyger said she entered the apartment believing it was her own and that she shot Jean believing he was a burglar . Guyger: "I entered the home thinking it was my own and I shot him in the face"
 In April 2008, Rausing and his wife were arrested on drugs charges . Mrs Rausing allegedly tried to take small amounts of crack cocaine and heroin into the U.S. embassy in London .
 They were charged with possession of a large amount of cocaine and smaller quantities of crack, heroin and cannabis after a Scotland Yard investigation . Scotland Yard officers say they were found to be in possession of crack and heroin .
 He married Julia Delves Broughton in June 2014 . She is the sister of Isabella Blow and the daughter of Sir Evelyn Delves . He married her in June last year and she is now a British monarch .
 As the muse of hat designer Philip Treacy, she is credited with discovering the models Stella Tennant and Sophie Dahl . She is also credited with propelling the career of fashion designer Alexander McQueen .
 A year later, she left the Art History programme at Columbia, moved to Texas, and worked for Guy Laroche . A year after she left Columbia, she worked in Texas . She also worked in New York and New York .
 In 1981 she married her first husband, Nicholas Taylor . She was introduced to the fashion director of the United States edition of Vogue, Anna Wintour . In 1981, she married Taylor .
 Blow was hired initially as Wintour’s assistant, but it was not long before she was assisting André Leon Talley, as of 2008 U.S. Vogue editor-atlarge . Blow was also hired as the assistant of Vogue Editor-at-large
 Blow brokered the deal in which Gucci purchased McQueen’s label, according to a 2002 interview with Tamsin Blanchard . Blow was reportedly behind the purchase of McQueen's label .
 Detmar Blow went on to have an affair with Stephanie Theobald, the society editor of British Harper’s Bazaar, while his estranged wife entered into a liaison with a gondolier she met in Venice .
 Blow was diagnosed with bipolar disorder and began undergoing electroshock therapy during the couple’s separation . Blow has since been diagnosed with the disorder and is undergoing treatment .
 During this period she also had an affair with Matthew Mellon . After an eighteen-month separation, Isabella and Detmar Blow were reconciled .
 Depressed over her waning celebrity status and cancer diagnosis, Blow began telling friends that she was suicidal . Blow was diagnosed with cancer and told friends she was depressed .
 Later that year, Blow again attempted suicide by jumping from the Hammersmith Flyover, which resulted in her breaking both ankles . Blow broke both ankles when she jumped from the flyover .
 Blow made several more suicide attempts in 2007, by driving her car into the rear of a lorry, attempting to obtain horse tranquilizers, trying to drown herself in a lake and by overdosing while on a beach in India . Blow attempted to kill herself in 2007 by driving into the
 Erik was born on November 27, 1970, in Gloucester Township, New Jersey . Kitty quit her teaching job after Lyle was born, and the family moved to New Jersey in 1970 . The Day of the Murder Kitty was released on November 28, 2013 .
 Shane Todd’s girlfriend, Shirley Sarmiento, expected to hear from him on Friday or Saturday, but he did not respond to her messages . Todd's girlfriend expected to see Todd on Saturday or Sunday but he didn't respond .
 Todd's body was found hanging from a bathroom door, police say . Todd's wife found the door unlocked and entered the room to find her husband's body hanging from the door . Todd was found dead in the bathroom .
 Sarmiento then contacted Todd’s family in the United States to alert them to his death . Todd's family was in the U.S. when he was killed .
 Police say Todd “drilled holes into his bathroom wall, bolted in a pulley, then slipped a black strap through the pulley and wrapped it around the toilet several times” Todd was found dead at the scene of the attack .
 The location of the toilet was also not where the police report indicated it was . Police report did not indicate the location of a toilet in the toilet .
 There were no signs of an investigation at the scene; police had not put up crime scene tape or dusted for fingerprints . Furthermore, there were not signs of a crime scene investigation .
 He was apparently in the middle of trying to sell his furniture, and had been writing out price tags . He was also apparently writing out furniture .
 His airline ticket back to the U.S. was on the table, but his laptop and phone had been taken away by the police . The police had taken his laptop, phone and phone away from him, he said .
 Police found several suicide notes allegedly left by Todd Todd . Family and girlfriend said they did not seem to be Todd's writing . Todd's family and girlfriend told the Financial Times that the notes were not Todd's handwriting .
 In one note, he apologized for being a burden to his family, but his mother said he had never been a burden . He had excelled at everything, she said . In the note, she wrote: "He has excelled"
 David Camp, a criminologist from Illinois, analyzed the suicide note side by side with a collection of Todd’s other writings . Camp said he held the opinion that the note found by the police was not written by Todd .
 Camp concluded that it wasn't written by an American and wasn’t typical of a suicide . He felt the note was detached and unemotional, and did not match up with Todd’s personality .
 Todd’s family found bruises on his hands and a bump on his forehead, neither of which was mentioned in the autopsy report . Todd's family says they found bruises in his hands, a bump in his forehead .
 Suspecting foul play, Shane's family asked the mortuary to photograph Shane’s body before burial, and send the photos to Edward Adelstein, a county-level deputy medical examiner .
 Todd’s wounds did not support the suicide hypothesis, Adelstein said . Todd's wounds were not consistent with the suicide theory . Todd was found dead at the scene of the shooting . Todd is believed to have committed suicide .
 The original pathologist in Singapore dismissed Adelstein’s conclusions, stating that he had not seen the body and had mistaken the post-mortem pooling of blood in the hands for bruises . The original autopsy was conducted in Singapore .
 She served in the Mississippi House of Representatives, from Diamondhead, Mississippi, as a Republican from 2004 to 2013 .
 Upshaw was found dead in the home of former Mississippi State Representative Clint Rotenberry in Mendenhall, Mississippi on March 24, 2013 . Upshaw's body was found in his home on March 25 .
 Clinton Grice Rotenberry Jr. was a former American politician and businessman . He was a member of the Republican Party of the United States . Rotenberries was elected to office in 1964 . He served as a senator from New York City .
 Rotenberry served in the Mississippi House of Representatives from 19922007. He served as a member of the Mississippi legislature . He was elected to the state legislature in 2000 .
 Agenda 21 is a comprehensive plan of action to be taken globally, nationally and locally by organizations of the United Nations System, Governments, and Major Groups . Agenda 21 aims to take action in every area in which human impacts on the environment . The United Nations is committed to taking action globally,
 Commission on Sustainable Development was created in December 1992 to ensure effective follow-up of UNCED . UNCED was created to monitor and report on implementation of the agreements at the local, national, regional and international levels .
 It was agreed that a five year review of Earth Summit progress would be made in 1997 by the United Nations General Assembly in special session .
 The full implementation of Agenda 21 was strongly reaffirmed at the World Summit on Sustainable Development held in Johannesburg, South Africa from 26 August to 4 September 2002 . Agenda 21 and the Programme for Further Implementation of Agenda-21 and the Commitments to the Rio principles, were strongly .
 Martin Charles Scorsese was born November 17, 1942 . Jean-Marc Vallée was hired to direct The Young Victoria . He is credited with directing the period drama .
 The film is based on the early life and reign of Queen Victoria, and her marriage to Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha . Written by Julian Fellowes, the film is set to be released in October .
 Julian Alexander Kitchener-Fellowes, Baron Fellowes of West Stafford DL (born 17 August 1949) is an English actor, novelist, film director and screenwriter . He was 58; Heart Attack Believed To Be The Cause of the Cause .
 J Epstein VI Foundation was based in the Virgin Islands, where Epstein owned a private island . The “VI” stands for Virgin Islands where the foundation was based, and Epstein owned private island there .
 The foundation’s board included Cecile de Jongh, wife of the former Governor of the U.S. Virgin Islands . The foundation is based in New York City, New Jersey .
 John Percy de Jongh, Jr. was born on November 13, 1957 and was raised on St. Paul's Island . He was born in 1957 .
 John Percy de Jongh, Jr. is the seventh elected Governor of the United States . He graduated from Catholic Central High School in Detroit and received a Bachelor of Arts degree in Economics .
 De n Jongh has served on the boards of business and philanthropic organizations . He has been involved in community development, commercial banking, and elected to public office .
 Jeffrey Epstein case threatens to drag Virgin Islands elite into the muck . Jeffrey Epstein has been accused of sexual assault in the U.S. Virgin Islands .
 The U.S. Virgin Islands is a co-defendant in the case . The island's governor's office seemed to be painting some of the island’s most prominent figures as a target .
 Social media and the island’s legal community erupted with speculation that the powerful officials might get dragged into the mire created by Epstein's criminal enterprise and human trafficking ring . The island's legal community erupts with speculation about the officials .
 USVI Attomey General Denise George says there's no evidence yet that might suggest broader responsibility . At issue is Southern Trust, a purported data-mining company that Epstein incorporated in the USVI in 2011 .
 Elisabeth Jenny JEANNE Maxwell was a French-born researcher of the Holocaust . She established the journal Holocaust and Genocide Studies in 1987 .
 She was married to publishing tycoon Robert Maxwell from 1945 until his death in 1991 . Maxwell's family soon came under scrutiny for his business dealings, especially his responsibility for the Mirror Group pension scandal .
 In September 1944, after the Liberation of Paris, she met Czechoslovakian-born British Army Captain Robert Maxwell, while working as an interpreter for the ; Welcome Committee, which introduced French people to allied officers . The couple married on 15 March 1945 .
 She then worked as his secretary and assistant in ' London as he established his publishing empire . She worked with him as he set up publishing empire in London .
 All of Maxwell's children were delivered by her sister Yvonne, a gynecologist, in Maisons' Laffitte, France .
 Founded in 1998 1 by Dr Edward Kessler MBE and the Revd Professor Martin Forward in central Cambridge . Study of interfaith relations between Jews, Christians and Muslims .
 The CoC does not have policy-making powers and serves solely as an advisory institution to the U.S. and other governments . The CoC is a non-policy-making institution .
 No direct evidence has yet emerged to tie Clinton to the group, although no direct evidence yet emerged . Clinton has been accused of being involved in the group .
 Lord James has come to the conclusion about 1 Foundation X, “I think there may have been a massive piece of money laundering committed by a major government which ought to know better.”
 The second alternative is that a major American department has gone rogue on it because it has been wound up and has created a ql ; structure out of which they are seeking to get at least 50 billion Euros as a payoff . The other alternative would be that the U.S. department
 CIA dosed prostitutes with LSD and 'watched them have sex behind mirrors' CIA watched prostitutes have sex with mirrors, says CIA .
 United States intelligence recruitment of over 1600 Nazi ; €ientists into U.S. military intelligence . Over 1600 Nazis were recruited into the United States military .
 The policies of abuse 4f/S/UK MILITARY INTELLIGENCE ASTROTURFING ciology and the weaponization of public psychology, including military . In the Smedinghoff sanction, Homeland Director Janet Naps Napolitano knew of this operation
 Napolitano is often in the dark about operations being run in the high profile, and that 1 includes the murder of Hugo Chavez . The U.S. military has been involved in the death of Chavez .
 Children: Maya Holder, Brooke Holder, Eric Holder . Vivian Malone Jones uncle Henry in upcoming 90-minute PB ycumentary Children .
 Ivy HeteroInflexible I believe overtly faked warrants on me, by William Ruiz and Jim Volcelka, are what Jen Moore was murdered over . I believe they are what she was killed over, and I believe she was murdered .
 Vincent R < Stewart is a Jamaican American lieutenant general in the United States Marine Corps . He is currently serving as Deputy Commander at United States Cyber Command .
 Prosecutors spent too much time in their offices and the courthouse, and not enough y time in the community, says Ronald C Machen . Machen told his future boss in a job interview that they needed to have a regular presence throughout the District .
 My goal is to represent all community forums. meetings in opel says . meetings in the District's new United States ailomey. meetings .
 In fact he was born as part of a Windsor FBI NSA DARPA plan on November 18 1961 at Daniel Freeman Memorial Hospital Manhattan Beach in the Manhattan Project .
 August 4 1962 they were staging a birthday party for him with Marilyn Monroe and Malcom X . Marilyn Monroe died that day .
 Glenn Allen Youngkin is an American businessman and politician . He is the governorelect of Virginia . Youngkin was a member of the Trapp Family Singers .
 QinetiQ officer responsible to co-sign all contracts entered into by the company . Among other obligations to obey the Queen, Youngkin was duty bound to follow British Official Secrets Act .
 The QinetiQ Articles of Association affirm that Trapp Family Singers Carol Of The Drum Youngkin was the company ee ne secretary and keeper of the seal . Youngkin is a member of the Trapp family Singers .
 Petraeus has repeatedly stated that he i has no plans to run for elected office . Petraeus has said he has no intention of running for elected political office .
 McChrystal as commanding general of ' International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, technically a step down ' from his position as Commander of United States Central Command . U.S. Central Command oversees military efforts in Afghanistan .
 On June 30, 2011, Petraeus was unanimously confirmed as the Director of the CIA by the United States Senate 94-0 . Petraeus was confirmed unanimously by the U.S. Senate in 2011 .
 Prince Edward of Wales becomes King Edward VIII, denounces the Nazis, and resigns as King of England to become Duke and husband of Ductchess of Windsor, Maryland USA resident Wallis Simpson .
 Georg worked on several endeavors including writing his WWI memoir, lecturing, and exploring some engineering ideas .
 Williamson Grea Grea 1938, Trapp Family Choir . “i took some time to land oe a name for the group.”
 Earl Winfield Spencer Jr. was the first commanding officer of Naval Air Station San Diego . Festus Gainey was a pioneering pilot who served in the Navy .
 She was the former Miriam Ham, the daughter of George and Katie Anastasia (née Eagels) Ham of Portland, Oregon . She was born to Katie and Miriam, an American woman who died in 2008 .
 Theodore L Gunderson was a Federal Bureau of Investigation Special Agent In Charge and head of the Los Angeles FBI, author, and conspiracy theorist . Gunderson: Big Oil, Big Great Leap Forward Pharma .. ; and Communist GDP Big Money have caused famine and caused famine .
 He would later recollect he had first observed Colette ‘walking down the hallway with her best friend” and that, although he was attracted to both girls, he found Colette more attractive . He would recollect that he had observed her ‘walking down the hall
 The two formed a brief romantic relationship in the ninth grade . MacDonald recollects they fell in love while holding hands on a balcony while watching the movie A Summer Place at the Rialto Theatre .
 Theodore L Gunderson (7 November 1928 31 July 2011) was a Federal Bureau of Investigation Special Agent In Charge and head of the Los Angeles FBI . Gunderson was the author of the best-selling book How to Locate Anyone Anywhere Without Leaving Home and Santa Monica private attorney .
 Illuminati, 2,000 highly placed great social leaders use monetary and sex bribery in social controll adhesion of movement . Once entrapped patsys are slaves at risk of being exposed by the Illuminati and thus are blackmail slaves of Illuminati .
 In 1786 Barvarians get rid of Illuminati, not Audubon and USA forming in 1800 following 1776 . USA formed in 1800 after 1776 following the death of the Illuminati in 1786 .
 Craig Spence was to demonstrate how to hack a pacemaker . He was found dead in San Francisco days before he was due to give a demonstration .
 Quote retrieved from My Experiences With A Drug Kingpin and copied or modified to here eles . Retired Brig. Gen. John Sutter was a drug kingpin in the 1980s .
 The Colombian drug lord had many friends within both the Medellin and Cali cartels . He had friends with both the Cali and Medellina cartels, and had friends in both of the cartels .
 Bowen and others became disenchanted with the CIA involvement with drugs . They wanted to stop the practice of bringing them into America . Bowen wanted to end the CIA's involvement in bringing them in .
 Many had been longtime members of the Nazi party and the Gestapo . Many had conducted experiments on humans al concentration Comps and commited other war crimes . Many of the Nazis had done experiments .
 The Woolsey Fire was a destructive wildfire that burned in Los Angeles and Ventura Counties of the United States state of California . Aa scientists ended the fire after a scientists ended it .
 It was one of several fires in California that ignited on the same day . The fires are one of many that ignited in California .
 Jones’s first job was to study ‘new German weapons’, real or potential . Possible work with John Trump, brother of Donald John Trump . Beam guidance Jones' first job as a weapons expert was to look at new weapons .
 Aldrich Hazen “Rick” Ames is a former Central Intelligence Agency officer tured KGB double agent . Ames was convicted of espionage in 1994 .
 Hall was appointed in February 2011 by Governor Rick Perry, and was replaced in February 2017 . Hall was replaced by Governor Perry in February 2016 .
 President George W Bush Preceded by Alexander Vershbow . Succeeded by John Beyrle . In office June 4, 2001 March 2, 2005 . November 8, 2005 May 13, 2008 President George Bush .
 For the Egyptian government, economic aid promised to serve as an important crutch . For the government, it is eager to take rapid strides toward ' land, and a meager reserve of foreign exchange .
 For American policymakers, economic assistance appeared to be an ideal means of developing American influence in Egypt . For U.S. policymakers, it was an ideal use of economic assistance to develop American influence there .
 Few aid relationships in the last three decades can match the drama and significance i of the U.S.-Egyptian experience . Few aid relations in the past three decades have been as close as this one .
 It follows, appointing Mueller “Special Counsel” in a case where Western liberal democracies’ intelligence agencies are implicated is brilliantly cynical, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: The appointment of Mueller as Special Counsel is "brilliant cynical"
 Homeland Security to Grant Millions to Groups to Combat White Supremacists and Other Extremists . Homeland Security’s new Targeted Violence and Terrorism Prevention program . announced $10 million in grants in recent weeks to several organizations dedicated to stopping white supremacist and far-right violence .
 I always get death threats when I go to libraries or read books on science, study law, etc., , as was true then twenty years ago . In answer to my father’s question, I said: "In answer to his father's question I always gets death threats"
 Now it is time a court heard why, y and why I was stranded at the time . Now a court must hear why I had to be stranded in the early hours .
 The intimidation, the lies, the false police reports filed against me, the violations of all : the FIOA laws, all this fucking goddanm bullshit will end . The intimidation and the lies will end. The intimidation . will end, the intimidation, lies, and the false
 A Slightly Gothic Interplanetary Tale is a space opera novel by [As Donald Barr, the father of CIAs former U.S. Attorney General William Barr close friend of FBI Director Christopher Wray . Barr is a close friend to FBI Director Chris Wray, who is also a
 Morgan Sidney was the only female member of the oligarchy, with whom he became ' romantically involved' with . Morgan Sidney .
 The bureau tends to use the euphemistic term "white supremacist violence" to denote white supremacist violence . That’s the euphemism used to denote violence .
 i 7 is a paramilitary, counter-terrorism, and special/clandestine ' Op erations specialist, with a focus on international training operations . 1 served as an Operations Officer in six overseas posts . i 7 .
 Analyst, Michael Scheuer, as well as Chief of Station in a hostile Muslim country . Scheuer: "I'm not afraid to go to a hostile country. I'm glad to be here"
 Director of Central Intelligence John McCone in 1962 began creating a new directorate within the CIA . It would bring cutting-edge technology to the nation’s hardest intelligence challenges .
 The statement didn't identify McAfee by name but said he was a 75-year-old U.S. citizen awaiting extradition to his country . The statement said the dead man was a United States citizen waiting extradition .
 Homeland Security must have flexibility and resources to quickly mitigate any potential harm, agency says . Homeland Security has taken steps to address physical threats and cyberthreats .
 This seating arrangement supported the conversational music of composers like Mozart and Mahler . have proof in his hands | am an exploiter of females .
 Placed along my as | am on my way to TMobile. Oh those brave cops are too busy to investigate this. Placed on my as well as my phone .
 My cell phone in use for “k”navigation knowledge map usage to a store, illicit “R” eproductive interests staged against ey will . My phone was used to “navigate knowledge map” usage to store .
 Mere innuendo, less than name calling. refutes the central point . Refutation contradicts contradicts and then backs it up with reasoning and/or supporting evidence. Mere . rebuttal . Criticizes the tone of the writing without Responding to. Responding .
 Paul Graham's Hierarchy of Disagreement lists ad hominem as the second lowest type of argument in a disagreement . Ad hominem is the second-lowest argument in the hierarchy of disagreement .
 Image:Graham's Hierarchy of Disagreement jpg by BUNKO . Modified by Rocket000 hand-coded by uploader; based on en:Image:Graham .
 Sessions previously served as United States Senator from Alabama from 1997 to 2017 . He resigned from the position in order to serve in the Trump administration . Republican, Sessions served as a United States senator from Alabama .
 James Brien Comey Jr. was the 7th Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2013 until his dismissal in LS SS Eee May 2017 .
 Her meeting at a dance club with society osteopath Stephen Ward drew her into fashionable circles . She met her osteopath at an osteopath's dance club in London .
 At the height of the Cold War, she became sexually involved with a married Cabinet minister, John Profumo, as well as a Soviet naval attaché, Yevgeny Ivanov .
 A shooting incident involving a third lover caused the press to investigate her, revealing that her affairs could be threatening national security . The press investigated her affair after it was revealed that she had affairs with a third person .
 Profumo denied any improper conduct but later admitted he had lied . Profumo later admitted that he lied in the House of Commons .
 This incident discredited the Conservative government of Harold Macmillan in 1963, in what became known as the Profumo affair . The Profumo scandal discredited the Conservatives' government of 1963 .
 Keeler was alleged to have been a prostitute, which was not a criminal offence . She was accused of being a prostitute but was not charged with a crime .
 Ward was found guilty of being her pimp, but was not convicted of being Ward's pimp . The trial was instigated after the embarrassment caused to the government . Ward was convicted of not being Ward, but being Ward was the pimp.
 The trial has since been considered a miscarriage of justice and a charade by the establishment to protect itself .
 Baker found her a job as a hostess for the Quorum Club at the Coroll Arms Hotel on Capitol Hill . Baker later found her job as hostess .
 It was a private club, founded by Baker requiring annual membership dues . It was used by lawmakers and other influential men to meet for food, drink, and engage in dalliances with ladies away from press .
 The President of the United States, John F Kennedy, allegedly began an affair with Ellen Rometsch in 1963 . It was during the summer of 1963 that, according to later claims by Baker, the President met 27-year-old Ellen .
 Rometsch had worked in the Quorum Club for about two years before allegedly starting her affair with Kennedy . Rometch had worked at the club for about 2 years before the affair .
 Rometsch had apparently disclosed details of her illicit relations with highly placed government officials that she had met at the club, to a former FBI informant of questionable reliability . Former FBI informant was a former member of the FBI .
 Because she had been born in East Germany and was rumored to have once worked for Walter Ulbricht, the FBI decided to investigate her . She had been rumored to be a member of the criminal gang that organized the murders of the likes of U.S. citizens .
 Attorney General Robert F Kennedy was informed of the planned investigation on July 3, 1963 . Attorney General had been told of the investigation by the Attorney General .
 Rometsch was interviewed by the FBI in 1963 and it was concluded that the security allegations against her were not warranted . The high-level sex contacts were unsubstantiated, she said .
 U.S. State Department could not remove Rometsch without disclosing a specific reason to the West German authorities . It was decided that the information developed by the FBI would be transmitted via liaison to the State Department and then be made available discreetly to West Germany .
 Rometsch was informed by his superiors of the allegations being made against his wife and that he was therefore being recalled back to West Germany in one week .
 Rometsch was expelled from the United States on August 21, 1963 “because of her behavior in Washington’s Washington” behavior which according to media reports threatened to have scandalous overtones reminiscent of the Profumo affair .
 The allegations involving Rometsch and her subsequent removal from the U.S. were brought to the public’s attention through a front page article written by Clark R Mollenhoff in the October 26, 1963, issue of the Des Moines Register .
 Clark Mollenhoff asked President Kennedy at a live televised press conference if he is fulfilling the requirements of his Code of Ethics . A few days later Clark asked him if he had fulfilled his code of ethics requirements .
 FBI, passed along a salacious allegation about Flynn during a meeting with his FBI handler, Stephen Somma, on Aug. 2016 . Flynn's FBI handler passed along the allegation to Flynn, who is accused of lying to the FBI .
 Page and Papadopoulos have identified Halper as the person who has been described in FBI documents as the bureau’s confidential human source for Crossfire Hurricane . Halper is described as the FBI's confidential source for the FBI .
 The Defense Intelligence Agency’s potential interests in me. e DJA has an interest in concealing Obama DNA and Birther dates tied to my family. The defense intelligence agency has a potential interest in covering up Obama DNA . The agency also has a possible interest in hiding Obama DNA
 Office, which played a vital role in creation of ARPANET, the basis for : the future Internet . Office of the Office of Office . Office played a key role in creating ARPanet, the . basis for the Internet .
 DEFENDER and AGILE programs formed the foundation of DARPA sensor, surveillance, and directed energy | ; R&amp;amp;D, particularly in the study of radar, infrared sensing and x-ray/gamma ray detection .
 Arati Prabhakar, Director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency discuss the new research effort in an Open for Questions session . Arati talks about the research effort at the Pentagon .
 U.S. defense company DARPA has been interested in the human » genome for years . The company created 99 percent of the world’s deadly robots . Their interest isn’t purely » for educational purposes .
 "I had just had my fourth child and was just starting to get involved with learning about the NWO online and what their agenda was on earth," says mother-of-four .
 I must tell you that when these crafts enter into this portal from Camp 1 Robinson, and most often from their underground locations, that they . enter slowly into this inter-dimensional space and as they pass through ; this space, they . travel up and out through my body .
 Next to Camp Robinson is Camp Pike, named after Albert Pike, the father of modern freemasonry, * which is Satan’s worldwide occult organization . Camp Pike is named after Pike, a member of the Satan's worldwide occult group, and is located in Camp Robinson .
 Understanding "" wters’ behavior can explain how and why decisions were made by public decision-makers, or by the electorate . Understanding the behavior of the wters can explain why decisions have been made by decision makers or by voters .
 At Pacific Bell Video Services my boss introduced a joke to me I had not hear before . The joke was the first time I had heard a joke I'd heard from a company I worked with .
 Never waist an opportunity for a Narrative, chaning by others acts, changing the context of where i am and what I am . I sought out teens and tots nor me when instead they are planted, planted, normal populuation i sought removed .
 Gangstalkers fake evidence then infiltrate groups I seek to join or were in and lead votes against me on KOMPROMAT hidden from me, a persecution scheme . Gangstalksers fake . Then infiltrate groups he seeks to join, or join, groups he sought to join
 I am convinced not only am a targeted individual but I was radiologically attacked in my midsection imprisonment. I was ... a target, I'm convinced,’s a target and I was radarically attacked in my midsection imprisonment . ‘I was
 Evidence plants on my or former friends property of ours build the gridiron appearance that I DO have despicable interests which make me vulnerable to blackmail . But for the intervening event of them surrounding me, I would not be “following” etc., etc. But for . the intervening
 Someone other than me will award those who “caught me in the area” (non whites and often those who enfiled the women) my white genetic origins . Someone else will award me the title .
 Ai dhe Tia Marsili, Evelyn Gu Trinitas Nsabimana, Caroline Girgenti .
 This both defames a white and evens the genetic scales, and flips the morally contrasted parties as to who is in the right and who are in the wrong . This is the case of a white person defaming a white, evening the scales .
 This rage impairs their cognition, therefore "" impairing their judgment,’s ‘rage’ is a form of rage . This rage is caused by rage .
 Navin Bhatia framed past employees of theft and fraud and forged documents then made false accusations against an employee that had recently quit to make up lost revenue . Navin K was never charged but has been fired and is no longer with the company .
 Psych Ward Ed has published a book on dyslexia and co-morbidities which may better fall under the cluster of FOXP2 gene expression . Some charismatic intelligent people fall into the diagnostic bucket of say “Aspergers,” “Dyslexia,
 Conversationally AHDH presenting people can be an annoyance to talk to . Conversationally presenting people are often an annoyance . AHDHDH presents people with the disease .
 I rerecorded a team meeting once at Wells Fargo to analyze it and I found I was just simply spacing out on what was said by others, important points, as I was wandering around in my own thoughts and not on point and missing it .
 In particular I missed some good input from Latin American Checkpoint Firewall instructor who I had nothing against but stil missed some of the points she was making .
 Let us Begin with WHO is Stalking me, Why, How and a few other such questions Etiology, again visiting this elsewhere .
 Why blocking the successful and prominent existence of people who share family lineage with Elites and the Elites (or the experiments who created genomic twins experiments) allows no prominent examples of the same genome which also exists in the elites . Why block the existence of those who share . lineage with .
 Non-white activists on one level want high IQ dna, even DNA tied to King Edward VIII, and further, need public appearance of permission for my DNA or else they would face the death penalty for using without my permission, and the death .
 Senate hearings on White SUpremacism, Psychology articles on it, and bills in the 1980s to stop fag bashing, were all behind . Tom Donegan and Mark Weirmess always want psych evals on me .
 Kaine, sponsor of anti-white supremcist legislationm. Kaine, was meeting with Tom Donegan in TOm Donegan's home as Virigina arrested him for FOIA contacts on my web sites behalf .
 In 2017, violent white supremacists brought their hate to Virginia when they marched through the streets of Charlottesville . White supremacists marched through Charlottesville, Virginia, on Saturday .
 “According to Brian Glick, in War at Home, COINTELPRO used a broad array of methods, including:” 1. PsyOps against Goth and Myself. 1. Wetworks Legal and Psychiatric System Harassment. Harassment . Harassment of Goth and
 Gregg Abbot wins Texas in wheelchair, a string of deaths in medicine and bone matrow . Abbot's victory comes amid a series of deaths that have been linked to medicine . He says he is proud of his wheelchair-bound son's success in Texas .
 It is an “anti white supremacist” two armed protection racket . He was si ‘UT he was mov ¢) Out Of 47 though tt is trashed . Pinhole size hole in curtains after maintenence visit fa . After the shov fix the Mac
 Sr ore Dredging is the operation of removing material from one part of the water environment and relocating it to another . The operation is called 'Sr ore dredging' and involves relocating material .
 In defaming an alleged white supremacist a Dregg none white or gay will photograph a white or other woman despicably or catch a racketeer dressed as me doing so . The Law Enforcement, perhaps sometimes sometimes United States Marshalls fighting white supremacist will defame me behind my back as *
 In the chapter Apendix Witnesses there is a list of locations, businesses, etc. which have co-operated with the Protection Racket by placing people who will intone to me what will later become the acts of a protection racket person, who will with identity theft incur a liability of
 This is all fraud including forcing me into SJW services as retarded, homeless, etc., but that mismanagement of my property is wanted by the shelters I am forced into upon the Conspiracy Against My Rights . This is a conspiracy against my rights, but mismanagement is wanted .
 Though paradoxical to Dr Jeckyl Mr Hyde acts are allged to Dr. Jekyll requiring Dr. Jeckyll non existent illness be treated and the damages of Mr Hyde be paid to alleged of Dr. Dr. Hyde victims . Mr Hyde's actions are paradoxical
 If asuspect assaulted an officer, that suspect learned to never assault an officer again. e If the suspect ran away from the officers he knew that he would pay a price once he was caught . e If suspect ran from police, he knew he would be caught .
 Nearly from the first moments of Corpus Christi I found it the worst toilet stain of people and city I ever encountered in all the world . This book is South Texas Federal District Court South Texas .
 At the same time they (while blocking an apartment I appliqued for) suggested their Retarded Person Housing Advocate would become a counselor . I said I refuse retardation services our housing. At the time they suggested their . Retard Person Housing . Advocate would be a counselor and I
 I went to Austin to look for a place but had hotel breakins and finally wallet theft . I was arrested in conflict with cops as I had no ID and no money . I thought they had it but needed me in social services. I thought it was needed by social services .
 During the 2019 hearing I requested Fee Waiver and a Federal Defender be assigned . The hearing will take place in January 2019 .
 Tom Donegan, my brother who assisted Rod Rosentein switch-out my lawyer and tank my sanity defense, says he is proud of his brother's actions . He says he's proud to be able to live with his brother and wife .
 Operation 1A 2B 2A 2GW is a series of descriptive names I have termed for use in describing assaults on me . There are various descriptive names used to describe assaults against me, including Operation Operation 2GW .
 Without permission conservators and blind conservators represent me and they also represent them, and in “fairness” awarded them my genes arbitrating damages on “the playground” of retarded children . Without my permission conservator and blind . conservators . represent me .
 As for Jen Moore, PIzzagate reporter, I think me, “Plagerized by the Special Counsel What” and “Ultimate Betrayal” again I think refering to me as a coopted and persecuted victim . As I was writing law suits Jen
 In NYC this kid was very sick and | did not feel right about sending him home . Jenny Moore stayed one extra night in NYC this week .
 He slept well after releasing so much of is, Hori unit is the place to go . Hori Unit is where the top FBI are blackmailed or involved . The top FBI officials are blackmailing or involved in the case .
 Behind my back 2B (who wrongly put themselves in place to manage my assets) will settle the debt to person victimized who was victimized by the person near me . 2B will pay out the debt .
 When I confront My Hyde I am threatened with mental health detainer for paranoia or physically attacked by them for my hostility towards them and their ‘daughters” The Marshals Service supports communities by transferring certain types of forfeited assets to state, local and nonprofit organizations .
 Marshals Service manages a wide array of assets, including real estate, commercial businesses, cash, financial instruments, vehicles, jewelry, art, antiques, collectibles, vessels and aircraft . Marshals service manages assets, such as real estate .
 Proceeds generated from asset sales are used to operate the program, compensate victims and support law enforcement efforts . Proceeds from asset sale proceeds will be used to pay compensation for victims .
 Classical elements typically refer to water, earth, fire, air, and aether . They were proposed to explain the nature and complexity of all matter in terms of simpler substances . This book Evil as an Element is an attempt to find out who is responsible for evil .
 This book is about perhaps the most important story in human history as Feudalism . Genetic claim for rule has hidden its quirky genetics of FOXP2 so it can claim royal rule despite a trend against feudalism .
 Jen Moore observes from the inside of Free Masonry to us the USA people . This clash of systems makes up the infiltration the USA lives under . Jen Moore says the clash of the systems is part of the infiltration .
 Marilyn Monroe has one foot in the Rat Pack with Frank SInatra, Peter Lawford, Anrold Schwartzegger and another foot in JFK, RFK, TK, Joe Dimagio . Marilyn Monroe is an all-Catholic Roman Catholic moral center .
 The CIA that LBJ was working with . inthe Queen of England sleeper agents common wealth plot was not one Marilyn would keep secret . Marilyn would not have kept it secret .
 Farrah Fawcet knew the back story of her movies and was killed . Farrah knew her movies before she was killed, Farrah was killed in a car crash .
 Feudal system of Free Masons eroding a person’s reach and power of voice by damaging slander is used to preserve the glean of the throne by eliminating complaints against its princes slandering the complaining party . My family and Jen Moore have been tarted by Free Mason families
 In a Liberal democratic society the press should expose the errors of the Rulers, however, in what is called the Cabal the enormous wealth of Feudalist Free Masons have been able to subdue the press, demonize opposition .
 The quest of this book and my teasers excerpts from it is to pierce the resistance to the real truth with facts which would be and should be accepted by reasonable minds, should . Acceptance of the truth is important to clear minds rather than brainwashed minds be exposed to the truth
 Edward Paul Donegan begins with a quote from Rothkopff . Mr Donegan hopes along with the voice of Ted Gunderson address you .
 Ted Gunderson asserts, as I do, that the NWO poisoned him, and that he was poisoned . The NWO radiologicaly poisened me and from a foodstuffs availability and exercise availability . I believe this is a connected series of events tied to JFK and the
 It is my belief that oil, ‘liquid gold’ is yet a another of Earth’s treasures which like diamonds and the precious metals have been the quest of the greatest of powers to possess . Like diamonds and precious metals, it is believed that oil is yet another of
 DNA and Eugenics and reproductivity may be the most mind altering substance that there is, says Rothkopf . If I were to argue with his points it would only be to say that DNA .
 Eugenics quest and oil quest and Crown Jewels quest may really be all one power struggle . In arguing that point though as I have in this book (once title Genoracketeering) I find that . I find . that . in arguing that . the point is that the
 A place called Gibson Island, close to and perhaps related to the Epstein Brain Foundation island, is a place where oil executives and world elites gathered for the most advanced sciences tied to industrialism .
 It appears that in the quest to rule the world’s riches and protect them from hazards of being buried deep in the earth or possessed by Socialist nations . The genetic super-class of selected groomed leaders could rise to power in places around the world now in turmoil and bring to
 CIA backed Windsor backed genetic experiments as the out-of-wedlock Windsors around the world were watched as in the USA, watched for good ones of various batches to emerge and then could be run for office in a Republic or rule a country where Banana Republic might serve the USAs
 Donald Barr, William Barr, Jeffery Epstein, Alexander Alcosta, Christopher Wray, Robert Swan Mueller III, and perhaps hundreds of Bush family and Arkansas families of politics appear in the NWO . Certain families in an internal power struggle and losing out to #}WETDIV
 The desire to create and groom euginicaly may be inseparable from the quest for power or wealth . Further Reading: The desire for eugicaly may well be linked to the search for power .
 Many of our world wars come from the unlegislated ethics of genomics, says Dr. John Defterios . They go together, and in world history, they go together .
 DNA and familial legacy at issue in a well protected deep state cartel, possibly the Cali Cartel or MENA Airport CIA cartel . First; My DNA and . familial legacy is at issue .
 "My normal activity like going to the gym, photographing scenic places or historic events turns into an allegation against me as my actives are poisoned by entirely out of place staged sexual misconduct such as minors exploited in the vicinity I am in"
 I call this Poison R into Healthy normal activity (Healthy normal activity) into K the healthy activity which is to be undermined and eroded with the false allegations . I call it Poison R . into healthy normal activity into K .
 Jen Moore: "False allegations that my reproductivity is rewarded and that is part of a criminal syndicate of counterfeiting and money laundering some (Jen Moore, others) assert have been CIA mafia criminal networks of the long term Deep State"
 A DNA-Cartel black market happy to create collisions with me with staged abusive situations (assaulting me by placing themselves in positions close to me) Then battering me with outstanding sexually aggressive and exploitative trespasses against me (forced positioning children, naked children, twerking children
 There is no question long time street people, migrant farm, or those toiling low wage jobs are seeking some sort lift from poverty enabling claim against the Establishment class as recompense .
 These people are motivated for false claims against me and have made such claims, and claims of my abusing them in a reproductivity way raised claims to my reproductionivity as a cross claim in justice seeking . The claims were raised as a claim in a justice seeking.
 Eugenic rights won in rigged hearings or systems of justice are desired on black markets . Criminal Syndicate can create operating world budget of of patented or stolen genetic rights which are treated as so precious an available right .
 Ted Gunderson was poisoned or the subject of mafia attacks during his lifetime by the MKULTRA Deep Stat as he asserted and I believe. Second, the livelihood he was poisoned . He was poisoned by the mafia during his life, Gunderson says .
 On February 20 1961 I was likely fertilized during Manhattan Project atomic testing . My father flew as pilot in the atomic bombing and other fighter-bombing activities of Germany, Japan and Korea .
 JFK was assassinated almost two years to the day following his birth . Almost two years after his birth, JFK's assassin was assassinated . JFK's assassination took place in 1968 .
 Operation40 and the oil business was looking for sleepers and to assassinate inside and outside the USA to protect the insinuation of U.S. Big Business or CIA backed business like Zapata Oil throughout the world . Operation40 wanted Zapata oil to protect its reputation in the U.
 As John F Kennedy and Robert F Kennedy fought the mafia in the U.S. Congress in the 1950s and in Washington D.C. with Ted Gunderson in the 1960s they were killed by the mafia . The mafia needed its privately funded businesses and sleeper agents to succeed if
 It is this cartel mafia that is the Criminal Syndicate which is the nexus between Ted Gunderson and myself. It is the criminal syndicate . Ted Gundersen and myself are at the nexus of the cartel mafia, he says .
 Few view the FBI as an evil or an Espionage agency but it is both and more so than a law enforcement agency . The losses to Evil and the USA versus Journalism are due to the loss of journalists .
 Since J Edgar Hoover days and founding of the FBI it has had a role in shaping politics by political surveillance, assassinations, murders, child porn plants, COINTELPRO on military scale and international scale .
 This book tells the story of Catholics and ANTI mafia figures who dispute George H.W. and Prescott Bush or Robert Mueller Dupont family Masonic methods . It also tells why those like Robert F Kennedy were assassinated and blocked from the WASP Deep State .
 "I am trying to help career FBI out moles in the FBI, the motives of moles, moles who are a threat to FBI as well as to others," he says .
 Bush family's firing of U.S. Attorney’s I think tied to their fear of their own bureaucracy turning on them if they get wise to the Deep State . The Bush family is the most dangerous of cover up families in the greatest OSS, CIA, and MKU
 Jen Moore appeared to feal the same way and was trying to take her information into the USA government and national security infrastructure (Homeland Security Investigations and other groups like ICE) The Free Masons have infiltrated the USA with their dual or conflicting allegiances .
 Christopher Wray’s pedigree from the Deep State is little less reassuring . He has been part of the re-establishment of Target Killings in the USA for anti terror reasons, at least as alleged .
 Eric Holder and others have a long history of assassinations as well as does the State Department, Blackwater, Dick Cheney, George Bush, and possibly, only possibly by comparison, Killary herself .
 My mother and Glorian Donegan were raised and born in the USA likely arriving with a pregnant Maria Von Trapp leaving a Convent . They were moved to South Carolina where Harold worked in DuPont family and Harald told Harald about my royal family connection .
 I would also hear this on my fathers side James Donegan who explained I was named after Edward some sort of who had abdicated some of the title or throne, something to do with I thought the 1920s which fit the Irish revolutionary history .
 I say I was radiologically attacked and was hospitalized wiht red skin and placed in a psych ward . It was during Robert Swan Mueller time as 6th FBI director while in a federal prison .
 I had already been in a Psych ward Federal Medical Facility in North Carolina on a medical hold for trying to contact Freedom of Information Officers of the National Institute of Health too often .
 Ted Gunderson asserted he was being poisoned by and FBI NSA CIA alliance of unfathomable evil . Gunderson spent his last octogenarian years trying to fight in court before he died in 2007 . He also asserted that the FBI and CIA were conspiring to kill Gunderson .
 He had been Robert F Kennedy’s right hand man against the very mob the FBI loved so much for conducting hits . The FBI loved the mob so much that he had been involved in the Kennedy assassination .
 Robert F Kennedy fought with Dorothy Kilgallen against the mafia before the DOJ in Congress in the 1950s, in Washington D.C. in the early 1960s and in the late 1960s in the Senate again this time as Senator rather than Senate Lead Counsel .
 Doroth Kilgalen and RFK were murdered by the Mafia tied to the overthrow scheme and like with JFK is tied to my mother and uncle and at least one more, likely Marlin Monroe . Like with JFK's assassination of JFK, the assassination of my mom and uncle is tied
 Pataky moved in for the mob kill of Dorothy Killgalen in Sound of Music . The Gainey children were raised in North Carolina by Maria August Kutschera .
 As I was researching it and watching the movie The Kings Speech my PC was openly stolen from my apartment and TV too . The police merely faked all the records of of of a police backed bit on my PC and TV/wifi .
 This has matched death threats as I go to the library, work in my apartment with violent criminals threatening me or sexually assaulting me by acts or gestures . Or nearby dumpsters being beat on by large machinery openly creating loud violent noises . This has been matched with death threats .
 Jen Moore points her camera at the apartment Glorian Donegan and I lived in and Tom Donegan frequented from his home nearby in Arlington Virginia . Donegan spoke of the Infiltration of the U.S. political system .
 Nazi holdovers from MKULTRA in the United States and Argentina in the U.S. and Argentina . Nazi hunters have still not fully found .
 Jen Moore claimed to be and was a Mafia facts leaker, and by Mafia I will use some people’s terms, Free Masonry, perhaps called Skull and Bones, the Illuminati, or various other names like The Secret Team . Jen Moore claims to be a member of the
 I refer to as WASPS based Commonwealth preferring Old Guard of Big Business families who can and do run mafia for hire operations like Blackwater . These industrialists equate with and replace and replace the Sovereign national interest of the USA with their interest and self-preservation .
 Many including me believe Jen Moore was murdered to silence her (as she said she would create surviving documents that would be available after her death) and she told much of the same story as Philip Marshall, Daniel Casalero, and many others, and that I attempt to tell .
 Attempts have been made on my life and I have faced constant threat in writing this book . It is the same allegiance of Commonwealth or Royal Families in the British Anglo WASPS this book here is about and attempts have been attempted to kill me .
 JFK and RFK were both murdered by the Deep State . Secret Team is a book about very rich defense contractor industrialists and oil interests . JFK was once neighbors of his family in Cape Cod Massachusettes and have intermarried with my family .
 Danny Casolaro’s death may never be known for certain . Because circumstances have shrouded his death in mystery, the single aspect of his research that led to it may never know for certain.
 FBI Agent Speaks Out: ‘I Was Not Protected. For15 years, Gritz says, she did her job well . She says she was not protected by the FBI .
 The obsession with what my DNA could be worth to a group of rustlers has made the attacks profitable . The obsession has led to the attacks being profitable .
 It as if | were mere sunken treasure no one had rights for, and the tomb raiders were told to attack and clear the relic . Tomb raiders told to clear and clear relic .
 ARC of Nothern Virigina REFUSED Disbursment Request to pay off Wells Fargo, getting me then under investigation and with no bank account available to receive SSDI . While in Texas, Genesis Development Corp and Catholic Charities EXACTLY at the time,
 Tom Donegan and Mark Weirness have committed crimes that have facilitated human rights crimes . Rod Rosenstein, Robert Mueller, The Public Health Service, and more recently Donald Trumpl, have facilitated these crimes . The public health service has been involved in these crimes, including in the deaths of
 Non-white non-straight hate crimes invited a gainst me enable lack of Type II Diabetes treatment as the murder weapon . Arlington County Virginia before departure for Texas 1.0 .
 Tom Donegans and Mark Weirness Democrat friends were merged into the Wilson Mall gym location, mine, from the Clarendon closed location . Extreme financial abuse prevented trust fund and SSDI use for diet, MS Office, diabetes testing strips .
 The original email I had sent to Tom Donegan disappeared from my sent items in Gmail though the forwarded copy of it remained . After I forward the email in which I had told him uncolicicially about Dialysis, it disappeared from his sent items .
 Plans were likely made to authorize my DNA into the areas of Africa which would include Obama family areas of origin . The conditions of my death would occur as well .
 James P Donegan DNA 1961 DOD Medical Effects of Atomic Blast Testing Vet 1st Cousin or closer ~ 100% 4 1 IVF Feb 20 Barack Obama 1961 IVF Son, Edward Donegan 1998 9 pi 2 IVF Obama children 1998 donegan DNA 3 Oe NULL here in
 Tom Donegan and Mark Weirness have always been SJWs long in conflict with me . They have been in conflict for years with each other .
 The medical industry latching onto any stigma they could find simply was marginalizing me and he was supporting that, much like can't be done when sexual harassment victims try to credibly assert a powerful boss intimidated or harassed them . "The medical industry was latching on any stigma ... was
 Family Me: Niggers are worth a damn. Nigger is worth the damn . This book Family Me is the answer I have sought for 35 years . It is the first time I've written a book about Niggers .
 Each family had a demarcated territory and an organizationally structured hierarchy and reported up to the same 1 Overarching governing entity . Each family was reported up by the same one Overarching .
 The Commission was established by Lucky Luciano to oversee all Mafia activities in the United States and to serve to mediate conflicts between families . However, this led to his assassination that September, and that role was abolished for The Commission .
 The bosses of the Chicago Outfit and the ' Buffalo crime family were among the bosses of Chicago Outfits and the Chicago crime family . It consisted of the bosses * of the Five Families .
 Such concepts are criminalized as ' thoughtcrime' since they contradict the prevailing Ingsoc orthodoxy . The concept is criminalized since it is thoughtcrime since it contradicts the prevailing orthodoxy .
 Doublespeak is language that deliberately obscures, disguises, distorts, or reverses the meaning of words . Doubledpeak is a form of language deliberately obscuring, disguising, distorting, or reversing the meaning .
 Doublespeak may take the form of 1 euphemisms (e.g., “downsizing” for layoffs and “servicing the target” » for bombing) in which case it is primarily meant to make the truth 1 sound more palatable . Doublesspeak
 The term ‘doublespeak’ derives from two concepts in George Orwell’s novel Nineteen Eighty-Four, ‘doublethink’ and ‘Newspeak’ The term is not used in the book, but the concept is not mentioned in
 Parallels have been drawn between doublespeak and Orwell’s classic essay Politics and the » English Language, which discusses the distortion of language for political purposes, and doublespeak itself .
 In it he observes that political language serves to ; distort and obfuscate reality . He observes that . political language . serves to . distort and . obfuscate . reality .
 Political language has to consist largely of euphemism, question-begging and sheer cloudy vagueness . The great enemy of clear language is insincerity, says David Cameron . Political language must consist largely in euphemism .
 It was at a point when there was widespread skepticism about the degree of truth which characterized relationships between the public and the worlds of politics, the military, and business .
 Goodthink and crimethink linguistically reinforce the State’s totalitarian dominance of the people of Oceania . Crimethink and goodthink are linguistically reinforcing the State's totalitarian dominance . Goodthink is a form of totalitarianism in the United States .
 Newspeak is to make Ingsoc-approved,; thoughts the only expressible thoughts . The intellectual purpose of Newspeak was to make it more accessible to the public .
 The linguistic simplification of Oldspeak "" into Newspeak was realised with neologisms, the elimination of ' ideologically undesirable words, and the elimination . of politically ' unorthodox meanings of words'
 The word could not denote free will, because intellectual freedom was no longer supposed to exist in Oceania . The word 'free will' no longer meant to exist, as intellectual freedom no longer existed .
 Newspeak versions are not merely changed into something 7 different, but actually contradictory of what they used to be . Newspeak is a form of language that is contradictory to what it once was . The Newspeak version of this article has been amended to reflect that .
 These words are the same scientific terms in English, but many of them have their meanings rigidified in order to . prevent speakers from being able to express anti-government thoughts . Many of these words have been added to the A vocabulary to prevent them from expressing negative thoughts .
 In this section I am going to offer some information , about KinkBnB, and use it here to show not only did an IVF rape of me likely occur, it was done in a racially hostile covert operation, inside my rented residence, which also result in my being
 Jim Vockelca says to me things I would be expected to have said. Some key point are that at KinkBnB e says to him things he would not have said . Vockelcan: "At KinkbnB, e says things you would expect to
 Jim V says “I took the ASVAB at the MEPS but decided not to enlist” which is odd because I did. e A female with tatoes surfs for size 13 boots and guns on the shared computer and talks about it. e The woman with t
 Obama connected operations in that facility both frame me as a terrorist for ongoing FISA warrants or asset seizures . I am framed even as I masturbate in my bedroom, I am mocked and framed from the next bedroom by covert operators .
 Siemens M75 is bluejacking the Sony Ericsson K600i pictured below . This method provides no man-in-the-middle protection . Siemens has no protection for man in the middle .
 The only thing I add here is that the staff is always black, the whites being hired away or leaving, racial taunts are common . It is openly racial hate crime against me, by visual evidence as well as the open statements from those involved in the assaults on me in gym .
 A good example was a paddle boat trip I took in "the lake" of Austin, Texas . More on being in the Gym.
 Overcoeing the turn paddile in front of the long straight could be done by paddling backwards . Not long pontoon would straighten out the thrust, which was better than the front paddle just creating and creating and Isocliese water breark at the front .
 A lawsuit * is a proceeding by a party or parties against another in the civil court of law . Recourse against this has not worked . A lawsuit is a civil proceeding in a civil court, not a lawsuit .
 Arbitration Arbitration is a form of alternative dispute resolution . It is a way to resolve disputes outside the courts . Arbitration arbitration is an alternative to the courts. Arbitration arbitration is a type of alternative resolution .
 An arbitration award is legally binding on both sides and enforceable in the courts . An arbitrator's award can be legally binding to both sides .
 Wikipedia Mediation Mediation is a structured, interactive process where an impartial third party assists disputing parties in resolving conflict through the use of specialized communication and negotiation techniques . Mediation has been described as a 'formal, interactive' process .
 Illegal Guerillla Warfare working for elites in Shadow Government while denying guerilla warfare using it against their aleready victims . Guerilla warfare is a type of warfare fought by irregulars in small-scale actions against orthodox military and police forces .
 Dan Harmon, once a popular, charismatic, local political figure, is now known to have been on the tracks the night of the murders of Kevin and Don . Harmon . Harmon is now a well-known figure in the community .
 Paisley was assigned to the CIA’s Office of Security, of which Nixon campaign security coordinator James McCord was once a member . Watergate burglar and Watergate burglary burglar was also a member of the office of security .
 The second victimization of my family under MKULTRA A White House Plumbers operation using riff raff homeless people . Restating the premise of this book about Gangtalk ef me, the second victimizations of my . family .
 Everyone has the right to be believed unless no one is or will listen to you, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 I have known I am interested in non exploitive relataions with adult females in their reproductive years in what I call the Cake model of relationsips . Wikipedia: The Cake model is based on the cake model .
 In this covert operation a series of fight picking moves are a threat to me I keep away from . In this . covert operation, a . series of fights are a . threat to . me . I keep . away from.
 It is my belief the United States DOD, DAPRA, Boeing Corp., Illuminati families, Free Masons, etc., tied to history between King Edward VIII and the Kutschera family need me blamed, ostracized, and even living life under arrest . This operation to
 Women, reproductive women are warned away from me on either the social sabotage of me as a peeper on on death threats to me or her, or on her simply protecting herself by being somewhere else .
 As I go through my life story watch for these effects witnessed by me while I do not SEE the use of KOMPROMAT used by PsyOps at bifurcations I am not at . Watch for the effects .
 At the time I was working at Excite@Home around 1997 I will set the scene and this is when things started to get odd . The Press who are under Mind Control of | The presence of > utilized KOMPROMAT on me giggling 1 | KOM PROM
 Excite@Home, a broadband company in the San Mateo area, is based in San Francisco . It is the first time I've interviewed since I was unemployed .
 As I moved to San Mateo I continued my friendship with Cym and Professor DeSade, going to a party at their southbay home, and a woman or two I met later did not return my phone calls, no problem . Cym continued his friendship with Professor DeDe
 Todd Welch who was m security boss from my corporate security role later would ask in odd ways and even with the company bizarre questions if I had stolen a computer . Personnel treated me oddly and my mother in Virginia was getting very odd calls. Todd Welch .
 Clear Doppelgangers of me were all over as were strange occurrences and strange occurrences . The strange going cold of any form of contact with white females anywhere near me .
 I ejected him from my station wagon, nearly by force, and later he called me to say in a Aviator Glasses like ambiguous conversation “T don’t ever want to do that again...” and I said “neither do I” referring to
 Dung Feeces Nuecees Toilte of Black Liberation Theolgy Black Nationalism and Skid Row . Fighting white supremacism by using Social Services to spy on white women .
 Motorcycles Doppelganger me everywhere peeking at white women’s buttocks and white women in swimwear, and motorcyclists still gun their eninges at me . Jen Moore and someone else were saying things like ‘tic toc’ about who ever set themselves
 The Arlington Sport and Health Story and Conspiracy Against My Rights I Fled . By denying me recovery food, laundry money, and surrounding me with prison and DOD scum in the gym I was denied the gym, the goal all along was the gym .
 In fact I went about my San Francisco music list in the gym, using cell phone or tablet videos for my own non-pop high energy music . I was surrounded by prison bling grillz teeth non whites who surrounded me in the upscale gym and others who tried to both co-
 Fighting optical appearances created by Expressive Acts and Circumstances surrounding, planted, round my Life . A corrupt actor forms a Cartel by asking for those in the vicinity of a person to become invovled in a White Lie or black lies, criminal acts .
 Evolve a wall under color of law Revolving : Revolvin Revolving oe ; eee around me Revolving around ; Hostileme HostileGood Good Good Hostile . Environment . Environment | Environment honest honest honest and Hostile Environment .
 Stalking Long Con Set Normal |Normal | normal | Normal | Normal . Canal Victim Victim Location, others . Locations | Locations . Locations ere the imagery and and and . and appearances to represents .
 Some act makes the appearance bridge from mere optics into real ife pretexts for real life consequences . Normal |Normal | Normal | Normal theft or illegal Impersonations . Impersonation is a form of crime .
 For 1511 Ocean Dr 5 on 8/18/2021 donotreply@managebuilding.com PLEASE NOTE: DO NOT reply to this EMAIL ADDRESS . This email message was sent from a notification-only address that cannot accept incoming email .
 DOD PsyOps used Disinformation, Social Sabotage, and other schemes to maneuver away support or Human Rights for me . These people were part of a revolving crew of people who positioned themselves y aon me in Georgia United States DOD Psy Ops .
 U.S. DOD and CIA PsyOps torture of social, legal, and psychiatric harassment over some Pizza Gate scheme, tied to my genome . I have never understood why this has happens or why thousands of obvious frame jobs have been permitted in broad daylight .
 When I approach medical doctors seeking Metformin it is denied and non-whites end up being substituted who will refuse the diabetes medicine, and usually United States DOD jobs follow for doctors or doctors family members .
 Imagery intelligence, pronounced as either as Im-Int or I-Mint, is an intelligence gathering discipline wherein imagery is analyzed to identify information of intelligence value . Wikipedia: Imagery Intelligence is a gathering discipline that analyzes imagery for value .
 Potential Witness List includes Conflicted Politicians . The material in this book is concentrated from other parts of the book where the material is in the context of the history relevant to the quote .
 In 1961, Butt was appointed to the President’s Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity . Butt was also appointed by President John F Kennedy in 1961 . Butt has been a member of the Committee since 1961 .
 Peace Corps and Ambassador to the Pacific nation of Australia Crook was born in Momence, Illinois . Crook is a former Peace Corps Ambassador to Australia .
 It has been noted that the plot of the novel reflects the crimes of Epstein and his alleged accomplice, Ghislaine Maxwell . The novel is set to be published in New York City .
 The reputation of the agency and its director declined drastically after the Bay of Pigs Invasion fiasco . The agency's reputation has since declined drastically since the incident .
 Dulles was one of the members of the Warren Commission investigating the assassination of John F Kennedy . Dulles is a former CIA director and CIA director .
 A conspiracy occurs when two or more people agree to commit an illegal act and take some step toward its completion . A conspiracy is a conspiracy involving two people agreeing to commit a crime and taking some steps toward it .
 A defendant charged with conspiracy can raise the defense of abandonment or withdrawal . In some states, however, factual impossibility is not a defense, as courts rely on the fact that the person still had the intent to commence .
 Police officers sometimes do commit certain unlawful acts while acting under their authority . If their conduct exceeds their authority, then criminal charges may be brought * against them .
 Police officers have access to evidence such as controlled substances obtained from arrests and searches . Many have stolen evidence no longer used in criminal cases or never turned over for prosecutions .
 Any list of possible charges brought against a police officer includes the use of excessive force against defendants during arrest or detention . The list includes the excessive force used against defendants .
 "Sandbagging my life via Plumbers operation and misleading appearances the general public falls for. Sandbags my life," he said .
 THe louder the sneer at me and commit offenses against me, the more they have cover for their own illegal acts . The louder the people sneer towards me, I'm sure they have covered themselves in their illegal acts, says the author .
 According to Pizzagate reporter Jen Moore, the scheme is under control of the top most political figures . The impersonator of me will do so many drugs partying with the pizza in the blur of it all will be caught with child porn, etc., and wake up to find that has
 People tend to regard drug addicts as the dregs of society/humanity Crack Pack . Crack Pack. The Crack Pack is a drug-addicted group of people .
 A confidential human source or informant is a defendant who engages in the prohibited activity of associating with persons engaged in criminal activity for the purpose of furnishing information to or acting as an agent for a law enforcement or intelligence agency . The defendant is not permitted to be a member of the public
 A prisoner in a Maryland super-max complains to a sheriff or federal corrections officer, “You just don’t get it.” A prisoner I believe in a Baltmore Maryland prison said to a local sheriff or corrections officer .
 You don't get who you are, who I am, or even that we may be switched some day . You don’t get who is, who is you, or that you might be switched . We are not going to be switched, we are going to have to be
 CNN.com's John Sutter: Who is who is who, often a question asked by the FBI and many others. So let me start now on who is . who, many others, is who . What is the truth?
 If one in the United States thinks about the FBI, or perhaps a person in India, Pakistan, Thailand, Sweden, or elsewhere that person may think of Sean Connery as the Untouchable .
 The film stars Kevin Costner, Charles Martin Smith, Andy Garcia, Robert De Niro, and Sean Connery . The film follows Eliot Ness as he forms the Untouchables team to bring Al Capone to justice .
 The Grammy Award-nominated score was composed by Ennio Morricone and features period music by Duke Ellington . The film is nominated for a Grammy Award .
 The French Revolution provided at great expense to the cast and characters of Les Misérables throwing off their aristocratic oppressors . We might also think of Democracy in America and Criminal Justice as Social Justice .
 Alexis de Tocqueville begins his bbok by describing the change in social conditions taking place in France .
 He observed that over the previous seven hundred years the social and economic conditions of men had become more equal . He said that over . previous seven . hundred years, men had been more equal. He said .
 The aristocracy, Tocqueville believed, was gradually disappearing as the modern world experienced the beneficial effects of equality . The aristocrats were gradually disappearing, he said .
 Tocqueville traced the development of equality to a number of factors, such as granting all men permission to enter the clergy, widespread economic opportunity resulting from the growth of trade and commerce, the sale of titles of nobility as a monarchical fundraising tool, and the abolition of prim
 Tocqueville described this revolution as a ""providential fact"" of an ""irresistible revolution,"" leading some to criticize the determinism found in the book .
 He did, however, consider equality more just and therefore found himself among its partisans . He also considered equality as more just .
 Instruct democracy, if possible to reanimate its beliefs, to purify its motives, to regulate its movements . Instruct democracy to substitute little by little the science of affairs for its inexperience, and knowledge of its true instincts for its blind instincts .
 The remainder of the book can be interpreted as an attempt to accomplish this goal, thereby giving advice to those people who would experience this change in social states . The book ends with the conclusion that the social change is necessary to occur .
 Having been ""hassled"" by the FBI, arrested by it, investigated by it and attacked by it . I find my cinematic experiences were overpaid .
 Various conspiracy theories have existed in government the Press, alt-right media, sovereign movements, and elsewhere of a Deep State, A Shadow Government, A Cabal of devilish greedy Jews, a secret NWO, plans to conquer and imprison the human race or the white race, etc
 THe Mafia, business using muscle to keep in social control like in Al Capone's Chicago running liquor from Canada across the Great Lakes into the USA during prohibtion is more the FBI model than the mafia .
 Bush flagge group of big business cartel companies who keep victims dead and business operating . Bush flagging up Bush flag flagging group of companies who kept victims dead .
 I believe the FBI to be nothing more than gangland enforces for the most dangerous of illegal U.S. and NWO businesses . This is why the anti mafi types including Robert F Kennedy seem to have so much bad luck come their way .
 The fraudulent and criminal maladministration of the will and Trust Fund of Glorian Donegan . Donegan's will and trust fund was set up in the 1980s . The fund will be used to raise money for charity .
 My genome and family life history has concealed history tied to the FOXP2 gene that is also known as the LONDON KE FAMILY gene of speech, grammar, and other defects that come from my mother's side of my genome . The theft of the computer was related to my renting
 By definition of Money Laundering the fraudulent activities often are disguised as non-fraudulent and are carefully designed to escape detection as fraud even under scrutiny or while conducted publicly in public institutions . By definition, Money Launder is a form of money laundering .
 "I have had to pursue information in those domains of knowledge to effectively provide a factual fraud case description to you," he writes .
 Glorian Donegan's mother left a trust fund intended only for him . His mother left the trust fund only for me .
 Quackery and modification of the will for its exploitation by behavioral health services was foundation work for the fraud in the trust fund administration to defuse the value of the trust into families the trust was not intended for .
 Quackery, often synonymous with health fraud, is the promotion of fraudulent or ignorant medical practices . Quacksery is a form of quackery that promotes ignorance of medical practices, such as ignorance .
 In my case a Trust Fund which broke the Trust Fund broke illegally to form a corrupt Cartel of criminal racket organized criminal enterprise . In his case a . Trust Fund . broke the trust illegally . In my . case a trust fund which broke . illegally to . form a . corrupt Cart
 Behavioral Health Care in concert with powerful politicians abusing their power and influence allowed the trust to both medically and factually architect errors to redirect assets and liabilities among multiple parties . As if in stock trades, the trust arranged trading buy and sells from the floor in way that times the best trade timing
 Quackery is often described as ""health fraud" with the salient characteristic of aggressive promotion and can and criminal gains . Quacksery is a form of aggressive promotion and can and can be criminal gains .
 Obstruction of Justice is a process of creating errors in the administration of Justice . Obstruction creates errors in Justice. Obstruction is the process of making mistakes in the justice system .
 The Trust was illegally modified such that it could be targeted by fraudsters and subjected to fraudulent claims such as bogus asset seizures requests, protection racket money, and other purposes of fake claims against for restitution in justice proceedings could be manufactured under false pretexts and carefully staged events .
 The other hard copy letter I provide to you in addition to this one is the open letter I have written to the coroner of Jen Moore . Jen Moore was found dead at the scene of her death .
 I provide extensive data and case factual theory on a CDROM I am submitting as well . In addition to that I provide . extensive data . and case facts .
 Edward Paul Donegan 1513 apt 5 I suspect Fraudulent Activity at 1511 . I hope I am not erroneously linked to. I have never been linked to . I suspect fraudulent activity .
 Apartment 5 has its own building address as 1513, joined physical but differing postal addresses . Apartment is located in the same building as 1511 apt 5, 1513 and 1513 .
 I have asked my error not to be perpetuated in accounting but has been creating a concatenated “virtual” or “pseudo-apartment” apartment . The apartment may draw its properties and associated events from either 1513 or 1511 .
 Neighbors at 1001 N Water St have talked of “illegal animal husbandry” made reference to illegal acts in drug and weapons trade though seeming felons in possession and made child porn references .
 Recently on a about 4/18/2022 I asked a adult erotic model advertising compliance with laws if she would like to visit Texas coming to my apartment in 1513 #5 and sending pictures of my unit, inside gym, proximity to the park, etc., since she was a
 A friend of her later posted about some psycho involved in activities in his or his mother’s basement . I never heard from her but a friend of hers later posted that some psycho was involved .
 1513_6 has had floor work done after a flood in the apartment . 1513 6 had its floor redone after it was redone .
 The occupant of Unit 6 had a small female child with him who was near the vent area to underfloor crawlspace . I do NOT have access to the crawl space I do not have access .
 That is near the apartment mailbox and on the 1511 building line block block, not 1513 . That's on the block of 1511, not the 1513 block .
 General Ledgers and Transaction Journals are accounting tools used for tax and other purposes . Double Entry Accounting ensures all debts and credits are accounted for and match income and owner's equity financial claims .
 Receipts are used to identify who leases an apartment, how made a rent payment under a lease, etc., and and may be used during tracking or reported or identifying criminal activities or where crimes have occurred or properties under the control of criminals .
 Improper assessment of where damage to a neighborhood is occurring, or who controls what property should be correctly resovled both for the security and availability of my good credit as a renter building .
 No matter what line of business you're in, adhering to the Generally Accepted Accounting Principles for your accounting department is essential to accurate financial statements and legal compliance .
 Depending on the type and size of your business, you’ ll likely have both an overarching set of principles to follow and ones specific to your industry . You’ll likely have to follow both overarching and specific principles .
 Understanding the best practices and legal requirements that come with GAAP and other accounting principles will help you optimize your workflows, generate useful, clear, and accurate financial data, and stay on the right side of the law .
 Accounting Principles are a set of specific rules and ; processes specific to the * United States, designed to Clients and results . Accounting Principles provide oversight for xe @) ; accounting practices for fora C : ; ' BOY SCOUTS Hilton "" profit public companies, OF AMERICA
 This also applies to any company that publicly releases its income statement and any other financial documents . This is also true for companies that release their income statements .
 Standards are applied consistently throughout the entire financial reporting process . Standards were applied consistently through the entire Financial Reporting Process .
 All financial reports are prepared in a consistent and permanent manner . The financial report is prepared in the same manner as all financial reports .
 Accountants following GAAP are dedicated to complete accuracy, impartiality, and transparency . Accountants follow GAAP to ensure complete accuracy and impartiality of the accounting .
 All accounting practices and financial reporting are performed with strict adherence to established rules and regulations . The company's financial reporting is performed in accordance with established rules, regulations .
 Asset valuations are assigned with the assumption the organization will continue to operate for the foreseeable future . Asset valuation is based on the assumption that the organization continues to operate in the future .
 Financial reporting is performed at standard accounting intervals, e.g. fiscal quarters or years . Financial reporting has been performed at a standard accounting interval, such as fiscal years .
 Reports are absolutely transparent and fully disclose the organization’s financial health and position . Reports are "absolutely transparent"
 All parties involved in financial reporting are acting honestly, with integrity, and in good faith, says CNN.com . "All parties involved are acting ... honestly"
 GAAP’s 10 guiding principles are informed and guided by three overarching rules . GAAP's 10 principles are based on the principles of GAAP, the organization says .
 The three rules help protect both the public and the organizations themselves from inaccurate or fraudulent financial data . Created to prevent accountants from intentionally or accidentally creating a misleading view of an organization's financial position .
 Organizations adhere to the continuously evolving FASB standards for best practices . e Generally Accepted Industry-Specific Practices Are Enforced . e generally accepted industry-specific practices are enforced .
 Different organizations have very different in-depth and specific accounting practices, based on their particular structure and legal standing . Different organizations' accounting practices are very different, say experts .
 A government agency, a bank, and a nonprofit foundation would all adhere to GAAP principles, but have their own unique set of accounting and financial reporting requirements . For example, a government agency or a bank would have to comply with GAAP rules .
 The interior surfaces of my apartment I have control of but nothing beyond, the wall structures nor roof, roof, crawlspace, telecom, etc., Bizarre and downright confusing activities such as pictured here on Common areas of the campus or neighboring buildings are not my choice .
 Accounting is critical to tracking and assessing debits and liabilities and property owners . Accounting is crucial to tracking debits, liabilities and properties .
 Sometimes cats have gotten under there but I have nothing to do with that and tried to get them out, unable to do so . Sometimes some cats get under there, but I've been unable to .
 Social Security Aministration ethic in Washington and Baltimore Maryland is to make sure each Social Security recipient receive payments on time . On Interstate Financial and Health Care Fraud and Obstruction of Justice. On interstate financial and health care fraud and obstruction of justice.
 Social Scurity recipients can pay bills on time, accumulate good credit and access to financial services, have housing available as a priority along with clothing, be safe from fraud and crime in secur\e housing, and have the safest and most beneficial environments .
 A receipt is a document acknowledging that a person has received money or property in payment following a sale or other transfer of goods or provision of a service . A receipt means a person acknowledges that a payment has been made .
 Wikipedia disbursement is a form of payment from a public or dedicated fund . Wikipedia disburies are disbursements . Disbursements are a form payment from a public or dedicated fund .
 A payment made on behalf of a client to a third party for which reimbursement is subsequently sought from the client . Alternatively, it means a payment made by a third-party for which the client is subsequently seeking reimbursement . A third party payment is made by the client to the third party,
 Single entry accounting is less complex than double entry accounting . Single-entry accounting is a form of accounting that can be more complex .
 With the single-entry system, you record cash disbursements and cash receipts . The single entry system is a single entry point to the cash register .
 Double-entry bookkeeping is an accounting method where you equally record a transaction in two or more accounts . Double entry is a method of accounting that equally records transactions in multiple accounts .
 A credit is made in at least one account, and a debit made in one other account . A credit can be made in two accounts, one in three accounts .
 Double-entry bookkeeping method is based on the idea that every business transaction has equal and opposite effects on at least two accounts . The double-entry method is a bookkeeping system that aims to ensure that every transaction has the same effect on both accounts .
 Double-entry accounting can help you make better financial decisions . Catch and reduce bookkeeping errors and maintain accurate accounting records . See a clear snapshot of company finance maintain accurate records .
 I am proud of the property I keep and hope errors in accounting are fixable . I am not involved with the 1511 building except for knowing some of the tenants . I'm proud of my property and I hope errors are fixedable .
 She spoke of ""Targeted Victims"" victims of Espionage hits to silence them through created disasters waiting to happen . Victims of Espionage hits are silenced through created disaster causing disasters .
 Jen Moore had the evidence I collected plus the evidence she had on her own she was going to go public . It was during my time in California I was gathering evidence on the Obstruction of Justice and illeal operation tied to my mother's will and wills .
 Glorian Donegan and Ed Donegan addresses Jen Moore Pointed Camera at describing hidden CIA identities . Jen Moore: "I am a firsthand witness to the events surrounding the death threats, locations Ms. Ms. Donegan's death threats"
 The address and money from the sale of that house now part if a criminal network funding source . That address and the moneyh from that house are now part of the funding source.
 My long ago documentation in memorium video to my mother of our lives at those addresses . My long . ago documentation . of my life at these addresses . I'm not sure how long it will be .
 Manhattan Project (Los Alamos, Nevada and California atomic development programs, Jet Propulsion Labs, above ground tests my father was subjected to in Nevada observation tower, and as a pilot in the atomic bombing of Japan. Manhattan Beach .
 The DNA that runs in our family was always part of ‘black operations’ of Dr Cameroon and Sydney Gottlieb and others including Marilyn Monroe . Marilyn Monroe. Dr Cameroon . Dr Cameroon. and Sydney . Gottliebs .
 London KE family (Prince Albert of York, Prince Edward of Wales) family also King Edward VII) is fairly common in Central Europe . It comes from very famous out of wedlock Windsor Kutschera lines but carries small defect .
 That gene gene is secretly researched away from the Windsors and Nazis for low profile study . That gene was secretly researched . It was kept from the Nazis and Nazis .
 While secretly used for science the overall genetics of these families was considered pretty good and even turned into ‘who wants in on the good stuff” The program was considered a real benefit for a child .
 CIA surrogacy networks run by the CIA, DARPA, Human Brain Program, and highly connected families including with connections into the VI Brain Foundation of Epstein . That is the story of my family .
 Insider families of DNA research in its illegal assasnation days sprread the DNA around the world an into certain potlical CIA and Free Masons families in the USA . Those same groups are using it for illegal profits in sluch fund cartel mafia Central Intelligence Agency cells .
 Southern Poverty Law Center listed black nationalist or Mexican Mafia groups who have joined into the black market via pimp role of offering DNA rights . Among the most prominent are Knights Templar drug cartel and Black Hebrew Israelite .
 The function of the CIA program has been using the cartel rights for illegal science and funding “protection” from anyone getting too close to the truth, analogous to the Rolling Stones have Hells Angeles patrol a concert .
 The evidence related to In Shape Fitness, William Ruiz of Capitola California, Jim Volcelka of California, Glorian Donegan who lived in California, and the will of Glorian . Donegan . California, the sale of a house at 52 Lambeth Square Moraga
 Jen Moore was blowing the whistle on. The misdeeds in Criminal Justice by high ranking political elites were obstruction of justice . Jen Moore is blowing the . whistle on .
 OBstruction of Justice is considered a crime against justice itself . Obstruction of justice is considered by law to be a crime that is against justice .
 References to contacts I made to the CIA submit information system on the death of Jen Moore and genome history .
 Even if such activities were constitutionally legitimate (clearly they are not), they would still have an enormous potential for abuse as a personal or political weapon by the practitioners .
 Jenny held the rank of Corporal, served in ' the then named Street Crime Unit as a narcotics investigator . She also worked rin the Tracy Unified School District as a DARE officer .
 She also was a member of our | . . 7 , adventure racing team competing in several events on the west coast .
 Her mother, i Jane Moore of California, survives her; her father, Bob Moore of Texas, and her sisters, Robin and Kelli, and " brother Bobby, ' all of : California .
 She was reportedly working on stories about child abuse / trafficking involving important people when she was found dead in her Washington D.C. hotel room .
 Her death from a brain hemorrhage appears to have been the result of a severe beating she received the year before . Her death appears to be a result of the beating she had received a year earlier .
 Mark Gonzales “came up’ in very crime ridden poverty based border town Corpus Christi area Nueces as a law school graduate partially putting behind him behind him . Calaveras Motorcycle Club outlaw biker gang member .
 Still in the club and aligned with indigent people feeling hopeless in life and outlook, he is a candidate to be tempted by exploitable hidden value . He has been linked with Manchester City fans who feel hopeless in their lives .
 If the Trust Fund of Glorian Donegan can be monetized to serve homeless veterans and other cast outs and the value not acounted for, fake claims can kite away the otherwise sitting idle value . This is exactly the type of criminal network which recruited Jen Moore, former police
 Jen Moore calls herself a Trump supporter too and probably does not like labeling alt right as a medical illness or disease or trying marginalize simple right wing immigration nationalists beliefs .
 Jen Moore is a former police officer without active contacts or job status to act against Gonzales . Gonzales is a RICO connected connected connected office holder . Moore is an ex-police officer who has no active contacts to act on Gonzales.
 Edward Paul Donegan is a concerned citizen and Conspiracy Theorist . While in U.S. Federal Prison I began to study in formal training to become a Pagan Witch .
 Many in San Francisco were and mostly found it ridiculous, mostly attire for otherwise attire worn over desired behaviors and archtypical forms of resentments against establishment values .
 Pagin literature ranging from Odinism to Wicca includes Odinism and Wiccan .
 Odinism has a Japanese style to it of ties to the land in racial way and often is tied to White Supremacism . While not problematic for me in that regard, its use of myth I found less useful than the archetyps of Buddhism .
 Wicca offered internist concepts as well and education in theism Athiesm, polytheism, and patterns of behaviors of more powerful religions against minor ones or ones with little social power .
 It is widely believe and still debated that the male form the Horned God, a hunter myth an equal to the Moon Goddess making Day were either abaondoned by Christianity or turned into Satan .
 The pattern of replacement ideologies either demonizing or co-opting earlier movements or figures is not different from debate in the USA as Confederate flags are having their meanings altered .
 As I research the Kennedy curse which I believe I and other Donegans have lived under I came across a, perhaps ‘the” DOJ building as the RKF Building . Perhaps ‘RKF’ building is the DOJ building .
 It is my belief now and many others that a CIA based oil conspiracy with the mafia killed JFK and RFK . That was led by an FBI DOJ in cahoots with the Mafia, says Bob Greene .
 Bush who has CIA building, Langely named after him, and J Edgar Hoover Building, and Robert F Kennedy building are names I all find unforate window dressing of claims to an honoranble history that are not supported by the facts and likely even offensive .
 I believe your own institutons are likely influnceed by the troubling history of the cold war and Mafia partnership in the demise of communist states, Cuba in particular and CIA plans .
 My research has a rare area of development because I carry a rare gene likely studied by Alma Powerll, the mother of an FCC chair Michael Powell . The gene is likely to be studied by Powerll's mother, who studied her daughter's mother .
 Lloyd Austin asks conspiracy theories be purged from government . New leaders may have tread on the corpses of old ones while pretending to have been loyals to the deceased and past kings .
 I wish the billions of televion news hours covering the DOJ CIA Bush family, Rockefeller Republicans, Patreus and others that time was being used by Micheal Hastings, Doroty Killgallen, and others . I wish I wish this was used by Michael Hastings and Dorot
 CIA programs pretend to honor those whose corpses they used as stepping stones into the newly freed up government offices . I suspect in the USA a deep state does exist, is tied to long running CIA programs .
 I wish a more diverse conspiracy theory based media encouraged and I am unformattable with our legends of our great kings today . I have no new names in mind but I wish to be more diverse .
 The FBI has only one killing objective, preempting victims of a Deep State shadow government run by itself . The FBI is preempting the story of the assassination of JFK by the FBI and Shadow Government .
 I fear for my life in the USA from destructive espionage which has harassed my life because the life of my mother and father and myself that are honorable, loyal, and respectable represents a secret history of atomic weapons development and history of warfare the USA needs to hide . My mother, father and
 I am a witness to the JFK assassination, as far as I can tell from my family history, perhaps the most direct witness or ONLY surviving witness to a part of the Kennedy Curse story not yet told . I am going to try to tell you that my best guess as to WHY I
 Jen Moore started to tell that story before she was silenced and she and Ted Gunderson I put in the same group I am in, victims of State backed hits via illegal means of Espionage under-cover misconduct .
 Call those players the Rockefellers and Standard Oil, the Dulles and Hunt families, other Texas interests and Lyndon Baines Johnson, the Rothschilds and their banking and financing East India Tea and other British Pilgrim companies .
 Jen Moore was nearly the last living person to know my family history and its ties to the JFK assassination and MKULTRA and she was threatening to name names . Jen Moore's family history includes the assassination of JFK, the assassination and the involvement of MK-ULTRA .
 "Only I know the story still as a witness to inside that family, the Donegan family, and the attempts on my life continue. Both her and my last living family of origin relative died in the last few years . Only I know her and her last living relative .
 "This is not abstract discussion on the JFK assassination but life or death threat to us all and to me, all of us possibly at the brink of destruction of us by a Shadow Government with Shadow criminality, Shadow motives, and evil mafia ties"
 Others know as perpetrators of the crimes they are hiding and we have records from them if we are willing to rely on them . Others are hiding from us, and we know they're hiding . We have records of those who have committed crimes that we can rely on .
 English royal connected Bush family were working on genetics and Eugenics with the royal family since 1902 . JFK and his Irish government began experiencing assassinations and questionable deaths .
 Ted Gunderson was an ant-mafi person of the FBI and he also knew much of the story which Lee Harvey Oswald knew, about my family in North Carolina, my mother Glorian Gainey and Harold Gainey . Maria Kutschera Von Trapp tied, where Lee
 Recently I even found cryptic references to the whole affair in the popular Mary Poppins, like the Sound of Music, like British singing and dancing with metaphors of reality .
 All of that data is collected quoted and referenced here and supports my accounts of this history in multilayered corroboration of public records and many personal accounts of all the families involved in the CIA Behavioral Research which landed the CIA in trouble .
 The First Amendment, said Judge Learned Hand, 'presupposes that right conclusions are more likely to be gathered out of a multitude of tongues, than through any kind of authoritative selection' Hand said .
 The plan was for the Big Business Mafia to run the government in the 21st Century as MKULTRA and it does . It does . The plan for the government to run in the future is MKULTra .
 Gang Stalking, the Free Mason way of terminating victims by progressive Abuse of Power has been used against my family all who were equally witnesses with me to that core story of the hito n JFK, and I may soon be hit myself as so many others have been . We should all
 My family genetics under atomic testing study for secret reason by secret agencies for secret grooming of world leaders plans . FOXP2 gene is recognized and my family line truth is revealed .
 JFK and later RFK were aware of these illegal experiments, the “good” births of productive world leaders . CIA groomed world leaders who could create Capitalist success in communist poor farming counties via USAID .
 The genome illegally used from my family comes out of that “black registry ” The Kennedy administration objected to the plan in the 1960s going to far, beyond respect for life bounds, also out of resentment .
 WASPs wanted the plant out of wedlock to expand and study the genome cartel which has a defect FOXP2 to be studied and bred out in larger inter-breeding Commonwealth of Great Britain Crown jewels .
 London KE Family FOXP2, out of wedlock Windsor, Windsor with Nazis, Kutscheras, and others. That all is possible because my family genome has a secret gene and secret history known as LondonKE Family FOX P2 . London KE family FOXP 2, out
 Cars have been trying to run me of the road, every job or apartment I have had terminates me, child porn is planted on me and talked up elsewhere in usual FBI tactics . I was put in the mental hospital as I asserted being radiologically attacked in my life as my father
 "If this sounds grandiose the players and State Actors involved and the events in my family history are enormous," says the author . "My family history is enormous. The events in this family history were enormous"
 Bush family CIA milieu system to win against Eastern Europe and beyond for the Queen of England in the USA . Roman Catholics objected to, renouncing English Commonwealth as philosophy and as conquers of Ireland, India .
 Jen Moore was a truth teller about Gatsbians, Great Gatsby house of outlawed-cards MKULTRA COINTELPRO . Mafia based society concealing its deep underbelly of elites tied to long term assassination, racketeering profits, oil money, and other corruption
 She was murdered for outing the truth of my family, the Donegan family, and how the elites of society our Gatsbian mafia Dons have united behind hiding the details of JFK murder . Media, political office holders, and religious groups united behind covering up the JFK murder, and
 Data you need to use is verifiable, described, and present in the materials I make available to you 3.3.5.5 .
 The information I provide is full or re-usable teasers for the purpose the book was written . Many victims are named and even after death can be given voice .
 MKLUTRA is a slush fund of “research” and human trafficing with adult surrogates . One of the Central Intelligence Agency,. Defense Intelligence Agency, DARPA, and FBI programs the press protects over generations is MKLutRA .
 Donegan family genome is illegally used for that purpose under excuses and rationalizations no one would believe in a financial scam architecture . The Donegan genome was illegally used under excuses . Law enforcement tools operating in simulated and false pretense activation .
 The FBI programs infiltration adult entertainer commercial activity does not find crimes there . It places crimes there of free wheeling and corrupt practices intelligence community activities .
 Dallas Police were tied to and were operating with Jack Ruby in his Dallas Texas strip club as were the rest of the CIA connected mafia figures running the operations . It is no different today than when Dallas Police operated with and were linked to Jack Ruby .
 Robyn Lee Gritz Austin, TX an FBI Special Agent for anti terror was fired from the FBI on an excuse, is having her financial services and income dry-up, sometimes simply froze for no reason . Robyn Gritz is having financial services dried-up and sometimes froze for
 Jen Moore: "Small fringe groups in the USA do hold Conspiracy Theories of the type Jen Moore was reporting on, credibly, but those group make up only .0001 percent of media in the U.S.
 The extrajudicial execution of journalists like Micheal Hasting has been able to protect the USA from being outed as a criminal mafia machine . This book is not about street thugs used by the mafia but the fabric of the USA itself that protects the fabric . The Bush Crime Family, the
 The worst of criminal for instance Robert Swan Mueller or William Barr hold office not because they have been exposed as CIA criminals by the press but rather the press has provided “cover fire” suppressing Conspiracy theories about them . Major politicians and major businesses are indiscernible .
 I believe I am on that mafia hit-list as witness to the JFK assassination by the Deep State . I quote Richard Jay Belzer actor and independently wealthy . Actor and independent wealthy litterature and . history researching author of Hit list .
 Bush, Robert Mueller II of Dupont Board or Directors, Saudi Arabia, Great Britain, and the replacement to East India Tea Company, the British Petroleum and Standard Oil Brethren pirate companies .
 Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was an Indian lawyer, anti-colonial nationalist and political ethicist . He employed nonviolent resistance to lead the successful campaign for India’s independence from British rule . Gandhi died in 1948 .
 A JFK hero and other JFK heroes in British Parliament Profiles in Courage described, a Nobel Prize winning book on political leadership, were British politicians who in Parliament stood against East India Tea Company imperial oppression .
 Arnold Schwarzenegger married into the Peace Corsp through Sargent Shriver and Peter Lawford and others were in USAID and East-West Center of Hawaii to turn socialist leaning locations like Hawii into United States or military backed juntas .
 Edward Paul Donegan story is that my family line was from rescues from the rise of Nasim of 1926 Von Trapp story immigrees to the USA, born in the USA but probably from bastard births of secretive relatives of the Windsors and Kutscheras .
 The mammoth book about the Kennedy assassination, Reclaiming History, into a miniseries, is being turned into a TV series . Oliver Stone and James DiEugenio are producing the series .
 The story of an American political cabal so powerful that it has been able to repress knowledge of its existence for 50 years, and the hidden history of the political force that has dominated American politics for the last 50 years . The political power of the Bush Family US/Deep state has been
 JADED TASKS: The Blood Politics of BUSH & Co. America’s NightMARE: The Presidency of George BUSH II: The PRESIDENCY of George Bush II . America's NightMare: The President George W. Bush II:
 Madsen was stationed at SOSU Navy Anti Submarine Missile Facility Coos Bay Oregon . As a young naval officer, he served in the U.S. Navy .
 Psychological Warfare controls society, is social control, if and when Mockingbird controls the media of a nation fighting “Russian Propaganda theories that Free Masons killed JFK” Exhibits: id953 is the system of law enforcement and CIA using my genome via illegal operations .
 The program mostly experiments in eugenics, designer babies, and illegal science in party room where impregnation is offered and occur . Tied to Pizzagate the program the press corps denies, the press press corps says .
 LE tend to pay themselves as victims if they say I sexually victimized them by peeping . They pay for the right to peep at others as they stage peeping at adults using my name and my biology to “settle the debt” for having had peeped .
 Jen Moore was a former police officer in Tracy California and she held “Conspiracy Theories” as a “Truth Teller” and pointed out as others have the United States Espionage Deep State has a betray of the Donegan family, the USA, and the
 It is worth saying for the segway it creates that I do not believe myself to be a Nigerian Prince down on his luck and need of rescue . It is also worth saying that I don't believe myself .
 Some say an aborted fetus and an out of wedlock male were conceived in the 1990s . Barrack Obama Jr.'s marriage began to produce children, some say .
 James Paul Donegan was a late teen house painter who clomb down off the ladder from his work when he heard the U.S. Army was taking recruits .
 "My mother lived doing the work of George Washington and what Paul Harvey talked about, being a farmer, and producing food on a small farm," she says .
 After the war the TWA and airlines system around the world let employees and families of employees of employees travel on unused arline seats as a perk of being in the business .
 There ae those who DO believe the out of wedlock celebrity DNA in my family line is a some sort of bragging rights worth and they have aspiration group interest in it . There are those who do believe it is worth .
 I hear dopples of me who are in apartments next to mine, with adjoining door such as some motels or hotels, or on other areas saying that because they are caught by the Marshalls and other with child porn photos then to avoid arrest they will provide people like Salvation Army
 This is I believe an inflated value of my DNA which places a wrongful emphasis on Nature rather than Nuture, and feudal arrogance of self governance . This is an inflated . value of the DNA, which places an . improper emphasis on nature rather then Nuture .
 COINTELPRO Wetworks Subversioin, Legal and Psychiatric System Harassment via Gang Stalk Espionage Units . High power people are covering up atomic testing disasters by conspiring against the lives of atomic weapons development and testing victims .
 Agents and informers did not merely spy on political activists . But they did spy on them . They did not just spy on activists .
 The FBI also conducted “black bag jobs”, watrant-less surreptitious entries, against the targeted groups and their members . The FBI conducted ‘black bag’s jobs’ against the groups .
 "Those same thugs from that same conspiracy have been after me and it's tied to the war hero legacy of my family," he says . "It is tied to my family legacy of being a war hero," he adds .
 I have attached a photo this email I also refer to textually as id637 that is Jen Moore “Conspiracy Theorist” Jen Moore . My family is tied to the Von Trapp family history . My mother was born in 1926 .
 Lee Harvey Oswald’s last attempted phone call was too, the military intelligence office of WWII in that area . She was the out of wedlock daughter (along with Harold Gainey her brother from her earlier life as Glorian Gainey and Festus .
 She died in 2011 with a Special Needs Trust fund left for me, a trust fund under U.S. Federal Regulation that is not an inheritance of money but her keeping her money through a proxy after her death that money can be used for education, legal expenses, medical, and other
 When Uncle Festus Gainey died in 1935 or 1936 when my mother was 9 years old she and Harold Gainey, (all of us her, me, and Harold show FOXP2 and can’t tie our shoes well) in a DuPont workers family .
 Harold worked at DuPont too, war suppliers, during the war . Harold worked on testing synthetic fiber strength. Harold worked for DuPont at the time .
 She wanted Moon River played at her funeral a song about a woman who meets an amazing man who opens her entire world up . Moon River is a song that tells a story of a woman meeting a man who she loves .
 The Donegans took every kind of abuse that society can heep out . They were born poor family just like the Kennedy family, Rose Fitzpatrick, the Donegans .
 James Paul Donegan left Boston Massachusetts to become a P51 pilot just before the formal outbreak of the war and just before he was 18 . Donegan was a pilot in the P51 aircraft .
 By his telling me and Tom Donegan through our lives he was in the Atomic Bombing of Japan likely in the United States Army Air Corps and 509th air force wing of bombers surrounded by fighters and recon.
 After Korean War flying my father did ending in about 1958 Thomas Neil Armstrong was born named after Neil Armstrong and Thomas Jefferson . Thomas Jefferson wrote a Bible without Creationism in it . Thomas Armstrong is the son of Neil and Thomas Armstrong .
 James Paul Donegan Glorian Donegan led good lives . Edward Paul Paul donegan led a good life . He died at the hands of his family members .
 I had trouble in school and have a minor gene defect looked by good doctors who have little access to more data as co-morbid ADHD and Dyslexia, also strong emotions though rapidly flashing, just herniating a bit through reigning it in . I had difficulty in school .
 My mother wished the song Moon River be played at her funeral, sung by Audrey Hepburn of love for the man who swept her off her feet and opened the world up to her .
 Head Royce private school education based on Liberal Arts and the Humanities to one of the most influential artworks I have ever seen. And James Paul Donegan opened the world up to me too with Head Roycing private school .
 The Third of May 1808 (also known as El tres de mayo de 1808 en Madrid or Los fusilamientos de la montafia del Principe Pio) is a painting completed in 1814 by the Spanish painter Francisco Goya .
 While I embrace Irish Nationalism and Sien Fein, India indepence from Eat India Tea company and Ghandi, Palestian protection from excess in close spaces where sabotuer battle is intense .
 State massacre of its citizens is the most brutal of all forms of violence for it ability to surround its victims and operate with impunity . State of state massacre is most brutal form of violence that surrounds its victims . State massacre is 'most brutal' of all violence .
 We were abnormally educated and . abnormally sophisticated which has made us targets of Free Masonry on one level . We are abnormally . educated and abnormally. sophisticated which have made us . targets of the Free . Masonry, says. "We are not going to be able
 FBI subversion tactics were used against me as a terrorist of uknown Orthodox or Pagan sympathies against Chrisiandom . On a second level targeting me . has both opened doors for me, not judging “hookups” church groups in Corpus Christi admonish in people at
 Donegan genome was too, defamed as a mentally retarded person whose DNA is not of value, it is in fact of value and being black marketed . Donegan: "I was simply I was simply ... of value to some backward people and I was of value"
 COINTELPRO is being used to undermine Edward Paul Donegan with a conservancy treating and nearly arrested an insane Dopple of Ed Donegan .
 The effect of the Mafia scheme of using an impersonator of me in a conservancy taking Goth lessons from Goth or Victoria Secrets entertainers sex workers allowed that entertainer to also sign DNA rights into slush funds IF that person being entertained, the Salvation Army loser had child porn .
 Allowing them to destroy my life by generating records of ignorance and misconduct has incited normal areas of life to shun me . I find myself stuck in homeless shelters with no apartments of normal people willing to accept me and fired from all jobs I might have .
 Law enforcement officers do not like to be lured into dark alleys or unsafe places if they are enforcing the law . Police say they are not always going to be drawn into dangerous places .
 If they are breaking the law they may force a person like me into such a place where an unknown and nu-noticed death might occur . No questions raised by a person dying homeless behind a dumpster, no questions raised .
 Jen Moore explains Western Schism and after Russia, blaming the death of JFK on Russia, and acts of the Illuminati on Russia . Jen Moore also blames JFK for JFK's death on Russia and the Illuminati's involvement in Russia .
 Our side of the Schism is using church groups to make gambits of their children to populate Western Schism side of Great Schism of 1054 . This is illegal genome trafficking .
 Non Roman Catholic office holders objected to assassinations and overthrow that Protestants wanted . Protestants wanted but by resentment of both Feudalism and embracing sanctity of life the Irish, Italian, or other Roman Catholics did not wanted genetically cultivated sleeper agents out of Donegan atomic testing genome .
 She adds in Free Masons as elite mafia black budget illegal profits of Deep State via Pizza-gate asset seizures of black market genome used in the Ukraine by United States Mafia crime families .
 Garrison expertly built the case a deep state CIA led killed JFK and blamed then killed Lee Harvey Oswald. this is the case as Joan Mellen changed history. Confirmed by many new sources of available earlier suppressed evidence from me, Jen Moore, others .
 Bush, Richard Cheney, England, and the FBI Knights of Malta . J Edgar Hoover . James Jesus Angleton NWO NWO British backed Wild Bill Donovan .
 An impersonator of me or a person faking I have authorized them to do so goes to an adult entertainer as a retarded person who needs lessons in Goth lifestyle, paganism, sexuality and modeling help for a sexually retarded childlike person .
 Dopple agrees he is Ed Donegan and agrees he's an Atheist and is harming minors from local churches . During the sexual surrogate lessons the moron as me will be caught with child porn and I will be blamed .
 The more complex motive is that person shaken down for the trust fund my mother left, a trust fund which will pay to get my mother’s son out of being arrested, is being bilked of assets due to me and even more to the point I am being branded a low
 The Pizzagate plan is Western Christian organizations using my genome to get lessons on avante guard lifestyle and at the same time use payment of my genome into churches and other organization of world orphanages . CIA creations like Barrack Obama Jr headed to Indonesia or other locations .
 The entirety of a CIA operation is destroying my life, and catching up on the opposition, an Easter Side will educated Atheist Goth whose death will complete my genome transfer into a long running Christian Western Side Great Schism world .
 A Cabal forms branching Eugenics out of Nazi Germany and forming a separate 1936 fork which arose from 1926 babies fertilized in 1925 researching a FOXP2 gene believed to exist in 1902 . This book How amphetamine acts in minimal brain dysfunction .
 They were good friends with ; Anna Freud, Fawn Brodie and Margaret Mead . Margaret Mead was also friends with Anna Freud . They were friends with Margaret Mead, Anna Freud and Margaret Freud .
 Dr. Max Jacobson retrieved from Wikipedia and . copied or modified r here .
 John F Kennedy e Nelson Rockefeller ‘Rocky’ e Marilyn Monroe . Rockefeller is tied to Rockefeller Psychiatrity, Nixon and other administrations .
 Dr. Feelgood administered highly addictive ‘vitamin shots’ laced with various substances that included amphetamine and methamphetamine . The shots were laced with amphetamine, methamphetamine and amphetamine .
 Jacobson was known for his “miracle tissue regenerator” shots . The shots included amphetamines, animal hormones, bone marrow, enzymes, human placenta, painkillers, steroids, and multivitamins .
 In September 1960, then-Senator John F Kennedy first visited Jacobson shortly before the 1960 presidential election debates . Jacobson was part of the presidential entourage at the Vienna summit in 1961, where he administered injections to combat severe back pain .
 Plans include global medicine in the poorest of nations in secretive genetic reversal of retard ion and immunology problems (for instance in Europe resistance was developed against the Bubonic plague Plague .
 For a disease-causing microorganism to infect the human body there must be a gateway or portal through which it enters into human cells . For a gateway to infect a person, there must also be a portal or portal to enter into the body .
 Plague bacterium hijacks white blood cells sent to eliminate it . The plague bacterium works this way, hijacking the white blood cell sent to kill it .
 Traveling inside the white blood cells to the lymph nodes, the bacteria break out and attack the focal point of the human immune system . The lymph nodes are a focal point for the immune system.
 Stephen O’Brien felt that the mutated CCR5 gene, delta 32, may have prevented the plague from being able to enter its host’s white blood cells . The mutated gene is delta 32 . It is believed to have prevented plague from entering its host's white blood
 Michelle Obama has the anthropological proportions of a male K Sasha and Malike , IVF, I just learned were born when I was at AOL Time Warner Netscape at my brothers referal to me for a job, at the exact time I noticed weird Doppelgangers of me
 The U.S.-based advocacy group quickly published a Farsilanguage version of its guide on how to delete digital history that it had produced last year .
 Science Prevails Again Gene Splicing Southpark Four Assed Monkey . A year ago no gene had been tied to performance on an IQ test .
 This passenger is observed floating in the ocean, wearing a life jacket and showing no signs of ; distress .
 Another passenger documents the entire event with a GoPro video camera .
 Back in the 1940s, the FBI was extremely interested in the parents of the husband from this Chicago couple . Now it turns out that back in the 1950s, it was the FBI looking for the parents .
 The Soviet spy was part of an espionage network penetrating the highest levels of the U.S. government . The spy then told the boy’s father “to bear in mind from where he was talking”
 The deceased was named in a sealed affidavit filed in the United States District * Court in Seattle . The affidavit alleges misprision of felony and treason against the ; United States .
 Hawaii Director of Health Loretta ‘Deliana’ Fuddy was the only passenger pronounced dead after the Cessna Caravan went down . Fuddy released President Obama’s ‘Hawaii Certificate of Live Birth’ on April 27, 2011, .
 Harold Bornstein said he felt “raped, frightened and sad” when Keith Schiller, Trump’s longtime former bodyguard, Trump Organization lawyer Alan Garten and another unidentified “large man” came to his Park Avenue office to collect the president's records .
 Her Bitchute Channel after August 8th 2018 technical problems days before her death . Ed Donegan independently and also later continuing her findings and reporting of this money laundering CIA black budget money laundering crime tied to MKULTRA .
 Claude Eatherly, an American pilot involved in the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, was a pilot in the war .
 The explosion lit the lane’s interior with a brilliant flash, so bright that some of the aviators omentarily thought they had been blinded . The explosion was so bright some thought they were blinded .
 George W Bush May Have Big Surprise from DEA from DEA .
 McClendon was unable to identify the body as Wilcher after viewing the remains . McClendon said he did not believe Wilcher was Wilcher .
 He joined FBI agents in the Wilcher partment during the 4:30 to 7:30 time period . He joined the FBI agents during the time period, FBI agents say .
 KIM, who performed the autopsy, has not released the results of the autopsy . The results have not been released .
 Fuller was arrested in 1 Virginia “on apparently trumped up charges” Fuller was being held without i bail at the time of writing in May 1993 . Fuller was held without bail in 1993 after the charges were dismissed .
 The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms attempted to execute a search warrant relating to alleged sexual abuse charges and illegal weapons violations . The warrant was issued at 4:20am on February 28 1993 .
 James Morrison is regarded by music critics and fans as one of the most iconic and influential frontmen in rock history . Morrison's wild personality, poetic lyrics, and erratic performanc es .
 Morrison was commander of U.S. naval forces during the Gulf of Tonkin Incident of August 1964 . The incident sparked an escalation of American involvement in the Vietnam War .
 Morrison witnessed the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941 . Morrison witnessed Yippie-yi-o, Yippi-yay the Japanese . attack on . Pearl Harbor .
 The American Society of Radiologic Technologists is the world’s : largest and oldest membership association for medical imaging : technologists and radiation therapists .
 ASRT provides them with assistance and guidance upon request . These affiliate ; societies operate independently of the national organization, but ASRT .
 Genevieve Eilert is the society's first full-time staff person . The society has increased its membership in recent years . Genevie EilERT is a member of the society .
 Training » programs varied greatly in length and in the subjects covered . Until then, training » programs were only short-lived . Training programs were often shorter than required .
 ASRT continued to grow, and by 1968 membership had reached : 14,000 . ASRT was the first group of its members to join the ASRT in the 1960s .
 1920 American Association of Radiological Technicians formed in Chicago with 12 charter members . e 1929 organization begins publishing The X-Ray Technician. e 1929 Organization begins publishing X
 Sal Martino, Ed.D., R.T., FASRT, CAE, becomes CEO in 2009 . The ASRT Museum and Archives opens in 2015 . 2020 ASRT celebrates its Centennial anniversary .
 The City on the Edge of Forever Quotes PoemOfQuotes.com . Quotes: "One day soon, man will be able to harness incredible energies"
 The men that reach out into space will be able to find ways to feed the hungry millions of the world and cure their diseases . And the men that . reach out to space will . find ways of . finding ways to food and cure diseases, they say .
 They will be able to find a way give each other hope and a common future . They will find each other a way to help each other achieve their goals .
 Edith Keeler is a fictional Missionary worker in 1930s USA who Jim Kirk, Spck, and McCoy encounter . Edith is a Missionary Worker in the 1930s U.S.
 A visionary peace activist and visionary in an age of wonder she foresees rocketry and space flight, the A-Bomb, fighting diseases, and more . A-bomb is a bomb that could be used to bomb the world .
 In on future she will counsel and gain national attention years from the 1930s but in that role she does not foresee the need to fight the Nazis and prepare militarily . The world is captured by the Nazis who do develop and effective rocket an the A Bomb .
 WRGB, then W2XB, was started as the world's first television station in 1928 . WRGB was the world’s first TV station .
 In the Soviet Union, Léon Theremin had been developing a mirror drum-based television, starting with 16 lines resolution in 1925, then 32 lines and eventually 64 using interlacing in 1926 . Meanwhile, in Russia, the Soviets developed a mirror-based TV .
 As part of his thesis, on 7 May 1926, he electrically transmitted, and then projected, nearsimultaneous moving images on a 5-square-foot screen .
 Roosevelt spent most of his time in the Southern U.S. beginning in 1925 . He lived in Southern United States on his houseboat, the Larooco . Roosevelt was born in 1926 .
 Intrigued by the potential benefits of hydrotherapy, he established a rehabilitation center at Warm Springs, Georgia, in 1926 .
 He assembled a staff of physical therapists and used most of his inheritance to purchase the Merriweather Inn . To create the rehabilitation center, he assembled staff of therapists .
 In 1938, he founded the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, leading to the development of polio vaccines . He founded the foundation that helped develop polio vaccines in the 1930s . He died in 1968 at the age of 92 .
 Frederick Griffith experiment, reported in 1928 by Frederick Griffith, was the first experiment suggesting that bacteria are capable of transferring genetic information through a process known as transformation .
 This was vital in treating Influenza of WWI which had killed so many . :Penacillian was not that much earlier. This was not a much earlier .
 A new society offered knowledge-hungry technologists the opportunity to meet and share technical advice . As we see form earlier in this chapter “New society’s new society” was created by a new society of technologists .
 Konstantin Tsiolkovsky’s work, ; “AccneqoBpaHve MMpOBBIX MIpOCTpaHCTB peaKTHBHBbIMM TIpHOopamu” » , ; published
 Robert ' H Goddard’s publication in 1919 of his paper A Method of Reaching I Extreme Altitudes . I Spaceflight became an engineering possibility with the work of Robert 'H Goddard . Goddard's publication of the paper in 1919 .
 His attempt to secure an Army contract for a rocket; propelled weapon in the first World War was defeated by the November ; 11, 1918 armistice .
 He was the first to launch a liquid-fueled rocket in 1926 . Working with private financial support, he launched a liquid fuel rocket .
 World’s first public manned flight of a rocket plane on September 30, 1929 . Opel RAK. Opel was a German-built Opel Opel aircraft that made the first manned flight in September 1929 .
 Project MKUltra is the code name of an illegal U.S. government human research operation experimenting in the behavioral engineering of humans through the CIA’s Scientific Intelligence Division . Project MK Ultra is an illegal United States government operation .
 MKUltra involved the use of "" many methodologies to manipulate people’s mental states and alter brain functions, including the surreptitious administration of drugs (especially 1 LSD) and other chemicals, hypnosis, sensory deprivation, isolation, isolation and verbal and sexual abuse .
 It is the belief of this author Edward Paul Donegan the program included DNA testing of created twins, brothers or half brothers . Barrack Obama, Mark and Scott Kelley, Tom Cruise and many others were also tested .
 JFK’s assassination was tied to objecting to the plan since the experimental output included moles to rule foreign countries on behalf of England . JFK's assassination was linked to the idea that moles would rule foreign nations . JFK was assassinated in 1963 .
 The center was Sidney Gottlieb, Donald Barr, and William Barr along with Dulles and Souther Baptist church, perhaps Salvation Army and YMCA all of which were in the Special Relationship with England, Will Bild Donovan, the Vatican, and others .
 The Project is to research it and help Great Brittian lead the battle against Nazism and Communism .
 Someonewaht insubordiant and informal GANG STALK is a form of non focus to the regimented situation . While not a psychiatric sympton it is a synthesized cognitve result .
 At the same time a person is reactionary to the environmental stressors they are reacting to it also manufactures an animal model as to how nationalists may respond to assault as for instance Adolph Hitler did .
 Dr. Prrotesso Robert Greenberg, Ph.D. retrieved from link and copied or P modified to here . Dr. Robert Greenberg was born in New York .
 Opposition gained the day on nationalization . Direct attempts against nationalization were abandoned . But the problem was more than forms of property in land .
 It is worth nothing that during those years the bourgeois press of the whole world, and the socialdemocratic press after it, repeated with sympathy the official attribution to the ‘Left Opposition” of industrial romanticism .
 The first official draft of the five-year-plan was prepared in 1927 . It was completely saturated with the spirit of stingy tinkering . The first version of the plan was published in 1927.
 Kant argued for the establishment of a peaceful world community, not in a sense of a global government, but in the hope that each state would group up . Kant argues for the creation of the world community not a global state, but a peaceful state of peace .
 Was it not declare itself a free state that respects citizens indeed the cruel and welcomes foreign visitors as fellow rational dataais ae thea beings, thus promoting peaceful society worldwide?
 Communist International is international disputes through negotiation and arbitration . The less he Communist International . International disputes through . negotiation through . arbitration, the less he .
 In 1919 United States president Woodrow Wilson won the Nobel Peace Prize for his role as the leading architect of the League . More political credit is given to Czechoslovak, and other bourgeoisies .
 The diplomatic philosophy behind the League represented a fundamental shift from the preceding hundred years . There was a major shift in the diplomatic philosophy from the previous hundred years to the League .
 The League lacked its own armed force and depended on the victorious First World War Allies to enforce its resolutions, keep to its economic sanctions, or provide an army when needed . is another . The League of Nations was founded by Britain, France, Italy, Italy and Japan .
 The Communist International systematically paints up the episodical allies of Moscow as “friends of peace”, deceives the workers with slogans like “collective security” and “disarmament” . Thus becomes in reality a political agent of the imperialists among
 The three leaders coordinated their military strategy against Germany and Japan . They made a number of important decisions concerning the post-World War II era .
 This is part of our series about CIA employees who have made the ultimate sacrifice . This book is about CIA personnel who have died in service .
 Shedd was a commercial officer, charged with helping U.S. companies do business in the region . Shedd: Shedd is charged with assisting U.K. companies doing business in region .
 To learn more about the Obama Foundation Scholars program and the 2020-2021 cohort, please visit obama.org/scholars .
 Obama to mark 75th anniversary of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Obama: From the ashes of destruction emerged a narrative of hope and peace .
 Post a topic that you’d love to share or sign up to engage on a topic you'd like to further explore . Meet up in-person onsite in the Braindate Lounge .
 The program gives grants to those in the legal system who have criminal backgounds in program designed to team them with Law Enforcement and Neigbborhood watch to switch their allegiance and lives towards civil conduct .
 President Obama: "We started My Brother's Keeper so that every boy or young man of color in America would know that their dreams mattered as much as any other child" Obama: My Brother’s Keeper is a place for young men of color to learn about their dreams .
 President Obama hoped his words would lead to a more empathetic understanding of the danger facing a son who looked like him . “Jf I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon Martin,” he said .
 William Albert Haynes III is a retired American professional wrestler better known as Billy Jack Haynes . Haynes is best known for his role in the professional wrestling industry . He is a former professional wrestler .
 Rich’s death as well as ‘The Boys on the Track’ to the widely debunked : “Clinton Body Count” conspiracy theory . Rich”s death is the subject of a new book, "The Boys On the Track," to the debunked “
 Haynes alleges that this unnamed politician asked him to kill David Kennedy, the son of Robert F Kennedy, in 1984 . Haynes then alleges that the unnamed politician then asked him for the killing .
 Ass Flashing towards me (Rx direction line, I receive the imagery towards me) which is harassing in itself . Sockem: Blame me for the incident out of my control but do it behind my back and let the stigma or stereotype of a single male work as me
 Women walking down the street in front of me, out of my control, are pieced together with other pieces, like ambiguous statements from others in places of business, pizza shops, etc., then behind my back those out of place things can be “fit together” in a
 Sound And Fury accusation towards me (empty of any accusation, just character assignation towards me like saying “Ed you are DIRT” utilized Newton’s Third Law of Motion Corrective Ploy. Sound And Fury accusation . Sound and Fury accusation .
 Dirty cops frame me with planted or real victims, then shake down ‘retarded’ Ed’s unwanted uneeded conservancy United States Marshalls and others . Ed asks for community support over and instead of me because the U.S. Marshalls are DEFEND
 "This is mostly racially motivated created inter racial DNA permissions via what an impersonator of me will sign over. This is mostly . I'm not sure what the impersonator is doing, but it's not what he's doing, he says .
 Tom Dunham, who had appearance created he was in a pedo network with me, had people, strangers, say odd things to him like “be careful.” Dunham says . Tom Dunham: “Be careful. Be careful”
 Where were you a few minutes ago (when my location was known, I was walking the dog) Are attempts to place me the location the Doppelganger was. was. When you were there, you can find the location you were .
 Capone’s Soup Kitchen, 1 Situated on what is now a parking lot on the corner of 9th and State St, served over 120,000 meals to hungry people . Most of the city of impoverished Corpus Christi Texas and the city itself are living far above their
 The kitchen, which was emolished 20 years after the epression, was a place that provided warm meals for unemployed people thanks to Capone . Capone's kitchen is now a museum .
 Capone was also known for sending expensive flowers to rival gang member’s funerals . He was known for his generosity to strangers and Italian immigrants .
 The ‘Boiler Room Girls’ was a nickname for a group of six women who worked as political advisors for Robert Kennedy’s 1968 presidential campaign in a windowless work area in his Washington, DC electoral offices .
 Washington campaign headquarters headquarters to each state director in their region . Washington state director: "I'm going to be a national hero"
 At the end of the day, a decision book was compiled and sent to Kennedy and his campaign manager, Stephen Smith . Kennedy and Smith's team compiled the decision book .
 Barbara Pierce Bush was the first lady of the United States from 1989 to 1993 . Nancy Davis Reagan (born Anne Frances Robbins) was an American film actress and first lady . Nancy Reagan was born in 1921 .
 As Nancy Davis, she was a Hollywood actress in the 1940s and 1950s, starring in films such as The Next Voice You Hear..., Night into oming, and M ( Cer Jill Tracy Jacobs Biden) is the current first lady of the United States .
 She was previously the second lady of the United States from 2009 to 2017 . She was formerly the U.S. second lady .
 She taught English and reading in high schools for 13 years . She also instructed adolescents with emotional disabilities at a psychiatric hospital . She taught adolescents with mental health issues .
 Ashley Blazer Biden is an American social worker, activist, philanthropist, and fashion designer . She is also a fashion designer, activist and designer .
 Blazer Biden visited the Mapetla Day Care Centre in Soweto, South Africa, during an official visit ad in June 2010 . Biden's visit was part of his first African tour of South Africa .
 She received the John Hope Franklin Combating American Racism Award . She was one of twelve graduates who received the award . She is one of 12 graduates who won the award in 2012 .
 After finishing graduate school, she gained a job at West End Neighborhood » House, a non-profit organization, as their Employment and Education » Liaison for adjudicating youth developing various employment and job i skills training programs .
 She worked as a social worker in the Delaware Department of Services for Children, Youth, and Their Families for 15 years .
 While working for the department, Biden created programs for youth focusing on juvenile justice, foster care, and mental health . Biden also created programs focusing on youth . Biden has been in charge of the National Guard since 2001 .
 In 2012, she ; joined the Delaware Center for Justice as an associate director, focusing . on criminal justice reform in the state .
 Programs and services at the center focused on public education, adult "" victim services, gun violence, incarcerated women, and community reentry .
 James Daniel Jordan is an American 1 politician serving as the United States representative for Ohio’s 4th congressional district since 2007 . He has been in the U.S. House of Representatives since 2007 and is currently serving as an Ohio representative .
 Rep. Jim Jordan attended and wrestled for Graham High School in 1982 . He graduated from high school wrestling . Jordan is a Republican who has served in Congress since 1999 .
 Jordan is a founding member of the | ARCOM UAL SCOLIEM BRC OIMOrI@bS . Jordan served as its first chair from 2015 to 2017, and as its vice chair since 2017 . Jordan also served as the first chair of the . ARCOM
 He was the ""ranking member of the House Oversight Committee from 2019 to 2020 . He was a member of Congress from 2019-2020 .
 Jordan sought to discredit investigations into Russian interference in the 2016 election . Jordan staged a sit-in to prevent a Trump impeachment inquiry hearing over the Trump-Ukraine scandal . Jordan has been critical of investigations into Russia's election meddling .
 After Joe Biden won the 2020 presidential election and Trump refused to concede while making false claims of fraud, Jordan supported lawsuits ; to invalidate the election results and voted not to certify the Electoral "" College results . Jordan supported a lawsuit against the president and vice president .
 Harvard Law School graduate was still a student at the U.S. Naval Reserve Center in Dallas, Texas, when he was in the Navy . He was a member of the Naval Reserve at the time .
 Later ; that year, he received orders to the JAG Trial Service Office Command * South East at Naval Station Mayport, Florida, as a prosecutor . He received orders that year to serve in the Navy .
 He worked for the commander of Joint Task Force-Guantanamo . He worked directly with detainees at the Guantanamo Bay Joint Detention Facility .
 DeSantis deployed to Iraq with the troop surge as the Legal Advisor to the SEAL Commander, Special Operations Task Force-West in Fallujah . He was reassigned to the Naval Region Southeast Legal Service in April 2008 .
 The U.S. Department of Justice appointed him to serve as an assistant United States : attorney at the United States Attorney’s Office in the Middle District of Florida .
 DeSantis was assigned as a trial defense counsel until his honorable discharge from active duty in February 2010 . He was assigned to duty duty with the U.S. Army in 2010 .
 He was awarded the Bronze * Star Medal, the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal, and the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal . He also received the Iraq Campaign Medal .
 They were just hard at work yet an observer there was there that asked the first mason what he was doing . The first masons were working hard at the time .
 Eleanor Iselin Manchurian Candiate 1962 . A person at extension 3223 is under control of the Queen of Diamonds card to act against his will, him possibly my father who haed the British. Eleanor .
 Gene Gargan was the campaign chairman for Robert F Kennedy’s 1968 presidential campaign . Gargan worked for the Kennedy campaign in 1968 .
 Michael McCarthy is a strong-willed man of Irish descent . McCarthy was a postmaster and cattle buyer . He was the son of Michael McCarthy .
 In 1943, he became a 1 Benedictine novice at Saint John’s Abbey . In 1943 he was considering the contemplative life of a monk .
 Howard was married twice and had two children . In the fall of 1964, ABC cancelled her news show and fired Howard .
 Her ; first marriage was to film director Felix E Feist, with whom she had a daughter, Fritzi .
 Howard suffered a miscarriage in June 1965 and was hospitalized with depression . Howard later married producer Walter Lowendahl, with whom she had a daughter .
 She was invited speaker at the International Congress of Mathematicians in 2006 . Her book is “Space?” and she was invited to be a guest speaker at 2006 .
 The Mathematics Genealogy Project is a web-based database for the academic genealogy of mathematicians . It is a search engine for a database of academic genealogists .
 Monkeys original line-up consisted of American actor/musicians Micky Dolenz, Michael Nesmith and Peter Tork with English actor Davy Jones . The Monkeys were originally formed by the American actor Micky .
 Fred attended Rice Institute in Houston from 1917 to 1919 . He graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1922 . He obtained a degree in chemical engineering practice .
 The larger oil companies quickly sued in response, filing 44 different lawsuits against Koch . Koch has been embroiled in litigation for years, embroiling him in litigation .
 Koch had partnered with William Rhodes Davis to build the Hamburg Oil Refinery, the third-largest oil refinery serving the Third Reich . Critics claim this showed a direct tie between fascism and the modern conservative movement, notwithstanding Koch's much greater involvement in the Soviet Union .
 In 1966, he turned over day-to-day management of the company to his son, Charles Koch . In 1980, Congressman Charlie Wilson is more interested in partying than legislating .
 Joanne King Herring is an American socialite, businesswoman, political activist, philanthropist, diplomat, and former television talk show host . She is also a former diplomat and businesswoman .
 Gustav Lascaris Avrakotos (January 14, 1938 December 1, 2005) was an American case officer and the Afghan Task Force Chief for the Central Intelligence Agency . SAP is " better known as “SAR” by the mandatory Special Access "" Required markings .
 Richard Welch, the chief of the CIA station in Athens, was assassinated in December 1975 . Welch was a charismatic, working-class American whose parents had come from Lemnos . Ke had all started off life as peasants .
 Charlie Wilson is more interested in partying than legislating, frequently throwing huge galas and staffing his congressional office with attractive young women . He ended his tenure in Greece in 1978 .
 Charles Nesbitt Wilson (JUNE 1, 1933 February 10, 2010) was a United States naval officer and former 12term Democratic United States Representative from Texas’s 2nd congressional district . Wilson was a former 12 term Democratic U.S. Representative .
 Charles Nesbitt Wilson was a United States naval officer and former 12-term Democratic United States Representative from Texas’s 2nd congressional district . Wilson was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1963 .
 Wilson is best known for leading Congress into supporting Operation Cyclone, the largest Central Intelligence Agency covert operation in history . The operation supplied military equipment to the Afghan Mujahideen during the Soviet-Afghan War . Wilson is known for his role in supporting the operation .
 Wilson was born in the small town of Trinity, Texas, to Charles Edwin Wilson, an accountant for a local timber company, and Wilmuth , a local florist .
 Wilson first entered politics as a teenager by running a campaign against his next-door neighbor, Charles Hazard . According to Wilson himself, he first ran a campaign as a teen .
 The women of Minnesota pitched in to do their part during World War II, breaking out of traditional roles . Ee. Ee was a pioneer of women's roles in the military .
 Some signed on to work in defense plants, while others took advantage of opportunities in the military . Some of the families signed on with the military to join forces .
 Women's Air Force Service Pilots flew planes from one base to another to free a male pilot for war duty . Virginia Mae Hope, pictured here, joined the W.A.S.P.s (Women’s Air Force) in 1943 .
 Dolenz went to Ulysses S Grant High School in Valley Glen, Los Angeles, California, and graduated in 1962 . He has three younger sisters, Gemma Marie , Deborah , and Kathleen .
 Joanne Gignilliat Trimmier Woodward is an American actress, producer, and philanthropist . She was born in 1930 . She is also a philanthropist and actress .
 She eventually began marketing her typewriter correction fluid as “Mistake Out’s” in 1956 . She began marketing the correction fluid in 1956, when it was first marketed .
 Peter Halsten Thorkelson (February 13, 1942), known professionally as Peter Tork, was an American musician, composer, and actor . He was best known as the keyboardist and bass guitarist of the Monkees . He is best known for playing keyboards and bass guitar .
 Felix and Felix Hughes settled in Keokuk, Iowa in 1879, where Felix Hughes was an attorney . The Hughes family was a prominent lawyer and businessman .
 The children attended First Ward School and were educated in the arts, history and science . The children were educated at the school .
 When her son offered to build her a house in Keokuk, Iowa, she asked the house be built without closets . She asked her son Robard to include closets in the house .
 The Hughes XF-11 was a prototype military reconnaissance aircraft designed and flown by Howard Hughes . It was built by Hughes Aircraft for the U.S. Army Air Forces .
 During the first XF-11 flight in 1946, piloted by Hughes himself, the aircraft crashed in Beverly Hills, California . The aircraft was the first of its kind .
 The production aircraft had been canceled in May 1945, but the second prototype was completed and successfully flown in 1947 . The production plane was canceled .
 The program was extremely controversial from the beginning, leading the United States Senate to investigate the XF-11 and the Hughes H-4 Hercules flying boat in 1947-1948 . The Senate investigated the program in 1947 and 1948 .
 A reconnaissance aircraft is a military aircraft designed or adapted to perform aerial reconnaissance . Its roles include collection of imagery intelligence, signals intelligence, measurement and signature intelligence .
 Modern technology has enabled some aircraft and UAVs to carry out real-time surveillance in addition to general intelligence gathering . Modern technology also enables some aircraft to carry on real-world surveillance .
 Before the development of devices such as radar, military forces relied on reconnaissance aircraft for visual observation and scouting of enemy movement .
 The XF-11 was a beautiful and innovative aircraft that had all the potential to be a great success in the armed forces . It was a bad day for Hughes and for the aircraft, and for Hughes .
 With its breeding, its capabilities and potential, the XF-11 might have snagged a lucrative production contract for Hughes . With its breed capabilities and its potential, it could have won a lucrative contract .
 The XF-11 was a “might have been,” a footnote in history that not everyone remembers today . Instead, it was a "might might have been," a footnote . The plane was a prototype of the Air Force One .
 Elliott Roosevelt, son of the president, wanted to adapt the plane for reconnaissance for the expected invasion of the Japanese home islands .
 This was an evolution for Roosevelt who had started out with an interest in a ‘convoy fighter” a huge, twin-engined warplane that would escort long-range heavy bombers to their targets . This was the first time Roosevelt had interest in the “convoy
 The D-2 was part of the same development efforts that produced the Lockheed XP-58 Chain Lightning . It was so scrupulously safeguarded that no clear photo of it is known to exist . No clear photos of it are known .
 The XF-11 was an offspring of a giant twinengined fighter, the Hughes D-2 . It was assembled in secrecy at Harper Dry Lake in the Mojave Desert, a location even more remote than the Army Air Forces’ flight test facility at Muroc,
 Gen. Hughes developed the D-2 in such secrecy that his company refused permission to even even Gen. Gen. Robert S. Hughes . Hughes' company refused to even reveal the secrets of the project .
 Henry “Hap” Arnold, the commanding general of Army Air Forces, visited the Harper Lake facility . Arnold was the obvious customer for the plane . The plane was built for the Army Air Force .
 In the 1940s, the Pentagon had absolute power over contractors . Ryan Aeronautical Co. was denied contracts throughout the war because of a perceived minor snub . Hughes seems to have felt that his connections to the White House made him bulletproof .
 Arnold is reported to have said that, “Hughes is turning against us” by developing an aircraft for military needs but not allowing the government to know much about it . This “Galactic Federation” has supposedly been in contact with Israel “and the United States
 Eshed said the timing was simply due to how much the academic landscape has changed, and how respected he is in academia . As for why he’s chosen to reveal this information now, Eshed explained i .
 If a 32 year old should see a 33 year old being carried away by a Pterodactyl the 32 should seek advice from a 33-year-old on whether it is wise to take the shot . The 32 year-old should seek the advice of the 33 year-
 Jodie Foster is an Illuminati crypto-pharisee pre-conditioning movie about “alien” life and contact with humans . Foster further starred in Contact, another pre-conformering movie . Foster herself is a member of the Illuminati .
 AFTERWORDS, a post-show talkback with the cast, will occur after the matinee performance on FEBRUARY 17 . After the show, a talkback will be held after the show .
 It can be used by companies sending out press releases to judge reaction by customers, or by politicians who deliberately leak information on a policy change .
 McConnell stated that his family “almost went broke” because of costs related to his illness . McConnell said his family almost went broke because of the costs .
 Eric Michael Swalwell is an American politician serving as the United States Representative for California’s 15th congressional district since 2013 . He is currently serving in California's 15th Congressional District .
 California’s 11th congressional district is a congressional district in the U.S. state of California . The 11th district consists of most of Contra Costa County .
 The Tuskegee Institute opened a polio center in 1941, funded by the March of Dimes . The center was the first polio center to be opened in the U.S. in 1941 .
 This policy, reflecting the ubiquitous norm of race-segregated health facilities of the era, was also sustained by a persuasive scientific . argument about polio itself: that Blacks were not susceptible to the disease .
 Kirk Lee Hammett is lead guitarist and contributing songwriter for heavy metal band Metallica . Hammett has been the lead guitarist for Metallica since 1983 . He has also contributed songwriter and contributing guitarist to Metallica's success .
 In 1964, Poitier won the Academy Award for Best Actor becoming the first Black male and Afro-Bahamian actor to win that award . He was the first African-American actor to receive that award in 1964 .
 He is the oldest living and earliest surviving Best Actor Academy Award winner . He is oldest living, earliest surviving Oscar winner and oldest living Oscar winner .
 Poitier was made an honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth II in 1974 .
 During World War II, in November 1943, he lied about his age and enlisted in the Army . He lied about age to get into the Army, and enlisted .
 After leaving the Army he worked as a dishwasher until a successful audition landed him a spot with the American Negro Theater . After leaving he worked at the theater he worked for the theater .
 The nine stories in this book illuminate times when unusual circumstances such as sudden death, unresolved emotions, abusive relationships, and painful family dynamics, make it necessary for the dead and the living to find new doors to healing .
 Kurt Donald Cobain was an American singer, songwriter, and musician . He was born February 20, 1967, in Aberdeen, WA, and died April 5, 1994 .
 He was so angry with his family that he lashed out at them and bullied a classmate at school . He was angry with the family, especially adults, and bullied his classmate .
 He started using his middle "" name ‘Spacey’, which is also his paternal grandmother’s maiden maiden . His paternal grandmother was also his grandmother .
 Rahm Israel Emanuel is an American politician who served as the 55th mayor of Chicago from 2011 to 2019 . Emanuel’s paternal grandfather was a Moldovan Jew who emigrated from Bessarabia, Moldova .
 His mother, Marsha, is the daughter of a West Side Chicago union organizer who worked in the civil rights movement . His mother Marsha is also a union organizer and a former Chicago organizer .
 New Orleans and Texas are places named often in the JFK assasination theories . New Orleans, Texas, and Methodists are all in the vicinity of larger collection of interests .
 Lamo says he was placed under a 72-hour involuntary psychiatric hold in May 2010 . The hold was extended to a nine-day hold . Lamo said he reported the theft of his backpack to an investigating officer .
 George Bush Jr.'s casket is draped with an American flag . George W. Bush Jr. is seen in a casket draped with a flag . Bush's funeral will be held in Washington, DC .
 Newton was born in Monroe, Louisiana, in 1942 during World War II . He was the youngest child of Armelia Johnson and Walter Newton . Newton was a sharecropper and Baptist lay preacher .
 Jackson, James E “A Fighting People Forging New Unity,” The Worker, July 7, 1963. “The Worker’s The Worker” was published in 1963 .
 He won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for Cool Hand Luke . He was nominated for the Golden Globe for the role . He also won a Golden Globe nomination for his role in Cool HandLuke .
 He was a vice president at Citibank, one of the world’s biggest financial institutions .
 S Peter Yarrow is an American singer and songwriter . He found fame with the 1960s folk music trio Peter, Paul and Mary . Yarrow was a member of the folk music group .
 She and Bernard divorced in 1943 when their son ; Peter was five, and Vera subsequently married Harold Wisebrode, the executive director of the Central Synagogue in Manhattan .
 Dwight D Eisenhower’s Secretary of State and chairman and ; senior partner of Sullivan & Cromwell, was two years older than his ; sister, diplomat Eleanor Lansing Dulles .
 On September 5, 1982, Gaynor, her husband Paul Gregory, Mary Martin, and Martin’s manager Ben Washer were involved in a serious car wreck in San Francisco .
 Her doctor, Bart Apfelbaum, attributed her death to the 1982 car wreck . Gaynor “never recovered” from her injuries, her doctor said .
 Gaynor is buried at Hollywood Forever Cemetery next to her second husband, Adrian . Gaynor was married to Adrian for three years .
 Aykroyd's father worked as policy adviser to Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau . He grew up in Ottawa, Canada’s capital, where his father worked .
 His mother, Lorraine Héléne Marie (née Gougeon; 27 April ; 1918 8 February 2018), was a secretary . He was born in Paris, France, and his mother died in February 2018 .
 Since childhood, Aykroyd has struggled with symptoms of Tourette syndrome and Asperger syndromes . He has also struggled with Tourette's symptoms of Aspergers syndrome and Touretterette syndrome .
 e This article contains content that is written like an advertisement. Please help to improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. e A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject.
 I think the article suffers from Neutral point of view issues . The section titled ‘diversity’ is made up entirely of quotes from Deborah ; Lee James herself with no citations .
 Martin reportedly doing well after fainting during a news conference Tuesday . Martin reportedly fainted during the news conference to unveil the service's fiscal 2017 budget .
 Air Force deputy assistant secretary for budget for budget under the Air Force’s Financial Management and Comptroller office . Air Force spokeswoman Maj. Maj. Martin says she is back to work supporting Secretary of Air Force Deborah Lee James and Chief of Staff General Mark Welsh .
 Cyrus Vance served in the U.S. Navy as a gunnery officer on the destroyer USS Hale (DD642) until 1946 . Vance was a member of the Navy during World War II .
 In 1968, President Johnson sent him to South Korea to deal with the USS Pueblo hostage situation . In 1968 he was sent to help deal with a hostage crisis in South Korea .
 Conrad, who has recently returned home from a four-month stay in a psychiatric hospital, feels alienated from his friends and family and begins seeing a psychiatrist, Dr. Dr. Conrad . Conrad was recently diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder .
 Berger learns Conrad was involved in the sailing accident that killed Buck, whom everyone idolized . Conrad was killed in the accident that took the life of Buck .
 Robert Conrad's first film as movie director was directed by Robert Conrad . Conrad's brother, Buck, died in a boating accident . The film was based on the brothers' experiences .
 Buck and his brother Conrad had taken the boat out onto the lake when a storm occurred and caused the boat to capsize . Buck and Conrad were killed when the boat capsized in a storm .
 Conrad starts dating a fellow student, Jeannine, who helps him to begin to regain a sense of optimism . Conrad begins dating a classmate and begins to be optimistic again . Conrad is a student at the University of Cambridge .
 Conrad, however, still struggles to communicate and re-establish a normal relationship with his parents and schoolmates . Conrad is still struggling to communicate with his family and friends . Conrad's parents and friends have been supportive of Conrad .
 He cannot seem to allow anyone, especially his mother Beth, to get close to him . His mother Beth is one of his closest confidants .
 Beth makes several guarded attempts to appeal to Conrad for some semblance of normality, but she ends up being cold toward him . Beth ends up cold toward Conrad .
 The band swims deep into what I call Max-Protect, football term for walls around me, the house walls, my best defense as far as home turf and being in control of it . Like the poroise the band Heart compares itself to as record produces attempt to extort
 "I have tried to stay in the most safe place. During the writing of the book I was trying to find out what the black market criminal organization interest in my genome was, like Heart, I have been trying to stay safe .
 The sexual attack is in the form of a racial hate crime, racial groups plant child porn and claim I am a trafficker in it and will pay for the child porn . The victim says she was attacked by racial groups who plant child pornography .
 Pizzagate scheme is a mix of researching Goths by hiring adult sex workers to pubish Fake Ed who is a teen-phile and also find out who those goth women are .
 The affect of the Dopple’s acts on my reputation and me sighted near teen females is dectructive to my reputation . That damage reputation incites the public to conspire against my presence including my presence in court when hearings are held .
 On phony and rigged allegation while on the job of her fast food company she stole from a customer's purse . The alleged police officer scams members of the public to strip and inspect the blonde cashier .
 The scenario was a variation on Pay Up Or Be Arrested, here she was part of some plot to prove her innocence or her strip searchers would be assisting police in some contrived law enforcement matter .
 Sandra, manager of a ChickWich fast food restaurant, receives a call from someone identifying himself as Officer Daniels . Sandra is the manager of the ChickWic restaurant . Sandra was the victim of an officer impersonating Officer Daniels. Sandra is Sandra's manager at the restaurant. Sandra was
 He claims to be in contact with the regional manager about a customer who had money allegedly stolen by an employee that day . The man claims to have been in touch with the manager about the incident .
 Daniels claims that he is searching the suspect's residence, but will remain on the phone while Sandra detains the employee until the police arrive . Daniels claims to be looking into the suspect, but says he is not looking into his residence .
 Sandra identifies Becky as the suspect based on the description; Daniels confirms the name . Sandra identifies the suspect as Becky . Becky is the suspect in the case .
 Sandra brings Becky to the restaurant office with another employee, Marti . Marti joins Becky in the restaurant's restaurant office . The restaurant is full of Becky and Marti.
 Sandra searches Becky's pockets and purse and finds nothing . Sandra finds nothing in the pockets of her purse .
 Daniels has her strip-search Becky . Telling her that the alternative is to have Becky go to jail, Daniels tells her to strip search her .
 Daniels tells Sandra that he and other officers are searching Becky's home on suspicion that her brother is involved in drugs, and that Becky may be involved . Daniels says he and others are searching the house on suspicion of drug possession .
 Sandra put Becky's clothes into a bag and take it to her car for inspection by the police . He has Sandra put the clothes in a bag to take to the police car for an inspection .
 After Daniels stipulates that a male employee watch Becky for ""security reasons" Another employee, Kevin, is brought in, but questions Daniels’ instructions and leaves .
 Sandra's fiancé Van takes over; under pressure from Daniels over the beers he drank before driving to the restaurant, he has Becky perform nude jumping jacks to shake loose any contraband concealed in her body .
 Ann Dowd was born in Holyoke, Massachusetts . She was the daughter of John and Dolores Dowd . She is one of the best known actors in television and film .
 Ann is one of seven children who were raised by their mother after her father died when Ann was a senior in high school . Ann was raised by her mother after their mother died when she was a high school senior .
 Her sister Kathleen Dowd is a casting director based in London . Her brother John Dowd Jr. is president of The Dowd Agencies, the insurance company started by their great-grandfather .
 Her paternal grandfather was James ""Kip"" Dowd, a former Major League baseball player for the Pittsburgh Pirates . Dowd's paternal grandfather is a former Pittsburgh Pirates player .
 Roger Craig Zobel is an American filmmaker and actor . His work includes music videos, film, and television . He is also an actor and musician .
 Becky the strip search victim meets an attorney to discuss options for suing Sandra . Becky was strip searched at Sandra's home . Sandra's husband says he's considering legal options to sue Sandra .
 Daniels stipulates that a male employee watch Becky for ""security reasons" Another employee, Kevin, is brought in, but questions Daniels' instructions and leaves .
 Van leaves with guilt and is replaced by the custodian, Harold, who is outraged by Daniels' instructions . Van is replaced with Harold, but Harold is not happy with his actions .
 Harold tells Sandra about Daniels’ orders; she calls the regional manager, who tells her he has no idea about any investigation . Sandra calls Sandra's regional manager who says he's not aware of any investigation into Daniels' orders . Harold calls Sandra to talk to her boss about Daniels'
 The Warriors is a 1979 American action thriller film directed by Walter Hill . Walter Hill directed the film . The Warriors was released in 1979 .
 The film is based on Sol Yurick's 1965 novel of the same name . It was released in the United States on February 9, 1979 .
 Cyrus proposes to the assembled crowd a citywide truce and alliance that would allow the gangs to control the city together . The gangs collectively outnumber the police by three to one . Cyrus proposes a truce, which would allow them to control together .
 Luther, the unbalanced and sadistic leader of the Rogues, shoots Cyrus dead as police officers arrive to raid the summit . Cyrus is killed by Luther as police arrive at the summit to arrest him . Luther is Luther's unbalanced leader and a sadistic, sadistic and sad
 Luther realizes one of the Warriors, Fox, appears to suspect him, and makes a false accusation . In the ensuing chaos, Luther realizes that Fox appears to be suspecting him . Luther realized that Fox had made an accusation against Luther .
 The United States Gov. Rouges, mocking me and false accusing me, mocked me, trying to call out Donegan's into a loosing fight over a false allegation transferring black from the guilty rouges to the loyal veteran family Warriors .
 Cleon Cleon of the multi-racial gang The Warriors is the one falsely accused . Cleon is a member of The Warriors, a multi-race gang that was falsely accused of being racist .
 Deceased Cyrus's gang The Riffs are a gang which seeks vengeance against the Warriors and stalk the Warriors . They are also known as the Riffs, who seek vengeance for their crimes .
 The Donegans, the Kennedys, and the Russians are under attack for the murder of JKF but that was from Shriver-Lawford British aligned Commonwealth spies in the USA trying to wind the cold war by Roman Catholics at the very top joining with Isreal and England
 Now those gangs aka Bush Abbot and NWO Neocons stalk the wrongly accused Donegans . Donegans were wrongly accused of murder in the 1990s .
 I try to get the Kennedy family and my evidence to point out to the Deep State that the Bush Family killed JKF and turn on their Texas Ranch William TEIl overture playing . William TEIL overture plays .
 A real person acting under that name will help Emma in a plot against Brad getting him out of the picture which the Trust Fund had required he stay in . Working with Molly and sympathetic to Emma Lilly a real person will help her in the plot to get Brad out .
 The Dark Side was founded by a person whose knowledge of the Force, let us say Cellular Biology and Genetics that the could alter life itself . Palpatine was born from a person who knew that the Force could alter the lives of people .
 He died in his sleep but not before teaching his apprentices his skills . He died before teaching them his skills, but he also taught his apprentices .
 José Maria Mariano Mariano Escriva y Albas was born on 9 January 1902 in Barbastro, in Huesca, Aragon, Spain . The second of six children and the first of two sons .
 José Escriva was a merchant and a partner in a textile company that eventually went bankrupt . He was a clerk in a clothing store in Logrofo, in the northern province of La Rioja, where he worked .
 Young Josemaria first felt that ‘he had been chosen for something’, it is reported . He saw footprints left in the snow by a monk walking barefoot .
 Escriva prepared to become a priest of the Catholic Church with his father's blessing . With his father’s blessing he prepared to be a priest in the Catholic church .
 He studied first in Logrono and then in Zaragoza, where he was ordained as deacon on Saturday, 20 December 1924 . He studied at Logronos and Zaragozano, and was ordained in 1924 .
 He was ordained a priest, also in Zaragoza, on 28 March 1925 . He was born in 1925 .
 Escriva was employed as a private tutor and chaplain to the Foundation of Santa Isabel, a school managed by the Little Sisters of the Assumption . In Madrid he was a chaplain for the royal Convent of the Santa Isabel and a school run by the nuns . Escri
 Escriva fled from Madrid during the Spanish Civil War, via Andorra and France, to the city of Burgos, which was the headquarters of General Francisco Franco’s Nationalist forces . During the war, he fled to Burgos to become a Nationalist leader .
 Escriva was able to resume his studies after the war ended in 1939 with Franco’s victory . He completed a doctorate in law, for which he submitted a thesis on the historical jurisdiction of the Abbess of Santa Maria la Real de Las Huelgas .
 The Priestly Society of the Holy Cross, affiliated with Opus Dei, was founded on February 14, 1943 . The society is affiliated with the Opus dei .
 The decree declaring Escriva ‘Venerable’ states that “in 1947 and on Monday, 16 June 1950, he obtained approval of Opus Dei as an institution of pontifical right.”
 Many of Escriva's contemporaries recount his tendency to preach about patriotism as opposed to nationalism . Many of his contemporaries recount the tendency to speak out against nationalism . The best-known poet of the Spanish poet was known for his work in Spain .
 Escriva de Balaguer is at bottom a child of his time: he is the product of a specific country, a specific epoch, and a specific church . More than “a classic of the spirituality of all time” he is a product of the time, he
 If Opus Dei had “never seen the need to bring itself up to date”, Escriva maintained, Opus would today be a paramilitary, pro-fascist, antimodernist, integralist organization . These are the Spain of General Franco and the church
 Professor Peter Berglar asserts that Franco’s falangists suspected Escriva of “internationalism, anti-Spainism and Freemasonry” and that during “the first decade of Franco's regime, Opus Dei and Escrivas were attacked with
 Escriva was even reported to the Tribunal for the . Fight against Freemasonry” On June 26, 1975, Josemaria died in his workroom of a heart attack . Escrivia was reported to .
 Opus Dei was present on all inhabited continents, numbering over 60,000 people from more than 80 nationalities . At his death, Opus was present in all inhabited . continents .
 In 1963 the year JFK died, he was named by Pope John XXIII as a consultant on the Pontifical Commission for the revision of the Code of Canon Law . In 1963, JFK died .
 Pope Paul VI named him consultant on several post-Conciliar commissions . He served as a consultant to the Pope on several commissions .
 In 1975, he was chosen general president of the Opus Dei and successor of Josemaria Escriva de Balaguer . In 1982, the Holy See appointed him as the first Prelate of Opus dei . He was also chosen as the successor to Josemar
 In 1991, he was consecrated a bishop by Pope John Paul II . In 1991 he was the first Italian bishop to be consecrated as a bishop .
 He has written extensively about pastoral and ecclesiological matters . He examines the role of the lay faithful in the Roman Catholic Church .
 Shortly after his 80th birthday, he returned to Rome on a pilgrimage from the Holy Land . Shortly after he turned 80, he went back to Italy on pilgrimage .
 Pope John Paul II came to pray before del Portillo’s remains, which now lie in the crypt of the Church of the Prelature, Our Lady of Peace at Bruno Buozzi 75 .
 Alvaro del Portillo y Diez de Sollano (11 March 1914 23 March 1994) was a Spanish engineer and Roman Catholic bishop . He died in 1994 at the age of 85 .
 He served as the prelate of Opus Dei between 1982 and 1994 as the successor to Josemaria Escriva . He was the successor of Josemarie Escrieva .
 Church leaders Pope John Paul II and Cardinal Carlo Caffarra have praised Portillo as a faithful servant of God .
 Coruscant ecumenopolis is the name of the planet in the fictional Star Wars universe, Corsica the island in Europe that could replace Hitlers Austria Germany . Corsica is a European island in the European continent .
 Rey hears the voices of past Jedi, who lend her their strength . Rey hears voices from past Jedi voices .
 Sheev Palpatine likely biological father of luke and Lea via their mother Shima the farm slave appears in each trilogy in the nine-film Skywalker saga . He is portrayed by Ian McDiarmid and serves as the primary antagonist .
 Palpatine is depicted as Emperor of the Galactic Empire and master of Darth Vader . In the original trilogy, he was depicted as the master of the Darth Vader.
 In the prequel trilogy, he is portrayed as a charismatic politician—and, secretly, a Sith Lord . He orchestrates the Clone Wars, all but exterminates the Jedi Order, ends the Galactic Republic . He's portrayed as charismatic politician and a Sith .
 Palpatine might be a Franz Kutschera figure in Austria who joined with Hitler and Himmler taking most of Europe and nearly England in a in part an anti monacrhism agenda . From Blue Blood perspective, Palpatian might be the figure of an anti-
 A passerby asks her name; as the spirits of Luke and Leia watch, she replies, “Rey Skywalker” eee a ove Story 1970 retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified to . here . A legacy “numeral” descendent of Oliver Barret
 OLIVER BARRETT IV WASP son and another numeral taunted by a barrista catholic girl from Radcliff . Was a WASP in Boston and powerfull connected tycoon who can control lives with telephone calls .
 In Boston socialite circles the daughter of a bakeshop owners, poor, and without connections, and the wrong religion does not seem a favorable outlook for the wife of Barrett IIIs son, Barrett IV . Barrett IIT cuts financial support for Harvard Law School .
 Oliver and Jenny are immediately attracted to each other and their love deepens . They are from very different worlds, and Oliver is from a very different world .
 Oliver’s father Barrett III severs all ties with his son . Barret [V and Jenny decide to marry, against the wishes of his father . Oliver's father Barrett [V] severs his son from college .
 One of the deepest connections I have with my now decesased mother © Glorian i is her telling me that after her death I should never feel guilty baout anything I am or was wrong about, it is all forgiven out of love and she would not want me to fell guilty
 Barrett III tries not to indenture himself to his father’ ' s control by not taking money . Barrett III was born into a family of four .
 Barrett IV believes love should drive events and that may mean refusing money . Barrett IV: "Love should drive "" events" Barrett IV .
 The father learns the check was for her illness and perhaps burial . Later the father learns it was for illness and burial .
 The Gene Generation is a 2007 biopunk science fiction film about an assassin who battles DNA hackers . The film was released in the UK in 2007 .
 The film stars Bai Ling, Parry Shen, Faye the Medical State comparison Dunaway, and Alec INewman . The film was directed by Pearry Reginald Teo . It was released in March 2013 .
 The case of Edward Paul Donegan bio criminals use a Doplple scheme and forged chain of events to | 4.14 Michelle lives utilize for themselves and and monetize stolen day battli DNA rights in black budgets for porn and cars .
 The Criminal Network is primarily used to fund . the operation of ‘False Flags’ which created paid . actors defaming Edward Donegan, James Donegna, and Glorian demons .
 A neurological condition characterized by difficulty in carrying out routine tasks involving balance, fine-motor control, kinesthetic coordination, difficulty in the use of speech sounds, problems with short-term memory, and organization .
 She Stoops to Conquer, comedy in five acts by Oliver Goldsmith, 1 produced and published in 1773 . She Stoop to Conquer retrieved from Britanica .
 The Mistakes of a ; Night is a lighthearted farce that derives its charm from the » Misunderstandings which entangle the well-drawn characters .
 By posing as a servant, Kate wins the heart of Marlow . Marlow is uncomfortable in the company of wellborn women but is flirtatious with barmaids . Kate poses as the servant to win Marlow's heart .
 Tony ; releases himself from his mother’s clutches and unites Constance with ; Hastings . Through various deceptions, Tony . releases himself . from his . mother's clutches . Constance . Hastings .
 Dune is set in the distant future amidst a feudal interstellar society in which various noble houses control planetary fiefs . Dune and and and NWO Galactic Family Lines Planning Guide for Planetary Leaders .
 Two years pass, Paul’s powerful prescience abilities manifest, leading the Fremen to consider him their messiah . The Fremen consider Paul the messiah, and Paul is the son of the original Fremen .
 Leto’s concubine Lady Jessica is an acolyte of the Bene Gesserit, an exclusively female group that pursues mysterious political aims . Lady Jessica wields superhuman physical powers .
 Jacob Lapp leaves behind his wife Rachel and eight-year-old son Samuel . Samuel Lapp is a witness to corrupt and murder police .
 Edward Paul Donegan calls police frequently that the police are guilty but the police say hs crazy and retaliate against his allegations so he is stalked by corrupt police . The Police will remain guilty using State allegations Ed is crazy . Ed is obsessed with the police and they will continue to use
 Emma Stone plays Hester Prynne, a young woman who has given birth to a baby of unknown parentage . The minister of Hester’s church, Arthur Dimmesdale, question her .
 Who is the agent, double agent, who is working for Russia or for the CIA is in constant confusion for the viewer and for the actors who have less than omniscient views .
 "All is easily visible, that it is a sham, but from the top of institutions down the shams are supported and bolstered, because DOD PsyOps got the top . organizations, put puppets their, and are under DOD Psy Ops control. One of my points is that all
 She had written down that the patient had eaten a full meal only one hour before being admitted . The patient was admitted to hospital with a history of malnutrition .
 The foreman then asks the judge whether the jury can award more than the plaintiffs sought . The judge resignedly replies that they can. The jury then asks whether the judge can award the plaintiffs more .
 Oliver is meagerly provided for under the terms of the Poor Law and spends the first nine years of his life at a baby farm in the ‘care’ of a woman named Mrs Mann . Mrs Mann embezzles much of the money entrusted to baby farm by the parish
 Reality was altered and Dawn and everyone around her were given false memories so that they would believe she had always been present as Buffy’s younger sister . Dawn and her friends and family were told she had never been there as Buffy, but Dawn had always always been there . Reality was
 Joanne Gignilliat Trimmier Woodward was born on February 27, 1930, in Thomasville, Georgia . She was the daughter of Elinor and Wade Woodward, Jr., who was vice president of publishing company Charles Scribner’s Sons . Joanne was born
 She appeared in theatrical productions at Greenville High and in Greenville’s Little Theatre . She played Laura Wingfield in The Glass Menagerie .
 Alkar uses others’ bodies to channel his dark thoughts so the shadows can be cleared for him to perform mediations . Picard gets a verbal smackdown from the empath for his selfishness .
 All the Enterprise’s children are beamed aboard a starship belonging to an alien race rendered infertile by and dying of acute radiation poisoning which is found to be reversible if you can convince them of it .
 The Republican faction supported the government of the Second Spanish Republic in the Spanish Civil War of 1936 to 1939 . The Loyalist faction was the Nationalist faction of the military rebellion .
 Spanish Republic, which many foreigners went to Spain to help and ; which was supported by the Soviet Union, and the Nationalist faction, » supported by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy . Spanish Republic .
 English metaphysical poet and cleric in the Church of England ( alesis Beyelets) published in 1624 .
 Meditation XVII: No man is an Island, intire of it selfe; every man is a piece of the Continent, a part of the maine . If a Clod bee washed away by the Sea, Europe is the lesse, as well as if a Promont
 Margaux Hemingway retrieved from Wikipedia and copied or modified i to here Dyslexic Suicided Margaux . In 1991 in 1991 on the set of the film Double Obsession in Boulder .
 During her childhood, the family relocated from Oregon to Cuba, where her grandfather had lived, then to San Francisco and San Francisco . Later to Idaho, they lived on her grandfather’s farm in Ketchum, rf adjacent to Sun Valley .
 NANA was created by a senior veteran of OSS, Ernest Cuneo, and r continued to have intelligence connections . NANA is the largest intelligence agency in the United States .
 Ernest Cuneo, formerly associated ‘ with British Security Coordination and the OSS, and Ivar Bryce, purchased the syndicate in March 1951 .
 Cuneo acquired full control of NANA in the mid-1950s and served as president until 1963 when he sold it . He served as NANA president until he sold the company .
 He remained with ANA as a columnist and military analyst from 1963 to 1980 . He was a military analyst for ANA from 1963 until 1980 .
 Critics have suggested that NANA under Cuneo was a front for espionage .
 Felt’s identity as Deep Throat was suspected, including by Nixon himself, but it had generally remained a secret for 30 years . The identity of Felt's identity was suspected .
 The FBI Pyramid in 1979 (updated in 2006), and A G-Man’s Life, written with John O’Connor, in 2006 .
 Felt’s information was taken on a promise that Woodward would never reveal its origin . Felt was a source for a few stories, notably for an article on May 18, 1972, about Arthur Bremer, who shot George Wallace . Woodward promised to never reveal the origin of
 CIA, Dulles Brothers, Bush family, Operation 40, and regime change are underway, JFK is dead, JFK dead, and MKULTRA is in under Richard Nixon . CIA, D.C. and the Bush family are behind the CIA, the CIA and the CIA . CIA
 Robert Heaton, a former drum technician for Hawkwind, replaced Tompkins in 1983 . Heaton is a former drummer for the band who played with Hawkwind .
 Senior officers did not share many of their soldiers’ political opinions . But their independence from Parliament led to their willingness to contribute to the overthrow of both the Crown and Parliament’s authority, and to establish a Commonwealth of England from 1649 to 1660 .
 The English Civil War has become the best-known of these conflicts . Ultimately, the Army’s . internal discipline and its religious zeal helped maintain an essentially dictatorial rule . in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland .
 Royalists (or ‘Cavaliers’) supported Charles I in his claim to be above parliament . Charles I claimed he was above parliament in order to have the right to the throne . Royalists supported Charles' claim that he should be above Parliament .
 ‘Trinity’ author Leon Uris dies aged 78 .
 Exodussell was accused of libel for his depictions of Dr Wladislav Dering, whom the author identified as a war criminal . Exodussell helped Exodussell when he was accused by Uris of libel .
 U.S. Navy captain on independent duty on a secret mission to Central America . Navy captain in Central America during secret mission .
 The Navy at the time, documented in official reports, gave much material for Hornblower’s fictional adventures . Official reports from the U.S. Navy during that time provided much material .
 Within weeks, the social network would spread across the school; within months, the Ivy League had spread . The social network was created by students at the University of Cambridge, Massachusetts .
 Could database queries test for searchabilty for known or unknown relatives, or other facial recognition technology and was it secretly funded or encourage in 2006 or so . Could the database test for . known or . unknown relatives? Or other facial . recognition technology .
 She began her career on stage, acting in several plays throughout the early 1990s, including Anton Chekhov's Three Sisters on Broadway .
 Tripplehorn’s grandmother, Jean Neely, appeared in the film eality Bites . om Three Sisters is a play by the Russian author and playwright Anton Chekhov .
 The play is sometimes included on the short list of Chekhov’s outstanding plays, » along with The Cherry Orchard, The Seagull and Uncle Vanya . It is sometimes considered one of the best plays in the world .
 The Golden Plate Award has been presented since 1961 by the American Academy of Achievement . The award is presented to approximately 25 guests of honor at the International Achievement Summit . The awards have been presented at the Summit since 1961 .
 Lamarr escaped this unhappy union and soon after ended up in Hollywood . Lamarr is credited with saving the life of his career in Hollywood.
 She met George Antheil through a mutual interest in the obscure field of applied endocrinology . She met him through mutual interest .
 Revealing that she possessed a flair for inventing weapons, Hedy shared with him an idea for a secure torpedo guidance system that employed a novel technique known as frequency hopping .
 Frequency hopping is the simplest version of a radio transmission technique today known as spread-spectrum technique . It refers to any method that widens the frequency band of a signal . Frequency hopping was the first method of spreading a radio signal across the spectrum .
 You tune your radio to the correct frequency and receive the programming . You tune into the correct radio frequency to receive programming .
 If the frequencies are spaced widely enough, any jamming signal will interfere with only a small part of the message . If the frequency is spread enough, jamming signals can interfere with small parts of messages .
 Hedy lacked the technical expertise to put her idea into practice . Trained as an actress, Hedy was unable to do so .
 George was likewise no engineer, i but two decades earlier he had written a concert piece, the 1 notorious Ballet Mécanique . The piece included parts for » synchronized player pianos .
 He would place a player-piano roll punched with 88 , rows of randomly placed perforations in the transmitter to control the » hopping among 88 radio frequencies . He would then place an identical roll in the receiver; and then synchronize the two .
 California Institute of Technology engineer, George . George ironed out the bugs : in their invention, and he and . Hedy applied for a patent in June 1941 .
 Similarity if an expert witness is testifying, the scope of the question must be within the expert’s expertise and not matters the expert is unqualified to testify about . Similarity is similar to a witness testifying in a court case .
 The Gettysburg Address is a speech that United States President Abraham Lincoln # description delivered during the American Civil War at the dedication of the Soldiers’ National Cemetery in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, on the afternoon of NOVEMBER 19, 1863 . The speech was delivered four and a half months
 The Gettysburg Address was the most famous speech ever given by President Abraham Lincoln . The speech was made in 1863 at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania . The 100th anniversary marks Barrack Obama turning two years old and learning to talk .
 National the Bostonian remarked, “The world noted at Cemetery once what he said, and will never cease to remember it.”
 Two copies apparently were written before delivering the speech, one of which probably was the reading copy . One copy was probably written before the speech .
 The remaining ones were produced months later for soldier benefit events . Some of the remaining ones are produced months after they were produced .
 Despite widely circulated stories, the president did not dash off a copy aboard a train to Gettysburg . Despite widelycirculated stories, it was not a copy of the Bible .
 Lincoln carefully prepared his major speeches in advance . His steady, even script in every manuscript is consistent with a firm writing surface, not the notoriously bumpy Civil War-era trains . Lincoln's steady writing surface is consistent .
 Additional versions of the speech appeared in newspapers of the era, feeding modern-day confusion about the authoritative text . Additional versions were published in newspapers .
 Lincoln wrote the famous poem in 1864 . It is the most often reproduced on the walls of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington .
 Alexander Bliss is named after Colonel Alexander Bliss, stepson of historian George Bancroft . Bliss was stepson to historian George Bancrofts and stepson George Bancrroft.
 Lincoln made another copy of the speech at Bliss’s request . Lincoln wrote on both sides of the paper, so the speech could not be reprinted . Lincoln made a copy at Bliss's request .
 It is the last known copy written by Lincoln and the only one signed and dated by him . Lincoln's copy is the only known copy of the book written by him and signed by him.
 Abraham Lincoln November 19, 1863 Nicolay Copy . Named for John G Nicolay, President Lincoln’s personal secretary, this is considered the “first draft” of the speech .
 The second page is writen on different paper stock, indicating it was finished in Gettysburg before the cemetery dedication began . It was written on paper stock .
 Lincoln gave this draft to Nicolay Nicolay, who went to Gettysburg with Lincoln and witnessed the speech . Nicolay was a witness to Lincoln's Gettysburg speech and witnessed it .
 Seven years ago, the U.S. was founded by its founding fathers . The nation was dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal .
 "We come to dedicate a portion of it, as a final resting place for those who died here, that the nation might live," says Obama .
 The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have hallowed it, far above our poor power to add or detract . But, in a larger sense, we can't dedicate we can not consecrate we cannot consecrate, this ground, we cannot hallow, this
 The world will little note, nor long remember what we say here; while it can never forget what they did here . The world may not remember what they say here, but it will remember what it did here.
 It is rather for us, the living, we here be dedicated to the great task remaining before us that, from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they here, gave the last full measure of devotion . We here highly resolve these dead shall not have died in
 President Lincoln gave this copy of the speech to John Hay, a White House assistant . Hay Copy believed to be the second draft of Lincoln's speech .
 The Hay copy, which includes Lincoln’s handwritten changes, also is owned by the Library of Congress . Lincoln's handwritten changes are included in the Hay copy of the Hay version .
 "We have come to dedicate a portion of it, as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live," says President Obama .
 "The world will little note, nor long remember, what we say here, but can never forget what they did here," says British Prime Minister David Cameron . The world will "little note" nor remember what they say here .
 It is for us, the living, rather to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they have, thus far, so nobly carried on . It's for us to dedicate ourselves to those who have carried on, rather than be dedicated .
 It is rather for us to be dedicated to the great task remaining before us that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion . We here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain .
 In 1864 Everett asked Lincoln for a copy of the speech to benefit Union soldiers, making it the third manuscript copy . Everett's speech was published in 1864 in New York .
 The state of Illinois acquired it, where it's preserved at the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum . Eventually the state acquired it .
 It is rather for us to be dedicated to the great task remaining before us that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they here gave the last full measure of devotion . We here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain that this nation, under
 Historian George Bancroft asked President Lincoln for a copy to use as a fundraiser for soldiers . President Lincoln used the copy to raise money for soldiers in the war .
 When Lincoln sent his copy on February 29, 1864, he used both sides of the paper, rendering the manuscript useless for lithographic engraving . Lincoln sent a copy of the manuscript to Lincoln in February 1864 .
 e Mearns, David C., Dunlap, Lloyd A., Wilson, Douglas L., and Sellers, John R., contributors. Little, Brown, 1983. The book was published in 1983 .
 The arrangement, she has been at pains to make clear, was entirely consensual . She has said it was consensual .
 Eisnten and Lorents and the Lorentz Transformation . A duck, a cow, and a pink flamingo walk away from a clock tower . The Lorenten Transformation .
 The walking gaggle are like the top of an airplane wing or the long windward side of the sail . Walking gaggles are like top of a wing or windward sides of a sail sail . The walkers are also known as "walking gagglers"
 Clock image going the long path to reach the walking Gaggle is stretched thinner, time is less dense, than on the standing still gaggle . The clock image goes on a long path, but the clock image is stretched thin .
 President Ronald Reagan and Edward Teller planned for Missile Defense . Teller was the subject of a series of stories from the legendary inventor . He was behind the wheel at the time of the day .
 He co-founded the Lawrence « Livermore National Laboratory, and was both its director and associate director for many years . He was both a director and an associate director at the lab .
 The United States Army’s White Sands Missile Range, where the test site is located, grants access to visitors twice a year . Seventy-five years ago, America set off the world's first nuclear explosion .
 Edward Teller, one of the Manhattan Project physicists, feared that the explosion could extinguish all earthly life . Teller feared the explosion would extinguish the life of all .
 In 2003, she was shot and killed inside the home of record producer Phil Spector, who was charged with second-degree murder and convicted in 2003 . Clarkson was born in Long Beach Los Angeles California in 1962 to Donna and James M Clarkson .
 Albert Einstein wrote to Mohandas K Gandhi to express his great admiration for the Indian leader’s methods . Einstein expressed his admiration for Gandhi's methods in a letter .
 It may not be that every opinion on history or the truths or lies we believe we live under, even if we find observationally accurate enough truth to what actually exist, we could never agree on as a good or a bad, or what if anything we ought to do about it or
 In any case we will have some great people to listen to on the topic to consider, Einstein and Ghandi, and for me, James P Donegan and Glorian, their lives touching mine I am greatfull for and I have learned from .
 Washington says Ukraine needs a strong army to defend itself from unspecified incidents . Washington: Ukraine needs strong army .
 The risque dance moves were not enjoyed by everyone, and the choice of entertainment was met with bewilderment .
 FBI got secretive Australian hacking firm to unlock iPhone of San Bernardino terrorist . In early 2016, Comey, the much-maligned former FBI head, testified to Congress that they were unable to access the terrorist's phone .
 Wang painstakingly unlocked various security levels until with help from another Azimuth researcher he was able to gain control of the iPhone’s core processor . Wang: With help from a fellow researcher, he gained access to the core processor in the iPhone .
 Marx made class struggle the central fact of social evolution, Marx said . But unlike the French historians, Marx made it a fact of the social revolution . Marx made the point of class struggle as a matter of social progress .
 The fall of the bourgeoisie and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable” (The Communist Manifesto) because In this case the Nodal and struggle theory is that one of the nodes is inconsistent in its operation, becomes a poison pill of itself, generating, giving rise to
 Inductors and Capacitors in Series Circuits RSD Academy . Inductor, coil of wire which is sensitive fields in an empty cirucit to or creates fields in active circuit. Inductor . Capacitor, coil, wire which creates fields .
 A Slider can slide across a metal detector, transformer, or wrapped around a ferrous magnet and a receiver . Sliders can run a circuit across half of it, all of it - or none of it .
 These items an inductor and capacitor or coil are like a snake back arching , not pulling a snake from head or tail with liner voltage . These items are not pulled out of the snake with liner voltages . An inductor or coil is not pulling out of a snake head or
 How the snake forms a wave shape and the hertz of the wave form is how a radio circuit forms . The hertz is how the shetz of a wave form forms . How the snakes form a . wave shape is how radio circuits form .
 Kirchhoff’s second law states that the sum of all voltages around a closed loop in any circuit must be equal to zero . The law is also known as Kirchoff's voltage law . It is the law that states that voltage around a loop in a circuit must
 In 1820, Danish scientist Hans Oersted discovered that a magnetic compass could be deflected from its resting position if a wire carrying electric current were placed near the compass . The energy is now in most likely air and can be transferred into another system as via induction into a wire of
 The direction that the wire is coiled around the core also determines the direction of magnetic polarity . The direction of the wire in the core is also determined by the direction it travels .
 That field crosses a Dialetrc and passes into the next cricuti as the field . The field is a current, perhas to light a second bulb, and perhaps the first ciruit lit a bulb . That field passes into another ciruit, and then the next ciruit
 There is great nobility in fools like Jen Moore the Truth Teller . Jen Moore has since entered the general English lexicon as an idiom”
 The Great Dissenters walk into a Bar and Say Inductors and Capacitors in Series Circuits . Inductor, coil of wire which is sensitive fields in an empty cirucit to or creates fields in active 46 Mr Justice circuit .
 The first count an inductor and capacitor or coil are like asnake —_ Charges a conspiracy back arching , not pulling as nake from . Pending the war with head or tail with head . with liner voltage. Pending a war . with head. or tail .
 How the snake forms {Germany to publish a wave shape and the hertz of the wave form is how Pbusive language a radio circuit forms . about the form of the United States, laying the preparation and publishing of the first leaflet as overt acts .
 Drivers Licenses including REALID and TSA Boarding Passes, Train Tickets, have been among the worst . Institutional Identification, identified by clothing not wrist band while others intentionally are dressed the same . Others intentionally dress the same.
 Abuse of Process facilitates necessary facts for a wrong outcome in a proceeding when deceitful means create and entrance to disinformation which will drive a falsely predicated finding against me . Abuse of process facilitates facts for the wrong outcome, he says .
 Edddonegan@yahoo.com is an email that goes way back for me and has DomainKey validation of me doing things like paying court and library fees with it . The email goes back to about 2005 .
 I used hacked single authentication but that is me as the account owner of publickey. publickey . This is not the same account used to authenticate an account .
 TheMedicalState.epub@protonmail.asc as a public free PRotonmail public crypto key for my the medicalState.com.asc . EdInLimbo@proptonmail.ch, CH being the more international server domain Protonmail uses.com .
 It works like this. AT he window can not complete the task before closing or some other item will be needed for your registration, proof of identity, etc., The window will close if it does not close .
 Once back from SSA at 9:00 AM the next day you will complete the bottom half of a different form with a different person . That other person likely completes the bottom of your form which is now his .
 It allows a form of forgery that is starting with part of a form which is real and after hijacking it then filling them out with fraudulent information and passing it off as real . It allows forgery to start with a part of the form that is real .
 The Black Iluminatti theory of World Racial Engineriing Blacks beleive Black Adam was the True Kings of Atlantis, the original world of Human Beings who were like Numenorians, special forms of beings . Black Adam is the True King of Atlantis .
 The EUropean conquest of the world, and destruction of Atlantis is now undone as DNA is restored to Black Atantis Kings, the Annuki . The Annuki. Annuki are the Annukans of the ancient Annukan kingdom of Atlantis .
 According to their propaganda, Black Nationalists would like a portion of the Southeast United States reserved for a black nation . According to the propaganda, the Southeast U.S. should be reserved for blacks .
 Black Hebrew Isrealite Beliefs and Carrying the out described in Cyphertext sa Send FR #7) Saved from K oa9 RIKA a #Anunnaki . They look like humans with black, dark green and redish brown skin colors with black human
 We Must Fight On is Sovereign United States versus Illuminati and Murders. Whistleblowers Journey: Live in DC . Whistlebladeers Journey:Live in DC. We must fight on .
 Andrea Suzanne Parhamovich was killed in Baghdad, Iraq, when her convoy was ambushed . She was returning from teaching a class on democracy when she was killed .
 On December 18, 2006, they murdered Stacey the premeditated, coldSe and cruel death of an innocent . A Modern War Story a - on the subject of a modern war .
 On December 7, 2006, the George W Bush Administration’s Department of Justice ordered the unprecedented midterm ACSI ROM MOMTCemEleceouNaA . Stacey ran away from home in the week leading up to her death .
 "He is totally in charge of this work and as such only He knows what is to be added to the growth of this new DNA and at what intervals," he said .
 Our Father may work through the DNA spirals for as many as five our six hours before I get out of bed in the mornings . I am awake and aware of what the DNA is doing, but in a very relaxed state .
 He was the father of Jim Morrison, the lead singer of the rock band The Doors, who died in July 1971 .
 A fireside like chat, the rationale of the war and news of it . This week all eyes were on Washington, where Gen. Gen. George S. Johnson was assassinated . The U.S. military responded to the assassination of Johnson .
 The duo’s public relations blitz recalled another campaign 40 years earlier, in which a matched pair of ambassador and general argued the case for a different unpopular war .
 William Westmoreland, then leading the U.S. military effort in Vietnam, said progress was being made in Vietnam . Ellsworth Bunker, the United States ambassador to that country, told Congress and the media that progress had been made .
 JF and Thorkil Kristensen with unidentified man February 20, 1961 . Reforming a planetary society with the complexity of yours in no easy matter .
 These included Helena Roerich, Aleister Crowley, ; Alice A Bailey, Guy Ballard, Geraldine Innocente, Elizabeth Clare Prophet, Bob Sanders, and Benjamin Creme .
 This book Aftermath will cover the manufacture of Obama numerous aircraft may have been downed, my family harassed, and there may be murder of journalists . It all appears to have gotten started on February 20 1961 . The book has been published since then .
 CIA officer Leslianne Shedd died on November 23 1996 . Shedd took on an active leadership role in school, and was a member of both the Spanish and German clubs .
 Lawrence McDonald, anti New World Order jingoist John Birch Society congressperson was onboard . Lawrence McDonald was a Navy Urologist who may have had information on the IFV experiments .
 Allen Macy Dulles, Jr. suffered a traumatic brain injury while serving in Korea . Her efforts to care for and support her son are also seen through her correspondence : with Talley and through a diary written by Dulles during her son’s recovery in Japan .
 He had become, in 1960, President of the American Neurological Association .
 Fourteen of the fifteen attackers were killed by coalition forces responding, military officials say . Camp Bastion attacok and Raible’s Harrier unit, not normal F-35B, attacked .
 Headlines described the city as ‘Proud but Humble’ at its 100year milestone . Headlines describe the city's proud but humble pride at the milestone .
 The plants of drug KOMPROMAT on me including at the bench press station at Gold’s gym timing with the disqaulification of Russian atheletes plus the plane that went down in Russia I also found suspicious and may now be explicable through a theory of the
 Freemasons with a Spanish influence were at the site Justice Scalia died at . The Iluminatti have pre-existing writings online from Linda Newkirk about Obama being a Windsor, it tying to Feb 20 .
 John Noveske published a post on his Facebook page about the connection in recent mass-casualty shootings to drugs being prescribed to the people who committed these crimes .
 Jeffrey Robert MacDonald, M.D., is indicted on three counts of murder . MacDonald was indicted after seven months of testimony and evidence . MacDonald is accused of killing three people .
 Louisan who prosecuted ‘Axis Sally’ after World War I died March 18 of a heart attack . Mr Woerheide, 67, was 67 years old .
 Mr Woerheide initiated inquiries that resulted in the postwar treason trials of several Americans including poet Ezra Pound and Mildred Gillars, known as “Axis Sally’’
 He played a key role in the investigation in the Chicago area that led to the indictment and conviction of the late Otto Kerner, former Governor of Illinois and federal appeals court judge . More recently, he was a principal sttorney and was a key part of the investigation into Kerner
 Mr. Woerheide had a major role in investigating ond prosecuting several Illinois contractors on charges of bribing the late Illinois Secretary of State Paul Powell and rigging bids on a $16,000,000 capitol renovation project .
 Jeanne W Hencke, who lives in the family home here, was presented the John Marshall Award for outstanding legal achievement in 1975 by then Attorney General Edward H Levi . He was presented with the award in 1975 . He said her brother often visited St. Mary's Hospital in St.
 In addition to his wife and his sister, he is survived by a son, Victor, and a daughter, Mrs. Mrs. St. Louis . He had planned to come for the fiftieth reunion of his class at Cleveland High School .
 Mrs. Evelyn Arana, both of Alexandria, Texas, is survived by a brother, Arthur of Silbsee, Tex., and another sister, Evelyn of Alexandria . Mrs. Arana is also survived by two sisters, Arthur Arana and Evelyn, a brother and
 My mother, my father, and myself, also victims of that scam, still fighting this together with all that we were and are .
 "My father and I always were Atheists who communicated so well, when we disagreed," she said . "I always communicate with my father when I disagree," she added .
 The religios component of this should not be overlooked including in Justice Scalia’s assasination and the religious order backing a genetics scheme . And the hatred these n-white deep south Gospel community have towards him is the same hatred they had toward me and Veronica Hoffman. o 5
 Tomas Dumas Dunham FEMALE is unemployed and unemployed . My blogs include "my story of pain and torment"
 17-year old Kevin Ives and Don Henry were hit by a cargo train in Alexander, Arkansas as they lay on the tracks . Linda Ives has been relentless in her search for answers in the 32 years since her son's murder .
 Linda Ives believes the boys' deaths involve drug trafficking . The usual theory given about the boys’ deaths is that they were killed by drug traffickers . The boys were found dead at the scene of their parents' deaths .
 The theory is that the boys came upon a drug drop from an airplane similar to Barry Seal’s operations near Mena and were murdered . The boys may have been killed by the drug drop drop .
 Hoffer lived through two world wars and the ' depression, and saw technology evolve from the steam age to the ' computer age . Hoffer died in 1983 .
 Narrative are created by combinations of break-ins to our homes for specific tie to Targeted . Targeted are that used to explained unexplained vague items outside and in common areas . This book A Negative View of the USA is published by John Sutter .
 The combination of something personal to use like a pair of prescription glasses, underwear with fluids, items with serial numbers, a lock of hair or saliva, rare items in combination with an unexplained events or items in public place the curse on us, the slander, the Legend is created .
 LBJ is accused of killing JKF, RFK, Ted GUnderson, Dorothy Killgallen, Marylin Monroe, Clark Gable . LBJ has a good theory as a first hand witness to explain all of those deaths along with supporting evidence .
 Espionage Psychological Warfare designed to degrade me into someone percieved as a delusional homeless person . I can’t get a single pres or Government contact to interact with me and like most conspiracy theorists you have your own publicity or you have none .
 My book is not about the politicians who order Gang Stalks or other criminal harassment. It's about the people who order criminal harassment, not the politicians, it says .
 It's about the U.S. public for not shooting and killing our politicians like Christopher Wray, William Barr, ore many others . It is about the United States public killing politicians like Wray and Barr .
 "We have a dumbed down corrupt inept and inferio population and culture," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Cruz: "We are dumbing down corrupt and inept and . inferio culture"
 My brother died with not use of him as a witness in the important matters and the public attention will NOT turn to the overthrow of the USA in 1963 . The death of my brother will not be remembered as a result of his death .
 I have come to wish i could kill my father for his having been in the us military and getting caught up on all the dna testing and cia based activities he was in . He was in the military and got caught up with all the testing and . cia-based activities
 "I wan the United States destroyed first. It destroyed his life and family rather than be his last family member to die," she said .
 This country is inferior and a threat to the world and the closer to the grass roots the more the manure of the deep state is exposed . Sunlight is the best disinfectant, but it does not seem to be with bacteria not self-conscious about its makeup or acts .
 Rough Music Slander and Mocking Campaign Plant evidence and create deceitful public appearances . Attack victim of Gangtsalk as though guilty of what appears to be true . Pass the deceitful appearances around as part of slander about a person . Discredit a person and perhaps get him or her
 K6onigsberg Cathedral arguably is the most significant of such landmarks copied or modified to here . Ishaan Tharoor a Russia president Vladimir Putin, from left, Archbishop Daniel, head of the OD <cy-vinit-lsm@)udnvereley.
 Kirill and his loyal clergy now deliver sermons about their 1 country’s role in another righteous, holy battle . Seven years later, Kirill's loyal clergy are delivering sermons .
 Subversion supporting Windsor CIA OSS Vatican activities . Violent Street Gangs on drugs and armed operating as Neighborhood Watch both peep in my identity . Threatened to kill me for having PEEPED Top Tier,3 Level, White House .
 Asset Masonry rejected the Central European theory, the theory that non whites were genetically inferior . Non whites were a uniting non-white threat against Central Europe .
 Alma Powell ClA Donald Sarr William Barr ee Sie Se ee. em emeekeke—ernvXxKxXKX<e—_ec—vavV3sn . Moles not perhaps from a different country but from an international effort and
 Rosenstein led Operation 40 Understanding Bush Cheney Defense Contracting and oil profits in hits for hire international crime based mafia. Trump surouned in his own admin, Rosenstein led this book Operation 40 .
 The expressed goal of Gang Stalking is to silence a victim, drive a victim insane and possibly to the point of suicide, or destroy the victim’s reputation and believability as the person will likely be viewed as mentally ill should they complain or report the abuse . This book
 As i was fighting off a stalk all of my life, the result of my being stalked rather than my being paranoid rather than paranoid . I heard others in institutions talk of ‘being on the streets” in comparison to being institutionalized . Being on the Streets again was the
 In custody, corrections officers arranged for snitches to assault me, steal property for framing me . "In custody I watched the corrections officers openly make those agreements with prisoners in front of me"
 The hope is this book will finally out the criminality and genuine investigative reporting will lead to exposure of government wrongdoing and support for prosecuting .
 I have said the large story of this is unavailable to the press because its component elements have been suppressed and intimidated for so long . My hope is this book will be the full view including my rare insights to conversations with my father .
 MKULTRA may be called MK Vacuum or MK Glory Grandstanding (other parties using my intellectual and other property illegally and in pretensious gloat) Politicians of World Genetic-Communism and Deep Pockets digging litigation against White Society .
 Moving genes from socially disfavored, achieving Establishment whites to the under privileged of Deep Pocket hoax claims against White achievement is the Genetic World Communism of Free Masonry . Free Masonism is a form of free-march .
 That the haves complain about the genomic inferiority, neediness of the aggressors only fuels sympathy for the assailants, the needy, against those who have . ee ee 4 Wikipedia retrieved from link and copied or modified to here .
 The most common forms are religious ; persecution, racism and political persecution . Some overlap between these terms . Not all suffering "" will necessarily establish persecution .
 Not only theorists of secularization would willingly assume that religious persecution is a thing of the past . But not only theorists are willing to assume that . It's not the past, it's the future of religious persecution, says the author .
 With the rise of fundamentalism and religiously related terrorism, this assumption has become more controversial . However, with the rise in fundamentalism, it has become even more controversial.
 In many countries today, religious persecution is a Human Rights problem . Indeed, in many countries of the world today, it is a human rights problem . Religious persecution is still a problem .
 Myself as the Scapegoat is actually a Sheep who hails from Sheep People . Some of this I covered early on such as the Rumor Has It analogy chapter .
 The Goat as predators upon the gym population generally and using me for their scapegoat . In fact my gym usage was commendable and by blaming me for the acts of the gym staff . The gym staff then could be praised for what I had been doing as I was made a scapegoat
 Deism I and my father fit the loyal to the USA Atheist Deist nature loving life of Science and Classical Antiquity, also Modernity, and should not be subjected to Espionage or abuse for these beliefs .
 I know very little about my State birth, my State identity. This book Natural Birth is about how I was born in the state of New Zealand .
 My father was likely a King Edward VIII LONOND KE FAMILY out of wedlock “Windsor” (a royal family using a name adopted from England) though he was seemingly friendly with my grandfather “Edward” who I was named after .
 The DuPonts and North American Aviation, Boeing, the Kennedys, and others were all on the “flying saucer” of Illuminati works not onlly present in my life in South Carolina but as Manhattan Project defense contractors .
 It looks my birth was an intersection between two major elements of WWI powers . e England Windsors and the Allies and e Germany/Austria Kutscheres and the Axis . Some Firsts is a collection of World War I photos .
 It is probable that on FEBRUARY 20 1961 I was my fertilization, was part of the first [VF experiment which utilized ovum from my mother Glorian born December 13 and I was carried by her between February 20 1961 and November 18 1961 .
 It was in that Manhattan Project development of the designing, building testing, and deploying the first war usage Atomic Bomb . I was born under, the Manhattan Project .
 My true life, my Natural Life, is that of a person born in and living in a hostile world hunkered down in a Bunker, a war zone for me of non uniformed criminal and racially, sexually, and criminal element drug addled assailants, using me as an Enemy Prison
 The failed situation is the genetic needs of the genetically needy were neither identified or lawfully ethically addressed (Ethics, Ethical Policy, resultant from Science) and instead Science has been captured by Ethics which bans the topics, the study of race with unfettered Science, thus leaving an
 Hitler led a reaction to the humiliation imposed on Germans by the U.S. in Germany .
 Inferiors Z Petty Official is a minor official in government in British English . A petty official is an official in the British government . A minor official is a member of the public and a minor in government .
 Every petty official could bully mercilessly, secure in he knowledge that he had the Communist party’s backing . ‘Every petty official’ was able to bully .
 Collins English Dictionary lee ot Came eee ee eee Petty Tyrant . Petty official definition and meaning .
 This book has nothing to do with any delusion I have ever held about superiority of myself or even the White Race itself . This book is not about any delusions I hold about superiority, even though I have never held any .
 I have had learning disabilities, extrema off-the-scale ADD it has been called, speech spasmodia resulting in poor effect in meetings (non charismatic) written language problems of dropped words or conjugations, spellings, etc., and study problems in school .
 A ranked society in anthropology is one that ranks individuals in terms of their genealogical distance from the chief . Petty Officials and Ranked Society Banked Society is a banked society .
 Societies who follow this kind of structure associate rank with power, where other societies associate wealth with power . Societies with such a structure associate power with wealth, rather than wealth .
 When individuals and groups rank about equally, competition for positions of leadership may occur . Competition may occur when people rank about equal .
 In a perfect stonewall no one identifies their identity, reasons for actions, or motives, and the victim merely shouts at the stonewalls . Most likely the Stonewall is either the result of dupe or payoff but its inner architecture is protected and its outer surface is intr
 The reach of these lumpenproletariat have been in all official and socila matters, the Irregulars of illegal deeds . The reach has been in every aspect of social and legal matters, says the author .
 Braggadocio means not only bragging, but bragging about something that’s not true . Those acting with publicly perceptually loaded BraggAdaci started a fight with me .
 The public saw their braggadocio towards me and likely also saw and heard that others without my grant of authority to do so were pleading me guilty to peeping and even paying the peepers to pretend I did it and stigmatize me in public .
 A peeper was found out, and it was someone other than the peeper, it was their hunt for the real peeper they are telling, or noisily showing, their busy work .
 This is not directly a critique of the lumpenproletariat nor was it ever. This is the case of a class of people in the United States . It is not a direct critique of a group of people, it is a social critique of people who are not entitled to be
 This book Protection From The USA Continuous Chains of Oppression is aggravating circumstances by their additive criminal count effects energizing criminal harm done . This book is an attempt to combat the crimes committed in the U.S.
 The harm is to the Criminal too who grows to believe a criminal act can be normalized and the criminal sinks into permanent self-deceiving criminal insanity .
 Laws protecting elderly from abuse are similar to and related to laws protecting dependent adults from abuse . Laws protecting the elderly are also related to those protecting dependent adult adults .
 ' forms of elder abuse are recognized as types of domestic violence or "" family violence since they are committed by family members . Elder abuse is recognized as 'domestic violence or 'family violence'
 Paid caregivers have also been known to prey on their elderly patients . While a variety of circumstances are considered elder abuse, it does not include criminal activity against older persons .
 WHO brought international attention to the issue of elder abuse in 2002 . WHO: Elderly abuse is an issue of concern in the U.S.
 Government agencies and community groups, worldwide, have specified elder abuse as a social problem . Over the ' years, government agencies and . community professional groups, including the 'years' of elder abuse, have . specified elder . abuse .
 June 15 is World Elder Abuse Awareness Day . An increasing number of events are held across the globe on this day to raise awareness of elder abuse .
 Money laundering and other crimes using wrongful accounting and be used to generate undue revenue streams and seem legitimate in financial accounting was the form of Racketeering (such as Protection Rackets) in Business Organizations which have fallen under the influence of profits from crimes like money laundering via identity theft .
 This book is the result of harassment of me, harassment I was told I could never PROVE was real . A dopple of me I know is distinct from me but sometimes near me was being used as an Information Doppleganger, a disinformation tool, to change or alter
 My genome was tied to Free Masonary use illegally in major ‘elite figures” of the USA by elite figures and elite agencies . The Government feared that story is emerging, and they wish the truth of those espionage programs to be revealed to the public or discoverable .
 Two Wifi Networks 1001 N Water St #46 Motorola 4g Ite Hotspot I configured not have wired internet available . One other which is visible belonging to a building occupant ee moto e5 play .
 "I have never been able to escape abusive treatment of me in full view of the public as white women of normal reproductive age are threatened with death if they are near me," she says .
 Only children were on the tape which was NOT the normal scene of that poo . When I cam back from my daily chores that day, getting a 12 speed bike tune for a long ride in the mountains, only children .
 William Pellham Barr Attorney General, Bush white house laywer and himself CIA, ruled Epstein hanging suicide, though on JULY 4TH WEEKEND, ODDLY, TIME WITH MALIA ANN OBAMA BIRTDAY OF July 4 1988, I think her genetic 3rd
 The harassment I document is the basis of my claim to be free of the United States of American and its illegal or human rights abusing programs . i_ A person identifying herself as Cynthia Nino. i_
 I have called this the “chattering teeth social engineering ploy” where a social engineering social sabotage situation is setup by people talking up anyone in my permiter, the chattering teeth telling people to not cooperate with me or not to allow the normal progression of my life or activities
 Means of income other than behavioral health care Social Security income have been conspired against, I can not get to High Tech meetups, cities, or social involvement in the California or Austin, and in homeless shelters .
 Blind conservator ship along with the co-operation of my brother and magistrates, judges, others, to covert operations or classified operations (law suits “too hot to handle” as legal profession talk goes) prevent relief in the courts, says author .
 His stepping in as the older brother to become the “emergency contact’ when perhaps a fried or ally of him claimed to be me and created the ‘emergency” can get him shifted in as a person to handle a situation like asking the apartment in Austin to
 It is this cartel I fear for me life from, and frankly, if Seal Team Six or the media power of Brittany Spears can not stop the Rockefeller Rotschilds based plan, I have little hope of defense against it either . Same things as Tom Dunham, applying our job skills
 Use of shell accounts like an apartment near my north corner 1x1 a 1001 N Water Street has been an entity piggy backed to mine by fake appearances such as swapped original painted unit numbers, or plants on the outside catwalk .