 Write true if you believe the statement is true or false if you think it is false . Then write true if the statement you believe is true . Write false if the statements are true or true if they are false .
 You must find and write a quote from the book to support your answer . Either way, you must find a quote to support the answer .
 Prior to the election of 1960, Americans were confident that they were winning the Cold War .
 Kennedy won his debate because he had been well prepared for a televised debate . Kennedy won because he was prepared for the televised debate. Kennedy won the debate because of his preparation .
 President Eisenhower helped get Martin Luther King out of jail after he had been arrested for sitting at a segregated lunch counter . King sat at a lunch counter at the White House in Washington, D.C. He was arrested in 1953 .
 Kennedy’s most important advisor was Robert McNamara, the former president of Ford Motor Company . McNamara was the former Ford Motor Co. president . Kennedy's most important adviser was former President McNamara .
 Kennedy wanted to continue Eisenhower’s strategies when it came to fighting against communism . Kennedy wanted the president to continue his efforts to defeat communism .
 Fidel Castro came to power through a guerilla war and replaced Fulgencio Batista as the leader of Cuba . Fidel Castro became the Cuban leader in 1959 .
 Castro angered Americans by taking over U.S. businesses and land belonging to American sugar companies . Castro angered America by taking control of American businesses, land and businesses .
 Kennedy gave permission to the CIA to use Cuban exiles to overthrow the Cuban government . Kennedy gave the CIA permission to use exiles in Cuba to overthrow government . The Cuban government was overthrown by the CIA .
 Kennedy found out on October 14, 1962 that the Soviet Union had set up nuclear missile bases on Cuba . Kennedy was in Cuba when he found out that the bases were set up .
 In response to the flight of East Berliners into West Berlin, Khrushchev authorized the construction of the Berlin Wall .