 In 1962, the Soviet Union could only strike Euorope, but the U.S.A. could strike all of the Soviet Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was behind the United States in the arms race . In 1962 the Soviet Russia could not strike E.U.A
 Aurthor Lundahl analyzes photos from a U-2 flight over Cuba earlier that day and finds that there are nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 Still in his pajamas, John Fitzergald Kennedy is informed of missiles .
 It becomes obvious that the Soviets were lying about the fact that they weren't putting missiles into Cuba, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "It becomes obvious ... they were lying"
 Kennedy decides to follow his schedule to maintain the secrecy of the fact that he knew about the missiles in Cuba and flies to Conneticut for a campaign appearance .
 Kennedy meets with Gromyko, a Soviet diplomat . Kennedy met with the Soviet diplomat in 1962 .
 EX-COMM is not sure if Gromyko knows of missiles or if he knew the Americans knew of missiles . Ex-Comm is unsure if he knows of missile technology .
 Kennedy meets with joint cheifs who still want an airstrike on Cuba . Ex-COMM still can't reach a consensus on a possible airstrike .
 Kennedy asks EX-COMM to draw up plans for both a quarantine and an airstrike . Kennedy: "There is no time for a quarantine or an airstrike" Ex-COMm drew up plans to use both quarantine and airstrike .
 EX-COMM decides to discuss the two speeches . Kennedy is still on his campaign trip . Ex-comm decides to talk about JFK's speeches .
 After lots of thought, Kennedy decides blockade should be first move .
 Khrushchev learned the Americans had probably already discovered thier missiles in Cuba .
 Kennedy wants a quarantine and informs allies and Senate leaders of his decision . Kennedy wants to quarantine and inform allies, Senate leaders about his decision to do so .
 Kennedy orders another low level recon flight over Cuba . Close up pictures of missile sites .
 Kennedy signs proclomation of interdiction to take effect at 10:00m. on October 24 . Kennedy then signs a proclamation of Interdiction, which will take effect on October 25 .
 United States is concerned about the Soviet submarines trailing some of the Soviet ships . The U.S. is concerned that the submarines are trailing the Soviet vessels .
 Khrushchev: "Kennedy went to sleep with a wooden knife" "the americans have chickened out, it seems that Kennedy went to bed with a . wooden knife,"" stated the Soviet leader .
 Adlai Stevenson confronts the Soviet Union at the United Nations . Zorin refuses to comment on the missiles .
 The U.S. forces boarded the Labanese feighter Marcula, but they only found paper products .
 EX-COMM meets at 10:00 a.m. Kennedy says a quarantine alone won't work . Kennedy says quarantine alone will not work. Kennedy: "It's not just a quarantine, it's a disaster"
 A U-2 is shot down by a SAM site, and another flew of course over Russia .
 October 28, 1962, Khrushchev meets with circle of advisors outside of Moscow . October 28 was 1962 .
 A general enters and reads that Kennedy was going to adress the nation at 5:00m. Kennedy was due to give a speech at the end of the day . Kennedy's speech was the first of a series of speeches by the president to address the nation .
 Aftermath: Superpowers still had to hammer out terms of agreement . Aftermath .
 A direct line was established between Washington D.C. and Moscow . The first time a direct line has been established was established .
 Three months later, the United States removed their missiles from Turkey . The U.S. removed the missiles from the country .