 Largely through use of the most recently released information on the crisis from the U.S. and Soviet governments, I attempt to ascertain the anticipated benefits, costs, and probabilities of success associated with each of the major policy choices that the key leaders in both superpowers perceived before each of
 Using this information and the logic of extensive-form game-theoretic models of choice, I construct a baseline for expectedutility theory . This helps us to understand when prospect or expected utility theory provides the better explanation for a particular decision .
 Prospect theory predicts that when individuals perceive themselves to be experiencing losses at the time they make a decision, they will tend to make excessively risky, non–value maximizing choices . Prospect theory says that when people see themselves experiencing losses, they make risky decisions .
 The evidence for the Cuban missile crisis supports this prediction . Khrushchev and Kennedy made the most important decisions made by both . Kennedy made a decision to launch the missile program .
 The Cuban missile crisis remains one of the most studied events in history . The Cuban crisis was one of America's worst moments in history.
 For over thirty-five years scholars have used various dimensions of this event to test theories of, inter alia, decision-making, deterrence, compellence, crisis management, and intelligence gathering .
 I wish to thank the following individuals for their advice, suggestions, and encouragement in writing this essay . Dale Copeland, Kelly Erickson, Kurt Haas, Margaret Haas, Rose McDermott, Jack Levy, and several anonymous reviewers for International Studies Quarterly .
 For Soviet documents on the crisis, see Lebow and Stein, 1994; Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, 1995 and 199601997; Fursenko and Naftali, 1997; Gaddis, 1997 .
 For related primary source documents, see Chang and Kornbluh, 1992; U.S. Department of State, 1996 . For more information, visit http://www.gov.org/report.com .
 This article seeks to make two primary contributions to the analysis of probably the most dangerous period in history . This article is an attempt to make an important point of analysis of the history of this period .
 First, largely through use of the most recently released information on the crisis, I attempt to ascertain the anticipated benefits, costs, and probabilities of success associated with each of the major policy choices . The key leaders in both superpowers perceived before each major policy decision was made .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev did tend to make excessively risky, non–value maximizing choices during the crisis, writes David Gergen .
 When leaders’ probability estimates associated with key outcomes approached certainty, their behavior became much more cautious . This behavior is much more comprehensible to theories based on the maximization of expected value, author says .
 This change in behavior occurred despite the fact that Kennedy and Khrushchev continued to operate in loss-frames throughout the period in question . This change of behavior occurred in the 1960s .
 I examine the logic of deterrence theory based on extensive-form game-theoretic models of choice . First, I examine how deterrence theory works .
 This section examines under what conditions, according to theories based on the maximization of expected value, it is rational for challengers to try to change the status quo . Defenders to choose to acquiesce to such challenges as opposed to fighting or threatening to fight, the author says .
 Developing a baseline for expected-utility theory is a key methodological step if we are to discern successfully if expected or prospect theory provides the better explanation for a particular policy choice .
 First, I examine the principal tenets of prospect theory and discuss how these principles can be applied to an analysis of decision-making in international relations . Second, I discuss how prospect theory can be used to analyze international relations in the future .
 In the third section, I test the predictions of prospect theory and analyses based on the maximization of expected value against the historical evidence of the key decisions of the Cuban missile crisis .
 I conclude with an analysis of the implications generated by my principal findings . I conclude that the implications of the findings will be discussed .
 None, to my knowledge, has examined as formally as I have done here these variables in combination with the estimated probabilities of success for each considered option .
 Decision-makers believe challenging the status quo will result in a worse position than the one they think they will occupy if no action is taken . No challenge to the defending state should be issued, the attorney general says .
 The decision-making calculus for defender states is also straightforward, according to the logic of expected-utility theory .
 Policy selection was critical because it allowed leaders in both superpowers to react to and learn from each other’s policies . This aspect of policy selection is critical because of the importance of the policy selection .
 I use the word “anticipated” to capture this product simply and to make my prose less cumbersome . I use it simply to make this product simpler and make it more clear .
 This placement reflects the fact that this outcome is a product of high levels of tension resulting from both sides’ decision neither to back down nor deliberately initiate military strikes . Both sides of the conflict have not deliberately initiated military strikes in Syria .
 This indicates that war by accident or miscalculation is not a product of rational deliberation in the traditional sense, but is instead due to inadvertence and the high levels of stress intrinsic to any international crisis . War by accident is not the product of deliberation, but instead of rational
 Each of the principal actors involved in the Cuban missile crisis could have made other choices than the ones depicted . The film could have been a different way of depicting the crisis .
 Each of the outcomes listed generated other sets of results that are not depicted . Moreover, each of these outcomes generated other results that were not shown .
 If Kennedy did not respond to the discovery of the missiles in a firm manner, his authority at home and possibly within NATO most likely would have been weakened . If Kennedy had not responded in a strong manner, he would have had his authority weakened .
 A more comprehensive examination of outcomes in various arenas and the choices available to Kennedy and Khrushchev is found in the text of this essay . The essay offers an examination of the choices made by the two men .
 The initial question confronting Player 1 is whether or not to challenge the status quo by placing offensive missiles in Cuba . Player 1 will decide whether to place offensive missiles on Cuba .
 Defenders can acquiesce to a challenger's gambit either by capitulating to the latter’s demands or actions, or by paying the challenger off through a negotiated settlement to the dispute . The defender should choose not to dispute militarily the challenger's .
 In either case, the status quo is changed, though in the former scenario the challenger will invariably have more of its preferences realized . In either scenario, the challenger has more of his preferences realized.
 Russian President Vladimir Putin warns that a crisis situation could lead to military conflict due to accident, miscalculation, or inadvertence . Putin says the Russian-Ukrainian crisis could be triggered by Russia's refusal to accept Putin's interventionist policies .
 The chances of conflict resulting from these factors will invariably increase the longer high levels of military tension and fear between states continue . The chance of conflict between states will always increase, say experts .
 Leaders’ fear of conflict by accident or miscalculation was a potent one in both superpowers during the Cuban missile crisis . As we shall see, leaders’ fears of miscalculations were potent one during the crisis .
 Defender’s utility calculations are not only the benefits and costs associated with maintaining or retreating from the status quo, but also reputational issues that go beyond these case-specific qualities .
 Deterrence theory is interdependent with the ability to deter challenges to the status quo in one area and another . A key component of deterrence theory is the ability of a state to deter a challenge to its status quo . The U.S. should be able to deter any challenges to
 Credibility is the variable that links commitments across time and space, says author . "Credibility" is a key variable in the relationship of commitment to a project . "It's important to maintain the credibility of the project," author says .
 When leaders fail to meet a challenge to their position in one area, reputation will suffer . According to deterrence theorists, when leaders fail, their reputation concerning their ability will suffer.
 A successful challenge to their position in any given instance is the potential losses in credibility which may increase the chances of these states having to face other challenges in other areas . Thus, an important cost that must be factored into defenders’ utility functions concerning a successful challenge is the risk of
 In policy terms, this last analysis means that defenders may have incentives to respond to a challenge in a more vigorous manner than the intrinsic worth of an issue would seem to dictate .
 International relations theories teach us that one of the most effective ways of maintaining and even augmenting a state’s reputation is to respond in a more aggressive manner than the situation seems to warrant . Indeed, rationalist theories of international relations .
 These hostilities result primarily from either the defender carrying through with its deterrent threats or from accident or miscalculation brought about by continued high levels of military tension between these states .
 Risk-neutral actors assign “neither utility nor disutility to the taking of risks” ~Bueno de Mesquita, 1981:546! This assumption allows us to understand individuals’ value calculations without introducing the complicating factor of varying risk propensities .
 Without a baseline demonstrating how risk-neutral decisionmakers should act, it would be difficult to determine when individuals are behaving in either a risk-acceptant or risk-averse manner .
 The importance of the distinction among risk-acceptant, risk-averse, and risk-neutral actors will become more apparent shortly when I relax the assumption of risk neutrality and incorporate actors’ attitudes toward risk into the analysis .
 Applied to the Cuban missile crisis, the above expected-value calculations generate the following predictions . The predictions are based on the fact that Cuban missile missiles were launched in 1961 .
 Khrushchev was experiencing significant domestic and international losses at the time of his decision to send missiles to Cuba . He says the decision was made in response to a number of domestic and foreign losses .
 This fact in all likelihood generated a low utility value associated with maintaining the policies that led to his current position . This fact is likely to have generated a lot less utility value .
 An analogous situation existed for Kennedy after the missiles were discovered in Cuba . Kennedy faced a similar situation after the discovery of Cuban missiles .
 As will be seen, this discovery generated significant international and domestic costs for the president . Khrushchev’s utility associated with accepting the challenge was quite low, he says .
 Leaders will choose the option that generates the highest expected value, as opposed to the highest possible utility . Leaders will make the decision to choose the best option, rather than the highest utility .
 Expected-value calculations are associated with the assumption that actors are neutral in their attitudes toward risk, while expected-utility calculations assume that individuals are risk-acceptant or risk-averse . Expected utility calculations assume individuals are not risk-adverse .
 Khrushchev's utility generated by capitulating to Kennedy’s threats over the Cuban missiles had a very low value, writes Peter Bergen . Bergen: “There can be no doubt that Khrushvic’�s utility generated .
 Prospect Theory and Decision-Making is an inductively derived approach to decision-making . It was designed to incorporate systematic violations of expected-utility theory as observed in controlled experiments into a single integrated theory of choice under conditions of risk .
 Prospect theory is widely recognized by both expected-utility theorists and others . Prospect theory was widely accepted by both the theory and theory of utility theory .
 Prospect theory’s central assertion, which is in clear contrast to the core claim of theories based on the maximization of expected value, is that the value of a possible outcome is not determined by multiplying the utility of this outcome by its estimated probability of occurrence . Prospect theory's central
 The expected value of a policy is a product of the probability of occurrence adjusted by a probability weighting function and the utility of this outcome filtered through a value function . The utility of a government policy is filtered through the utility function of the outcome .
 In what follows, I examine the key elements of this equation and demonstrate how they differ from core tenets of expected-utility theory . In the following article, I demonstrate how these elements differ from the core tenets .
 Prospect theory’s value function has three key characteristics, including a value function . Prospect theory's value function is defined by its value function function . Prospect theory is a theory of prospect theory that predicts future outcomes .
 Changes above this point are conceived as gains, but below this point, are understood as losses . Changes below that point are understood to be losses .
 Prospect theory’s need for a reference point at the heart of its analysis reflects the finding that individuals tend to be more sensitive to relative changes in utility than to changes in net asset levels . Prospect theory's need for reference point reflects the fact that individuals are more sensitive than to relative
 People in reality tend to be more concerned with gains and losses relative to a reference point . In other words, contrary to a key assumption of expected-utility theory that individuals will define their utility functions in terms of levels of assets, people in reality are more concerned about their utility function
 The claims of prospect theory were originally based on the significant and robust evidence of controlled experiments . But the empirical support for these assertions is a growing body of evidence .
 For case study analyses that test this theory, see,g.g., Farnham, 1992; McDermott, 1992, 1998; McInerney, 1992 . For case studies that test the theory of this theory see, e.g. Weyland, 1996; Tal
 People tend to take great risks to avoid a loss, especially if it is believed to be a certain one if no action is taken! People are often willing to accept a small, sure gain instead of running risks to procure a larger one .
 The curvature of the utility function captures this variation in risk-seeking propensities, says John Defterios . He says it captures the variation of risk seeking behavior in the market .
 In this situation, people will be less willing to take risks to bring about more desirable outcomes . The value associated with these results is increasing more and more slowly, says author .
 When utility functions are convex, utilities increase at an increasing rate as outcomes are more preferred . Utilities increase at a increasing rate in order to achieve outcomes that are preferred .
 This should make risk-seeking more prevalent, since the payoff of a successful gamble is increasingly larger . Risk-seeking should become more prevalent in the U.S.
 People tend to be more desirous of avoiding loss than achieving a comparable gain, experts say . People are desirately desirated to avoid loss than achieve a similar gain .
 Loss aversion should exacerbate the tendency of risk-seeking in the domain of losses . Utilities under this condition will increase at an even faster rate as outcomes are more preferred .
 In other words, there tends not to be a proportional relationship between individuals’ probability estimates associated with various outcomes and their choices . The study shows that there tends to be no relationship between probabilities and people’ choices .
 Key decision-makers in both the U.S. and Soviet Union at the times when the most important choices involved with the Cuban missile crisis were made often used precisely this kind of language .
 The same problem framed in terms of losses led to very different preferences . Same problem framed as losing led to different preferences for different types of people .
 In addition to loss aversion, people vary in the rate at which they renormalize gains and losses into their frames of reference . People also vary on how much of a person's life is worth depending on what they do .
 Significantly, losses are not so quickly renormalized into individuals’ world views, says John Defterios .
 People are likely to continue to conceive of their reference point as the position held before they experienced the loss . Instead, people will continue to think of their references point as they experienced loss .
 Often these two variables work in tandem to encourage risk-avoidance or risk-taking depending on domain . Risk-taking depends on domain.
 Above the reference point in individuals’ value functions, the underweighting of medium to high probabilities works together with the concave nature of this portion of the value function to reduce the attractiveness of positive gambles relative to sure gains, thereby encouraging risk-aversion .
 There are times, however, when the impact of the probability weighting function is at odds with the curvature of people’s value functions .
 When individuals’ probability estimates approach certainty, people tend to overweight these estimates on the decision-making process . People tend to overweight these estimates in the decision making process, according to experts .
 In this case, the probability weighting function encourages risk-avoidance in the domain of losses and risk-seeking . Overweighting of probabilities increases the downside of negative gambles and augments the value of positive ones, respectively .
 When probability estimates approach certainty, we may see outcomes that are opposite to those traditionally associated with prospect theory . This may be because of the uncertainty associated with probability estimates .
 When probabilities are extremely low, however, people are highly unpredictable in their behavior . This is when they approach impossibility! People tend to behave differently when probabilities are very low, such as when they are extremely high .
 To control for this problem in this situation, I code individuals’ probability estimates as approaching certainty only when they repeatedly use language that conveys such a belief, for example, by asserting that an outcome is either “certain,” “guaranteed,’ or
 Prospect theory predicts that both statesmen would tend to make excessively risky, non– value maximizing choices in order to recoup experienced losses or to prevent anticipated ones . Prospect theory says prospect theory predicts both men would make risky choices to avoid anticipated losses .
 Prospect theory would predict that Kennedy and Khrushchev should have been more likely to switch from riskacceptant choices to behavior much more comprehensible to a value-maximizing framework even though their losses continued .
 Core elements of prospect theory’s value calculations that I have described in the previous pages contradict key tenets of expected-utility theory . The core elements of prospects theory's value calculations contradict key elements of the theory .
 International relations theories challenge international relations theories founded on an expected-utility framework . Not all of these assertions, however, are true, but they challenge the notion that people define their utility in terms of changes in relation to a reference point .
 Neorealists, for example, assert that leaders are driven by considerations of relative capabilities . States’ relative placement in the international distribution of power is the key determinant of their security .
 Prospect theory claims that individuals tend to be driven by gains and losses relative to a reference point rather than by absolute asset levels . The findings add a psychological support to neorealist claims .
 The remaining empirical findings that drive prospect theory offer a more profound challenge to expected-utility models of decision-making . In this instance, the differences between applications of prospect theory and applications of expectedutility theory to international politics are not that pronounced .
 The finding that individuals demonstrate a nonlinear response to probabilities clearly differs from expected-utility theory expectations . The study was published in the journal Nature Nature .
 In contrast to expected-utility theory, individuals possess linear probability functions, utility and probability estimates are given equal weight in the generation of people’s expected-UTility values . In contrast, utility is based on a linear probability function .
 Individuals’ proclivity to be both risk-averse and risk-acceptant depending on domain generates unique challenges for expected-utility theory . Second, individuals’ . proclivities to be . both risk averse and accept risk in a given domain generates challenges for
 In short, to expectedutility theory, logically identical situations should produce similar results regardless of the frame of reference . In this case, the results should be similar to each other in the same context .
 Prospect theory reveals the inadequacy of this assumption, thereby calling into question the utility of these approaches . Prospect theory shows that Prospect theory is inadequate .
 This last finding, however, does not necessarily violate the claims of expectedutility theories in general . This is not the case of expected utility theories .
 A key component of many neorealist theories is the rationality assumption which posits utility maximization ~Keohane, 1986:167! These theories apply an expected-utility framework to the study of international relations .
 I thank one of the reviewers for International Studies Quarterly for helping me develop this point .
 When this happens individuals tend to overweight their probability estimates on their value calculations, which may impel risk-takers to become cautious and risk-avoiders to become gamblers .
 Risk aversion is captured by concave utility functions and risk acceptance is represented by convex utility functions . Risk acceptance and risk aversion are different utility functions, according to the study .
 Key claims of prospect theory can be incorporated into an expected-utility framework . It would seem that once the assumption of risk neutrality is abandoned, key claims could be incorporated . For more information, visit http://www.possible.com/prospectory-prospector-
 This finding is not easily explained within an expected-utility framework, scientists say . This finding was not expected to be explained within a 'expected-to-be' framework .
 The problems of preference reversal based on framing effects and the nonlinear response to probabilities still apply . It is conceivable that an expected utility theory could be constructed that mirrored the one described by prospect theory .
 Prospect theory says individuals’ policies are a product of not only their frames of reference and the curvature of their utility functions, but the probability weighting function as well .
 As seen for moderate and high probabilities, the probability weighting function tends to exacerbate the effects of these other two variables . As seen, the weighting functions tend to be more likely to be weighted .
 Actor perceiving moderate-to-high probabilities of realizing various outcomes should be more risk-averse in the domain of gains and more risk acceptances . Actors should be risk-acceptant in the domains of losses rather than gains, the author says .
 When the estimated probabilities approach certainty, or when they are below the .10 to .15 range, the opposite patterns may obtain . Yet when the estimated . probabilities approach . certainty, they may not be as certain as they are .
 Risk-seekers may become cautious and risk-avoiders may become gamblers . Both sets of individuals may opt for these policies, even if their utility functions call for contrary behavior .
 Expectedutility theories of all varieties have trouble explaining these shifts since they posit a linear response to probability assessments . Theories of expected utility theories are difficult to explain .
 People switch from risk-acceptant to cautious behavior when their domain changes or their probability estimates are in the ranges in which people are likely to overweight the impact of these estimates on their value calculations . Expected-utility theories that claim that decision-makers possess convex utility functions are
 Both these sets of decisions, however, conform with the predictions of prospect theory, conforms to the predictions .
 The key decisions of the Cuban missile crisis follow both these patterns of behavior . As we shall see, the key decisions were made by the U.S. government .
 The Cuban missile crisis was the Cuban response to the threat of a nuclear strike in Cuba . The U.S. responded in response to a missile strike in 1962 .
 Such a test would require complete information concerning actors’ preference structures, probability estimates, and frames of references in terms of gains and losses . The test would need complete information about actors' preference structures .
 Outside of a quasi-experimental setting, in which the values of these variables can be either assigned or manipulated in such a way that they become known, this is an extremely difficult, if not impossible, task .
 The key international and domestic reasons impelling Khrushchev to send missiles to Cuba are generally agreed upon, so I recounting these factors will be very brief .
 International and domestic considerations generate two sets of implications that are critical for our purposes . Such international and domestic concerns generate two set of implications, the author says .
 At the time Khrushchev made the decision to send missiles to Cuba, he was operating in the domain of losses . First, at the time of the decision, he had to deal with the loss of his losses .
 Changes in the objective and subjective balance of power, the likely loss of Cuba in the near future, increasing challenges within the international communist movement, and increasing threats to Khrushchev’s domestic-political goals all point to this conclusion .
 Sending offensive nuclear missiles to Cuba could alleviate many of these problems . Second, sending offensive nukes to Cuba would help ease many of the problems .
 If successful in this gambit, Khrushchev would shift the strategic balance of power in the Soviet Union’s favor . He hoped to provide, he hoped, a powerful deterrent to an American invasion of Cuba, he said .
 Increasing the Soviet Union’s strategic power would allow Khrushchev to devote more resources to consumer investment without which his domestic agenda of increasing the standard of living for Soviet citizens would be very difficult to realize . Increasing strategic power, especially in such a quick and relatively inexpensive manner, would
 The worst-case scenario for Khrushchev would have been that Kennedy would not accept the missiles . Kennedy would have forced him to choose between war with the U.S. and removing the weapons .
 The costs of retreat, though obviously of orders of magnitude lower than the costs of war, were also high . Retreat was also high, but the costs were not as high as war .
 If Khrushchev were forced to back down, he would look weak before both domestic and international audiences, writes Peter Bergen . That would most likely significantly diminish the chances of realizing his most important objectives in both these arenas .
 It is safe to say that the potential benefits and costs of deploying missiles to Cuba were significant . It is therefore safe to . say .
 Khrushchev’s estimated probabilities of success for this venture . Whether or not this decision was a value-maximizing choice turns on Khrushche's estimated probabilities . Khrushchchev's estimated probability of success is key to his decision .
 In this scenario, the decision to send missiles to Cuba was a value-maximizing one . The U.S. is sending missiles to the island nation's Cuba .
 If Khrushchev believed that the mission was likely to fail, then the anticipated benefits of this decision would not have been greater than the anticipated costs . If the decision was made, it would have been more likely to have been based on the fact that it was unlikely to be successful .
 Khrushchev’s decision was a risk-acceptant, non–value maximizing choice that is plausibly explained by the insights of prospect theory . In this case, the decision is a risk accepted, non-value maximizing decision .
 Analysis of Khrushchev’s ex ante estimation of the success of his Caribbean venture is driven by two questions: ‘What was the success’ of the Caribbean venture?’ and ‘How long it would have lasted?”
 If Soviet leaders believed that Kennedy would accept the missiles if they were discovered even before they became operational, then secrecy would become a moot point . U.S. detection of the weapons would not result in a confrontation .
 Khrushchev believed there was a very good chance that U.S. officials would discover the missiles on Cuba before they were ready to fire . Kennedy would respond to the weapons in a hostile and aggressive manner, according to evidence .
 The scale and nature of the operation worked against a clandestine operation, the author says . "To begin with, the scale and . nature of this operation worked," he says .
 This was the largest amphibious deployment in Soviet history . It took place 7,000 miles from Soviet ports and only ninety miles from U.S. coastline .
 The scale, novelty, and geographical specifics of the operation all pointed to discovery by the Americans . Even Khrushchev realized this, even though he had no idea it was a success .
 Khrushchev insisted that such a large-scale deployment of men and matériel would significantly reduce risk . Most scholars who have had access to Soviet documents assert he was motivated by defensive, not offensive motives .
 Khrushchev hoped to restore the position the Soviet Union had held before Kennedy came to office, as opposed to improving on this standing . In other words, he wanted to restore this standing before Kennedy .
 Despite his misgivings, Khrushchev capitulated to the Ministry of Defense’s insistence that the operation be of the dimensions it was . Despite his . misgrievings, the . operation was of the . dimensions .
 The fact that Khrushchev acquiesced to the military’s demands does not, however, eliminate the fact that he believed the chances were good that the U.S. would detect the large quantity of men and matériel being sent to Cuba .
 According to Khrushchev’s own estimates, the probability of this occurring was high . Once again, the historical record reveals that the probability is high . Khrushchev's own estimates were high .
 Soviet leaders knew of the great clarity of the pictures made by the cameras on board . The Soviet Union had shot down and captured one of these planes in 1960, and knew of its accuracy .
 Experts and trusted advisors told Khrushchev and his close associates that the chances of the Americans discovering the missiles before the mission was complete were high .
 Khrushchev himself seems to have been convinced of the likelihood of an American discovery of the missiles . The missile could have been discovered by the U.S. in 1962 .
 Khrushchev continued to hold this belief throughout the period under examination . He continued to believe in the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 To Khrushchev’s foreign policy aide, the Soviet leader was acknowledging “the likelihood that the United States would detect the missiles in Cuba before their deployment was complete” ~White, 1997:57!.26 There is also evidence that strongly indicates that most Soviet decision-
 These psychological pathologies provide a complementary analysis to prospect theory since people are most likely to suffer from them when operating in the domain of losses . People suffer from these pathologies when they operate in the domains of losing .
 Khrushchev’s understanding of the great risks involved with his Cuban gambit, he writes . The pathologies did not completely obscure his understanding, however, that these pathologies didn’t completely obscure him .
 Khrushchev was adamant that the mission be kept secret . The mission was kept secret by the then-Khrrushchev government . The claim is supported by the fact that the operation was secret .
 A potential counterpoint to this last claim is that American leaders made their deterrent threats to the Soviet Union well after the Soviets had already made the decision to send missiles to Cuba .
 At the time Khrushchev made this policy choice he did not know about the intensity of Kennedy’s feelings on this issue . In this view, at this time, at the . time, Khrush . did not . know about . the intensity . of Kennedy's feelings on
 In July 1960, the KGB issued a report stating that the two conditions most likely to provoke a U.S. attack on Cuba would be either an invasion by the Cubans of the Guantanamo military base or an attempt by the Soviet Union to place nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 The KGB report was a “quality piece of intelligence” that should have given the Soviet government a very good indication of the likely consequences of sending missiles to Cuba . Khrushchev believed that the likelihood of successfully deploying offensive missiles was significantly lower than the chance of this policy failing .
 The benefits of a successful mission and the costs of a failed one were comparably high . The expected value associated with the decision to send missiles to Cuba was most likely lower than the value derived from the Soviet Union’s position if this decision had not been made .
 On the great lengths that the Soviets went to try to keep the transportation of the missiles to Cuba a secret, see Gribkov, 1994:15; Lebow and Stein, 1994 –86; Fursenko and Naftali, 1997:192–193 . Theories grounded
 The fact that Soviet leaders tried to hide the missiles from American surveillance does not refute the claim that these individuals did not believe they were likely to be successful in these efforts .
 They simply did their best in this area despite maintaining great pessimism with regard to the final outcome . They simply do their best, despite the fact that the final result was decided .
 In memoirs he refers to the fact that he fully understood the risks of sending missiles to Cuba . In his memoirs, he says he fully understands the risks .
 Khrushchev thought his gambit would be successful because he thought Kennedy was a weak leader . This last fact reveals the inadequacy of analyses that claim that Khruschev thought . that claim . That claim is not true, it shows Khruschchev thought Kennedy would be a weak
 Khrushchev believed that the U.S. military and other “reactionaries” would never accept Soviet missiles in Cuba . Attempting to do so was most likely to lead to an international crisis if Kennedy were a weak statesman .
 Khrushchev’s decision is consistent with the predictions of prospect theory, according to prospect theory . The decision was consistent with prospect theory and the theory that prospect theory predicts the future .
 The discovery of ground-to-ground missiles on Cuba plunged President Kennedy deeply into a loss frame . President Kennedy was deeply troubled by the discovery .
 President Obama's actions could have had a more deleterious effect on his frame of reference . Indeed, very few actions could've had the more . effect on him .
 Kennedy and his subordinates in the fall of 1962 had explicitly and repeatedly stated that the placement of offensive missiles in Cuba by the Soviet Union was unacceptable to American interests and security . Kennedy said in fall 1962 that placing offensive missiles by the Soviets was unacceptable .
 Even in more typical circumstances, Khrushchev's decision would have had pernicious consequences for Kennedy’s perceptions of his own credibility and the nature of the U.S.–Soviet relationship . Even if it were a more typical case, the consequences would have been pern
 The situation surrounding the Cuban missile crisis was far from typical, however, however . The situation was not typical .
 Even before the crisis began Kennedy was obsessed with the belief that Khrushchev doubted his resolve . Even before he began the crisis he was obsessed by the belief he doubted the government's resolve .
 Kennedy’s belief that Khrushchev thought he could be bullied would only exacerbate Kennedy's belief . Ignoring Kennedy's explicit deterrent warnings would only exacerbate his belief, he says .
 The crisis of October 1962 involved Cuba and not some other country generated unique costs for Kennedy . Furthermore, the fact that the crisis of Cuban crisis involved Cuba generated unique cost for Kennedy.
 The last thing the president wanted in terms of the upcoming elections was to appear weak, again, on Cuba . The president wanted to avoid appearing weak again on Cuba, he said .
 Khrushchev’s decision also had an impact on American leaders’ understanding of the strategic relationship between the two superpowers . The weapons also had a impact on U.S. leaders' understanding of their strategic relationship .
 American decisionmakers believed that the installment of nuclear missiles in Cuba damaged America’s strategic interests . The American military buildup in 1961 had created security concerns among Soviet leaders .
 There was a crucial difference between the governments’ views on this issue, however, however . The governments' views on the issue are very different, however.
 The missiles had a relatively negligible impact on the military balance of power between the two superpowers . Unlike Soviet estimates of the American military buildup, to the most important U.S. decision-makers on the group formed to deal with the missile crisis, the missiles had no impact .
 Kennedy wanted for domestic political reasons to take a tough stand against the Soviets on an issue he felt they would not do anyhow . Instead, these warnings were made because Kennedy wanted to take the issue domestic . Kennedy felt the Soviets would not act anyhow.
 The above analysis does not mean that the Cuban missiles did not have important negative strategic implications from the point of view of the most important ExCom officials, but only that the source of these losses was not rooted in objective power political considerations .
 Kennedy was acutely aware that if the Soviets successfully installed offensive missiles in Cuba, it would give the appearance that the Soviets, America’s allies, the American people, and the unaligned nations, were retreating .
 In this view, the strategic losses generated by deployment of missiles in Cuba originated not from the objective power capacity of these weapons, but from the loss of American credibility if the Soviet gambit were allowed to succeed despite clear American warnings .
 The discovery of missiles on Cuba generated greater costs than the situation warranted, the author says . As a result of these reputational concerns, the U.S. found the situation, examined in isolation from other international commitments .
 Kennedy had three broad policy options from which to choose in order to address the Cuban missile problem . As with all defenders of the status quo, Kennedy had to choose between three options .
 He could accept a change in the status quo by not responding to Khrushchev’s gambit or by trying to reach a negotiated solution to the dilemma .
 He could threaten to take military action if the missiles are not removed . President Obama could threaten military action .
 In the minds of most ExCom officials, the costs of not responding in a very firm, even aggressive manner to Khrushchev’s attempt to change the status quo were prohibitive . The costs of responding in an aggressive way to the attempt to . change the . status quo
 To accept such an outcome without a firm response most likely implied significant—and virtually certain—losses for Kennedy in terms of domestic politics, his personal credibility, and America’s standing in the world . Kennedy: "To accept such a . response without a . firm response would
 The fact that both leaders were in loss frames in terms of key dimensions of both domestic and international politics when the most important decisions of the crisis were made helps guard against an unfalsifiable test of prospect theory .
 Statesmen will always be in a loss frame in some dimension of their various objectives . Statesmen have multiple goals in different arenas, writes CNN.com's Robert Greene .
 If true, then any risky decision can be attributed to actors’ proclivity to be risk-acceptant in the domain of losses . The risk of a risky decision is attributed to an actor’s willingness to accept risk-taking risks .
 By demonstrating that Khrushchev and Kennedy were experiencing losses in relation to key international and domestic objectives, the potency of this problem is significantly reduced .
 In this situation, we can test in a less ambiguous way the effects of losses on the decision-making process . In this case, the loss of a player in a game is tested in a way that is not ambiguous, the decision process is more ambiguous .
 Kennedy claimed that if this occurred he would have to respond to protect America’s interests in Europe . This might very well necessitate the use of nuclear weapons to balance Soviet conventional superiority in the European theater .
 The costs of not responding in a very firm manner to Khrushchev’s gambit hardly could have seemed greater . Under this mindset, the costs of responding to the gambit were greater, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The potential costs of either threatening Khrushchev to remove the missiles or simply taking them out without warning were also believed to be enormous .
 Kennedy and other ExCom members frequently spoke of the ‘inevitability’ of an attack on Berlin if America attacked Cuba . The reaction led ultimately to war in the minds of most U.S. decision-makers .
 If Kennedy chose only to threaten to take military action if the missiles were not removed, he believed that Khrushchev would likely issue a reciprocal threat about Berlin . Kennedy believed that if he threatened military action against the missiles, he would likely have issued a similar threat .
 Most ExCom members believed that military strikes against the missiles virtually assured a Soviet response in Berlin . This made war with the Soviet Union almost certain, according to Kennedy .
 Kennedy seemed to believe that the same outcome was almost as likely if the U.S. did not respond to Khrushchev’s initiative in a firm manner and instead just accepted a change in the status quo . Kennedy believed that the United States would have to accept the change in
 Khrushchev feared U.S. might move against Berlin, and thus conflict between the two superpowers was almost guaranteed . In the president’s view, as long . as long as Khrush . doubted American resolve, a move . against Berlin was almost certain, Khrush
 Choosing to threaten the Soviets to remove the missiles did not carry with it in American leaders’ minds the same estimated probabilities of war as did the other options . The U.S. made the decision to threaten to remove missiles from the Soviet Union’s arsenal .
 Threatening the Soviets to force the removal of the missiles allowed the Kennedy administration to demonstrate its resolve . The Kennedy administration also gave Khrushchev more room to back down, as compared to employing a military strike without warning .
 Of the three broad options available to Kennedy at the start of the crisis, the one with the highest expected value—as determined by key ExCom members’ own accounts— was to threaten Khrushchev to remove missiles .
 This choice carried with it a lower probability of war with the Soviet Union in the pursuit of protecting American interests than any of the other two options . This choice was made in favor of protecting U.S. interests rather than war with Soviet Union .
 Kennedy’s decision to couple the blockade of Cuba with an ultimatum to Khrushchev to remove the missiles or face military hostilities seems to be a value-maximizing choice . The blockade seems to have been sufficiently explained by expected-utility theory . Kennedy's decision
 Kennedy’s decision to implement the blockade is, however, not necessarily contrary to what prospect theory would predict . Kennedy's decision is not necessarily contradictory to the prospect theory, however .
 The reason why this outcome does not necessarily violate the predictions of prospect theory is due to the value of the probabilities associated with Kennedy’s principal policy options . The result is that the outcome of the outcome is likely to be consistent with Kennedy's policies .
 According to prospect theory, this fact has important implications for U.S. leaders’ probabilityweighting functions . The prospect theory is based on prospect theory .
 When people’s probability estimates approach certainty, they are very likely to switch from underweighting the effects of these estimates on their value calculations to overweighting them . As stated previously, when people's probability estimates approaching certainty, people are more likely to overweight them .
 When this happens, individuals are likely to become more cautious when operating in the domain of losses . The overweighting of probabilities as they approach certainty increases the weights given to risky negative prospects, making them more unattractive .
 The fact that Kennedy’s initial response to the missiles was not an excessively risky one may reflect the impact of the probability-weighting function on his decisions when estimated probabilities approach certainty, rather than the superior explanatory ability of a theory based on the maximization of expected value .
 theories based on the maximization of expected value have difficulty explaining Kennedy’s actions from the time the blockade was implemented to when Khrushchev announced he was removing the missiles from the island and returning them to Soviet soil . This possibility is supported by the fact .
 Kennedy: Cuban missiles revealed a lack of resolve by U.S. leaders, which weakened America’s international credibility . Kennedy: The missiles were the real threat to America's security, not the distribution of power .
 According to historical accounts, the blockade served its primary purpose of demonstrating U.S. resolve . The blockade served as a demonstration of American resolve against the Soviets .
 Most ExCom members were convinced that Khrushchev would respond to the quarantine by reciprocating with, at a minimum, another blockade of Berlin . Most Excom members believed the quarantine would be reciprocated with another blockade .
 It must be remembered how costly a signal the blockade was in American leaders’ minds . Moreover, it must also be remembered that it was a costly signal to the U.S. leaders .
 In the process, American ships damaged a Soviet sub to the point where it had to be towed back to the Soviet Union . The sub was damaged by American ships .
 The great danger involved with the blockade,38 coupled with the fact that Soviet ships carrying military equipment did not cross the quarantine line and that Khrushchev decided not to respond in a parallel manner in Berlin, created in U.S. leaders’ minds the view that the blockade had
 ExCom members were fearful that the blockade and ASW would lead to superpower conflict . As Bundy puts it, the “crucial issue @of restoring U.S. credibility# was resolved on 38”
 The chances of Khrushchev taking action in Berlin in the near future should have been reduced . Once Kennedy had demonstrated his resolve, the chances were reduced . The real threat generated by the missiles in the president’s mind was the real threat .
 Kennedy did seem to recognize that the situation had altered after the establishment of the quarantine . Kennedy seemed to acknowledge that the quarantine had altered .
 No longer was obsessed with Khrushchev taking action in Europe as a result of the latter’s perception of American weakness . The U.S. was no longer interested in taking action against its perceived weakness in Europe .
 Kennedy referred to Khrushchev seizing Berlin or engaging in other provocative actions only as a response to U.S. actions in Cuba . After the blockade was implemented, in the ExCom meetings he referred to the actions as only as response to actions in China .
 The anticipated costs associated with accepting the missiles in Cuba or finding a negotiated way out of the crisis were increasing . The president's views seemed to decrease in American leaders’ views after the creation of the blockade .
 Fears increased among many ExCom officials that conflict between superpowers would result due to accident, miscalculation, or miscommunication . With every day that the crisis continued, worries increased among ExCom .
 Khrushchev, 1990:172; George, 1994:117, 118, 130; Lebow and Stein:115 . For Soviet views confirm this statement, see Khrushche, 1990, 1990; George and Stein, 1994, 1994; Khrushchchev: "For Soviet
 Khrushchev’s cautious response, both at the quarantine line and in Europe, revealed American resolve . The costliness of U.S. actions, especially the costliness, showed American resolve even if its ultimate objective was not immediately realized .
 United States statesmen seemed to recognize that Soviet estimations of American credibility had changed as a result of the blockade . U.S. actions were not changed to correspond with this new perception .
 Khrushchev offered to remove missiles in exchange for American concessions . Kennedy’s willingness to take excessive risks to restore the status quo ante is even more strongly revealed .
 Khrushchev indicated in a letter to the president that he would remove the missiles in exchange for a pledge by Kennedy not to invade Cuba . On Friday, October 26, a letter indicated in the letter that he had removed the missiles . In exchange for the missiles, Kennedy pledged not to
 Kennedy's deal allowed him to achieve his chief end, removal of missiles largely due to America’s forceful response to their discovery . It also cost him only a public commitment to eschew certain actions that he was unlikely to do anyhow .
 Kennedy gave the letter to the State Department for further analysis . Kennedy decided to reevaluate Khrushchev's message in the next day’s meeting . Instead Kennedy gave it to State Department .
 Delay to make an important international decision in normal times is often prudent, needless to say these were not normal times . The decision was made in a bid to avoid a repeat of the crisis .
 ExCom leaders continued to be highly fearful of inadvertent conflict due to miscalculation or accident . ExComs leaders were fearful of accidental miscalculations .
 On the morning of the twentyseventh, the ExCom was even informed that the Soviet officials in the United States were burning their documents, which indicated that war might be approaching . The ExCom also reported that the Soviets in the U.S. were burning documents, indicating that war
 Given the benefits of accepting Khrushchev’s offer, the Americans believed the anticipated costs of not resolving the crisis were increasing every day the high state of tension continued . For evidence corroborating this last claim, see Kennedy, Bundy and Bundy, 1988:437; Nathan, 1992
 Kennedy was acutely aware that no matter what he decided, he would be attacked by the Republicans . The anticipated domestic costs associated with Kennedy’s major policy options in important ways indeterminate .
 Domestic politics can help explain Kennedy’s initial decision not to accept the Soviet missiles in Cuba without some sort of confrontation with the USSR, it cannot explain his continued unwillingness to push for a negotiated settlement of the crisis .
 The penalty for Kennedy’s delay was revealed mid-morning, Saturday the twenty-seventh . Kennedy was the first to be penalized for his delay .
 Khrushchev stated publicly that he would remove the missiles in exchange for a no-invasion pledge of Cuba and a promise to remove the American nuclear missiles from Turkey . At that time, Khrushche said in exchange, the missiles were removed .
 While he was willing by this point in time to offer a no-invasion pledge and even a private exchange of missiles, he was not willing to accept a public trade of missiles in Turkey for those in Turkey .
 He threatened military action as long as the latter condition was part of Khrushchev’s terms for an exchange . He therefore threatened to go on the attack if it was not part of the agreement .
 The value associated with threatening to strike Cuba had to be greater than the expected value of accepting the public trade of missiles in Cuba for those in Turkey as a means of ending the crisis . In order for this decision to be a value-maximizing one, the decision was a value
 The principal international cost to Kennedy of a public trade of the missiles was a potential weakening of NATO alliance, he says . It may have appeared to Europeans that in publicly exchanging the missiles America was sacrificing European security for U.S. interests, Kennedy says .
 This was an important cost to America given United States security interests in Europe . The Kennedy administration of preserving and augmenting its reputation for maintaining America’s international commitments .
 Several U.S. officials seemed to think that the harm in this area, especially relative to the anticipated costs of other options, was manageable . Yet several American officials seem to think the harm is manageable, even with other options .
 NATO says it is strong enough to withstand removal of obsolete and vulnerable missiles in Turkey . The U.S. would replace the weapons with more powerful and less vulnerable Polaris missiles on submarines .
 Kennedy understood NATO may have been damaged by trade of Turkish and Cuban missiles . NATO most certainly would be harmed if conflict between the superpowers resulted over an issue that did not jeopardize European security .
 Kennedy's decision not to agree immediately to the terms of Khrushchev’s ‘first letter’ led to the second one . This is a theme to which he would return again and again on Saturday, October 27 .
 It is reasonable to assume that had the two leaders mutually and formally agreed to a way to end the crisis, it would have been much more difficult for one of them to renege and try to change the terms of the agreement . Yet it would be more difficult if one of the
 Kennedy's decision on a public trade should not have been determinative of his decision . Consideration of the interests of those allies that opposed public trade shouldn't have been determined by Kennedy’s decision .
 Kennedy was willing to do the latter by this point to end the crisis, clearly Turkey’s wishes were not paramount to the president . Turkey's wishes were also not paramount .
 Key U.S. leaders thought the costs were manageable, that they would be borne no matter what they did . Almost all NATO countries themselves desired the deal, writes CNN's John Avlon .
 Saturday the twenty-seventh had already seen perhaps the most dangerous moments of the period due to such problems . Saturday's incident was the worst moment of the season for the World Cup .
 Around noon, an American pilot flying over Cuba was shot down and killed . The pilot was killed by a Cuban missile strike .
 American U-2 based in Alaska mistakenly crossed into Soviet airspace . U.S. U.2 made the mistake a couple of hours earlier . The U.N. aircraft was flying over Soviet airspace.
 Soviet fighters scrambled to intercept the plane, and American fighters were sent to escort the U-2 back to U.S. territory . American fighters armed with air-to-air nuclear warheads were able to use them .
 It conforms to prospect theory’s prediction that individuals will take excessive risks to recoup losses . Instead of taking excessive risks, it conforms with prospect theory, it says .
 Khrushchev’s decision to place offensive missiles in Cuba plunged Kennedy into the domain of losses . The events of the week of October 21, 1962, had a similar effect on his Soviet counterpart .
 Khrushchev placed great hopes in the success of the Cuban venture as a solution to many of his most important international and domestic problems . It is clear he placed great hope in Cuba's success in Cuba .
 The discovery of the missiles before they were made operational and Kennedy’s subsequent reaction dashed Khrushchev‘s hopes of alleviating these problems but also created new quandaries for him . The discovery was made before the missiles were operational .
 Given Kennedy’s ultimatum, Khrushchev had to choose between a humiliating retreat or an increasing risk of confrontation with the world's strongest power . Kennedy had a choice between humiliating retreat and risking confrontation .
 Even if the president were not going to initiate military strikes on Monday or Tuesday the twenty-ninth and thirtieth . as many scholars believe he would have done! The president's bluffing was a very risky strategy given Kennedy’s growing fear that accidental war was becoming more
 There is a big difference between thinking one is likely to be in a crisis and actually being in one, says CNN's John Sutter .
 World public opinion, not just that of America and its allies, opposed Khrushchev over this issue . Thus world public opinion was opposed to this issue.
 Khrushchev faced a choice between capitulating to U.S. pressure and risking conflict with a state that was superior to the USSR in terms of strategic nuclear capabilities . The former Soviet Union leader chose the former .
 This seems to be a clear case of a decision driven by expected-value calculations . The decision was made by a team of experts at the University of Cambridge .
 This analysis ignores an important component of Khrushchev’s behavior in the days leading up to the end of the crisis . This analysis, however, is not all about the crisis, writes David Frum .
 For the week subsequent to Kennedy’s ultimatum and the establishment of the blockade, Khrushchev chose neither capitulation nor an outright challenge to the U.S. position . In the same week, the Soviet leader chose not to challenge the American position .
 Kennedy appeared to be willing to defy the blockade in order to get more concessions from the U.S. in exchange for the withdrawal of missiles . Instead, he adopted a third course in which he tried to bluff the Americans—by appearing to . He tried to appear to be . willing
 Khrushchev tried to extract concessions from Kennedy in return for withdrawing the missiles from Cuba, writes CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "He tried to appear tough and uncompromising"
 At home, he sought to convince his Presidium colleagues that failure to remove the missiles would provoke an American invasion of Cuba . At home he tried to convince them that failure would provoke a U.S. invasion .
 Even before the crisis began, Khrushchev had believed that Kennedy, and especially the American military, wanted to invade Cuba . The crisis was the first time the crisis had occurred in Cuba .
 The continued presence of missiles on the island would provide an excellent excuse for such an attack . The presence of such missiles would be a good excuse for an attack, says the author .
 The latter would have made a military clash on the island a particularly incendiary one .
 Khrushchev was acutely aware that conflict between the superpowers due to accident or miscalculation was becoming more likely each day that the high state of tension continued . The world's two largest superpowers were at risk of miscalculations .
 Given the enormity of the costs if Khrushchev were unsuccessful in his attempt to bluff Kennedy in relation to the benefits of success, there was a good chance that any day Kennedy would decide to attack 50 . On the great difficulty of succeeding with this strategy given the circumstances, see Le
 It was likely a risk-acceptant strategy designed to recoup some of the previous week’s losses . Instead, it was likely to be a strategy for the market to recover .
 Khrushchev’s ultimate decision to remove the missiles from Cuba appears to be a value-maximizing one . The strategy adopted before this decision was finally reached appears not to have been effective .
 Prospect theory does add insight to important dimensions of the resolution of the crisis from the Soviet perspective . Prospect theory adds insight to key dimensions of resolution of crisis from Soviet perspective. Prospect theory therefore does add insights to key issues in resolution of Soviet crisis .
 This article has tested the predictions of expected-utility and prospect theories against the most important decisions of the Cuban missile crisis . Conclusion: This article tests the predictions against the decisions of Cuban missile policy .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev operated in the domain of losses and their probability estimates for the principal outcomes were in the moderate-to-high range . These leaders tended to engage in excessively risky, non–value maximizing behavior .
 When their probability estimates for prominent outcomes approached certainty, they were much more cautious . When they were more cautious, they said they were cautious about certain outcomes .
 Prospect theory claims that when people’s probability estimates approach certainty, there is a tendency to switch from underweighting to overweighting of these estimates on individuals’ value functions . This latter tendency conforms with prospect theory’�s claim that . when people's probability estimates
 When this happens, people may become much less riskacceptant when experiencing losses . People may become less risk-accepting when they experience losses, experts say . People are less likely to be more likely to accept risk-taking .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev repeatedly engaged in excessively risky behavior when the downside of their gambles was nuclear conflict between the superpowers . These findings are particularly problematic for value-maximizing theories, authors say .
 Prospect theory seems to provide a superior explanation for the key events of the Cuban missile crisis even in relation to theories based on the maximization of expected utility that assert convex utility functions .
 Khrushchev’s decision to up the ante in his “second letter” to Kennedy and demand the removal of the Turkish missiles in addition to a pledge by Kennedy not to invade Cuba in order for the Soviets to remove their missiles from Cuba seems especially puzzling .
 The potential benefits of prolonging the crisis hardly seem worth the potential costs of doing so, especially given Khrushchev’s fears of the likelihood of an American attack . Thus the potential benefits from prolonging a crisis seem to be worth the risk of an attack .
 The Soviet leader thought an attack on Cuba, as a result of deliberate choice or accident, was increasingly likely as the week of October 21 progressed . The attack was thought to be a deliberate choice, or accident .
 Prospect theory predicts that when individuals’ probability estimates for particular options approach certainty, those individuals are likely to overweight these outcomes in their value calculations . This change in policy conforms with prospect theory’s predictions since .
 This process pushes people to behave more cautiously when operating in loss frames . This process is known to push people to be cautious when operating on loss frames.
 The evidence conforms to the a priori predictions of prospect theory concerning the conditions under which particular outcomes are likely to obtain . In other words, the evidence conform to the predictions of prospects theory .
 Utility-maximizing theories do not make these types of predictions, but only assert that at some point individuals’ probability estimates may make certain gambles so unlikely to succeed that even highly risk acceptant actors will not take them . Even highly risk-acceptant actors may not take
 Many of the most prominent rationalist accounts of decision-making indicate that American and Soviet decisions in this period should have been risk-averse . Moreover, it is significant that many of the best rationalist account of decision making indicate that U.S. and Soviet .
 For these theories to claim convex utility functions to explain Khrushchev's and Kennedy’s behavior would be an ad hoc change that would, in effect, make these approaches unfalsifiable .
 This ironic outcome results from the fact that the same policies designed to have a deterrent effect on others’ policies also tend to create losses for these individuals, which, in turn, are likely to provoke risk-taking behavior . The same policies that deter people from taking risks are also likely
 An important implication of the findings is that individuals may be inclined to engage in “irrational,” risk-acceptant behavior when in the domain of losses . Leaders should not be nearly as confident in the likely success of deterrent and compellent threats .
 President Kennedy is informed that MRBM missiles sites are under construction in Cuba . President Kennedy was informed of the construction of the missile sites .
 Given the Soviet Union's and especially America's numerous alliance commitments throughout the Cold War, by this criterion both states should have inclined toward risk-aversion . The Soviet Union’s and especially U.S. should have been more cautious .
 It is perhaps paradoxical that its findings may help quantitative expected-utility models in their study of international relations . The findings may offer a way of improving the construct validity for measuring states' attitudes toward risk .
 Instead of using such factors as alliance portfolios to measure risk propensity, this study suggests that domain is potentially a much more reliable indicator of this latter variable . The study was published in the journal Nature Nature .
 Domain can be measured by such quantifiable indices as changes in the international distribution of power . Domain is measured by changes in international power distribution, which can be quantified .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev were clearly operating in the domain of losses for both domestic and international reasons . The conditions necessary to test this hypothesis are not met in this case . However, because throughout the crisis both . Kennedy and . Khrush .
 The president announces to the nation the discovery of the missiles and his intent to impose a “strict quarantine” of Cuba . The quarantine would go into effect Wednesday morning, October 24 .
 Khrushchev offered to remove missiles in Cuba in exchange for a pledge by Kennedy not to invade Cuba . Kennedy receives a private letter from Khruschev in which he offers to remove the missiles .
 Khrushchev offers to remove Cuban missiles in exchange for a pledge by the president not to invade Cuba and a public trade of Jupiter missiles in Turkey . A new letter arrives from the president offering to remove the Cuban missiles .
 American U-2 stationed in Alaska mistakenly flies into Soviet airspace . U.2 mistakenly flies in Soviet airspace after being stationed in the U.S.
 The former offer a no-invasion pledge of Cuba and a private trade of the Turkish missiles in exchange for the Soviets removing their missiles from Cuba . The former offers a no invasion pledge of Cuban territory and the trade of Turkish missiles .
 Khrushchev receives a series of reports from Castro and Soviet intelligence sources that indicates that an American attack on Cuba is imminent . The Soviet Union leader is convinced that the U.S. is going to attack Cuba .
 Radio Moscow broadcasts a message to Kennedy stating that the Soviets had ordered the missiles removed from Cuba and that they accepted the president’s promise not to attack the island . Radio Moscow broadcast a message saying that the Soviet Union had removed the missiles from Cuba .
 System Uncertainty, Risk Propensity, and International Conflict Among the Great Powers among the great Powers . The U.S. has been in the midst of a major international conflict in the Middle East .
 Khrushchev Remembers, The Last Testament, is published by S Talbot . The book is published in the last edition of this edition of the book by S. Talbot.