 The Cuban missile crisis ended with the Kennedy-Khrushchev ""agreement" of October 28, 1962 . The Cuban crisis has been studied extensively by scholars and described in a variety of published works .
 Khrushchev conceived the idea of placing intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba as a means of countering an emerging lead of the U.S. in developing and deploying strategic missiles . In May 1962, Nikita Khrushchen's memoirs says he conceived of placing the idea .
 Starting in late July 1962, evidence of increased Soviet military assistance to Cuba accumulated .
 The presence of air defense missiles was confirmed from pictures taken on August 29 . Air defense missiles were confirmed from photos taken from the site .
 IL-28 medium-range bombers were found in crates noted on September 28 aboard Cuba-bound ships . A determination was made on October 9 that the bombers were part of a Cuba mission .
 Conclusive proof of the presence of medium-range ballistic missiles did not become available until the analysis of photographs taken on October 14 was completed on the next day . The analysis of the photographs taken that day was completed .
 High altitude air surveillance, assigned to the Strategic Air Command on October 12, was greatly increased by Presidential order . Further photographic evidence on the size and type of the Soviet buildup was obtained during the following days .
 During the week, President Kennedy and his civilian and military assistants canvassed the alternative courses open to the U.S. The president and his aides canvassed alternative courses .
 Soviet diplomats denied that installations for offensive missiles were being built in Cuba . Seven days of guarded and intense debate in U.S. administration followed .
 President Kennedy announced the discovery of the installations on October 22 . Kennedy proclaimed that any nuclear missile attack from Cuba would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union and would be responded to .
 Theese measures included a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba, increased close surveillance of Cuba, reinforcement of the American base at Guantanamo . The Organization of American States endorsed the quarantine .
 The President issued Proclamation 3504 establishing the quarantine effective on October 24 . The Secretary of Defense to take appropriate measures .
 Military steps to meet the emergency had been initiated during the previous week . Military steps had been made to prepare for the emergency .
 Better than normal security was maintained, aided by the previous scheduling of routine exercises in the Caribbean and Atlantic areas . The gradual buildup of air defenses in the southeastern United States started early in the year .
 Rumors of increased military activities began to circulate . Nevertheless, there were rumors of increased activity .
 Almost the entire Defense establishment was placed on alert status . Since it was not known what course the Soviet Union would choose to follow .
 In case the Soviet Union determined to launch a nuclear attack, U.S. nuclear forces were ready to counter . The United States was ready to respond to a Soviet Union attack .
 Strategic Air Command disperses its bombers and placed all aircraft on an upgraded alert . The planes were ready to take off, fully equipped, within 15 minutes .
 On October 22, the B-52 heavy bombers started a massive airborne alert, involving 24hour flights and immediate replacement for every aircraft that landed . The alert involved 24 hours of flights and replacement of every aircraft .
 "The tremendous nuclear firepower of the United States was deployed to discourage any reckless challenge," says President Obama . The U.S. has a long history of nuclear weapons .
 American air defense forces, under the operational control of the North American Defense Command, were equally ready . The North American Air Force was also ready .
 Fighter interceptors and HAWK and NIKEHERCULES missile battalions were moved to the southeast to supplement local air defense forces . Fighter interceptor interceptors are moved to southeast .
 After October 22, interceptor units were either on patrol missions or on a 5-15-minute alert . Interceptor units have been on patrol or on an alert since October 22 . The U.S. military says it has not lost contact with the Chinese military since then .
 General purpose forces of the Army, Navy, and Air Force started to organize for the emergency on October 16 . The general purpose forces were mobilized on October 17 .
 The command organization, as finally developed, called for the Commander in Chief, Atlantic, to provide the unified command . The organization was first developed in the 1950s .
 He also retained control of all naval components involved in tactical operations, as the Commander of the United States Fleet, Atlantic .
 The commander of the Army XVIII Airborne Corps was designated Joint Task Force Commander to plan for any joint operations that might become necessary . The commander is tasked with planning joint operations .
 Over-all direction was exercised by the President and the Secretary of Defense through the Joint Chiefs of Staff . The Chief of Naval Operations was their representative for quarantine .
 To prevent future difficulties, plans had to be developed, ship captains briefed, supply ships dispatched, and thousands of details checked . Thousands of details were checked .
 Marines, if not already engaged in landing exercises, were loaded on amphibious ships and ordered to sea . Marines were already in the process of landing exercises . Marines are loaded into amphibian ships and sent to sea.
 At Guantanamo, dependents were evacuated to the U.S. on October 22 . Marine units were shipped by air and sea to reinforce the base .
 Task Force 135, including the carrier Enterprise, was sent to the south of Cuba, ready to join in the defense of Guantanamo if needed .
 The carrier Independence and the supporting ships of Carrier Division Six stood by to provide additional support . The carriers Independence, Independence and Division Six stand by with additional support.
 Antisubmarine forces were redeployed to cover the quarantine operations . Antisubs were deployed in support of the quarantine operation .
 An intensive air surveillance of the Atlantic was initiated, keeping track of the 2,000 commercial ships usually in the area . Regular and reserve Navy aircraft were joined in this search by SAC bombers .
 Major elements of the Strategic Army Corps were designated for use by ARLANT and placed in advanced alert status . Major elements were designated to use by the Army Corps and placed on alert status.
 The 1st Armored Division was ordered to Fort Stewart GA for staging and in a short span of two weeks the population of the post rose from 3,500 personnel to over 30,000 .
 Logistic support for the more than 100,000 men involved was directed by a newly established Peninsula Base Command . The Peninsula base command was established to support the operations .
 Preparatory steps were taken to make possible the immediate callup of high priority Army National Guard and Army Reserve units .
 Air support for the ground forces was provided by the TAC, which moved hundreds of tactical fighter, reconnaissance and troop carrier aircraft to the southeast .
 To make room for all these units, bombers, tankers, and other aircraft not required for the current operations were ordered to other bases in the United States .
 This massive movement of ships, aircraft, and troops, together with their weapons and equipment, was carried out with unprecedented speed . This massive move of ships and aircraft together with weapons and . equipment, together . together with . their weapons, equipment, and . troops, were . carried out
 The forces alerted were ready for their assignment when the President addressed the Nation on the evening of Monday, October 22 .
 The Quarantine Proclamation became effective at 10:00m. on October 24 . Air and surface units of the Atlantic Fleet were at their designated stations .
 Whether or not other units would be called upon to carry out their operational missions remained an unanswered question throughout this week of maximum danger .
 Photographic intelligence continued to show a rapid buildup of offensive weapons in Cuba . The Cuban government continued to build up offensive weapons against the country .
 The construction of permanent sites for intermediate-range ballistic missiles was noted . The construction was noted in addition to the deployment of the mobile medium-range type of type .
 The potentially dangerous confrontations inherent in the quarantine failed to develop . On the other hand, the potential confrontations with the quarantine did not develop .
 On October 25, the first Soviet ship, the tanker Bucharest, was intercepted without incident and permitted to proceed . It was determined without boarding that it carried oil and no prohibited material .
 On the same day it was confirmed that other Cuba-bound Soviet ships, likely to require closer inspection, had changed course . The ships may have changed course, possibly to return home ports .
 On October 26, the freighter Marucla was boarded and cleared after a brief inspection . The freighter was flying the Lebanese flag but chartered by the Soviet Government .
 The Secretary of Defense asked the Air Force to call 24 troop carrier squadrons and their supporting units to active duty . The move involves about 14,000 Air Force Reservists . The Air Force Reserveists are also called to duty .
 The break in the crisis came on Sunday, October 28, when the Soviet Government finally agreed to dismantle its offensive weapons in Cuba and return them to the Soviet Union subject to United Nations verification . The Soviet Government agreed to return the weapons subject to UN verification .
 Khrushchev expressed his trust that the U.S. would not invade Cuba . He expressed his hope that the United States would not attack Cuba . The U.N. would never invade Cuba, Khrushchen said .
 U.N. Secretary General of the United Nations was trying unsuccessfully to reach an agreement with the Cuban Prime Minister on verifying the removal of offensive weapons . They were suspended temporarily only for 2 days, October 30 and 31 .
 The dismantling of the missile sites began on October 29 . It was not until November 2 that it could be announced that it had definitely been started .
 During the following days, aerial reconnaissance provided detailed information on the progress made in this work . The information was also provided on the transfer of the missile systems to the Cuban ports and the loading of 42 missiles and their support equipment .
 These ships sailed between November 5 and 9, and a final visual check was made as each of them passed the quarantine .
 All the men and women left Cuba on December 5 and 6, loaded on three Soviet ships . All of them left Cuba in Soviet ships, loaded with Soviet Union cargo .
 Fiftyfive Cuba-bound merchant ships had been checked during the 4-week quarantine . None of the ships were found to carry any prohibited material .
 The special alert activities of our armed forces at home and abroad gradually were reduced . The units no longer required were returned to their permanent stations . Special alert activities were reduced, and units were returned .
 The Air Force Reserve units called to active duty were released by the end of November . The extension of tours of duty for Navy personnel, ordered on October 24, was canceled .
 Further negotiations were held to implement the October 28 agreement, including a Soviet request to clarify the exact form and conditions of U.S. assurances not to invade Cuba .