 In late April 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev had the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba . The missiles were placed in Cuba by the Soviet Union .
 A deployment in Cuba would double the Soviet strategic arms . It would provide a real deterrent to a U.S. attack against the Soviet Union .
 The crisis began on October 15, 1962, when reconnaissance photos revealed Soviet missiles under construction in Cuba . The U.S. became involved in the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 .
 Kennedy organized the EX-COMM, a group of twelve advisors to handle the crisis . Kennedy was the first president of the U.S. to be elected to the White House .
 Kennedy wanted to prevent the arrival of more Soviet offensive weapons on the island . After seven days debate within the upper echelons of government, Kennedy concluded to impose a naval quarantine around Cuba .
 Any nuclear missile launched from Cuba would be regarded as an attack on the U.S. by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union demanded that the Soviets remove their offensive weapons from Cuba .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy suggested ignoring the second letter . Robert Kennedy contacted Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to tell him of the United States agreement with the first letter .
 Khrushchev announced on October 28 that he would dismantle the installations and return the missiles to the Soviet Union . Tensions finally began to ease on Oct. 28 when Khrushche announced he would remove the missiles .
 Further negotiations were held to implement the October 28 agreement . U.S. demand that Soviet light bombers be removed from Cuba, and specifying the conditions of United States to not invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev had always known the U.S. had more missiles but now he knew that the Americans knew . Khrushchev had always always known that the United States had more .
 The second of the two major causes was Cuba’s fear of invasion from the U.S. Since he had come to power in 1959, Fidel Castro was aware of several attempts to oust him .
 The CIA had also been running covert operations throughout Cuba trying to damage the Castro government . The CIA also ran covert operations in Cuba to damage its government .
 In April, 1962, Nikita Khrushchev had the idea of placing intermediate-range missiles in Cuba . The idea was the idea to place intermediate range missiles in the country .
 A deployment in Cuba would double the Soviet strategic arsenal . It would provide a real deterrent to an U.S. attack against the Soviet Union or Cuba .
 Castro accepted Khrushchev’s offer to risk a great crisis rather than wait for an invasion . Castro believed it better to risk the invasion than sit back and wait .
 In July of 1962 the Soviet Union began its buildup of offensive weapons in Cuba . The Soviet Union had begun building up offensive weapons against Cuba in 1962 .
 The Soviets shipped launch equipment and personnel necessary for the preparation of missiles to Cuba . The secret build-up began in the summer and fall of 1962 .
 CIA director John McCone sent the president a memorandum stating that the Soviets would place medium-range ballistic missiles in Cuba . In 1962, the CIA director sent a memorandum to the president saying the missiles would be placed in Cuba.
 On the 29th, a U-2 reconnaissance flight over Cuba revealed the presence of SA-2 SAM sites . The U.S. Air Force says it has found the sites in Cuba and Cuba .
 Kennedy announced on September 4, 1962, presence of Soviet defensive missiles in Cuba . There were no offensive weapons in Cuba, Kennedy said .
 The first Soviet medium-range ballistic missiles arrived 11 days later . Eleven days later, they arrived in Moscow .
 Kennedy ordered another U-2 flight over Cuba over Cuba on October 9 . Kennedy ordered the flight over the island of Cuba on Tuesday . Kennedy has ordered a similar flight to Cuba on Wednesday .
 National Photographic Interpretation Center analyzed pictures from the flight . There were more surface-to-air missile sites, and six much larger missiles, each 60 to 65 feet long .
 It was now clear that for months the Soviets had been deceiving America . Tuesday, October 16, is October 16 . It is now clear for months that the U.S. had been deceived .
 Kennedy took charge and scheduled two meetings for that morning; first, he wanted to see the photographs himself . Kennedy was in charge of the team that took the photos .
 At this point, the missiles were not yet operational, nor were fitted with nuclear warheads . At the time, they had not yet been fitted with warheads .
 Kennedy hand-picked a group of trusted government officials to advise him on the crisis . Kennedy's team of trusted officials advised him on how to deal with the situation .
 Military action directed against Cuba, starting with an air attack against the missiles,” and then followed by a invasion. “Then followed by an invasion.” said President Obama .
 The goal of any action was to stop the warheads from reaching Cuba or to prevent the missiles from becoming fully operational . Therefore, any action they proposed would be aimed at stopping the warheads reaching Cuba . The U.S. government said it was not interested in any further action .
 EX-COMM didn’t know that the Soviets did have nuclear warheads on the island . The Soviet Union had nuclear warheads in the area .
 They had also installed battlefield nuclear weapons in Cuba and were prepared to use them to stop an invasion . They were also prepared to stop a Cuban invasion .
 EX-COMM expected Khrushchev to retaliate . No matter what action the U.S. took, Ex-Comm expected it to do so .
 The Soviets and the American public didn’t know the Americans knew of the missiles in Cuba . The U.S. didn't know the Soviets knew the Americans had the missiles .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Air Force strongly argued for an air strike . Ex-COMM discussed the possibility of a strike in Syria .
 On October 18 Kennedy fulfilled a previously scheduled engagement to meet with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrie Gromyko . Thursday, October 18, was Kennedy's first meeting with Soviet foreign minister .
 EX-COMM wasn’t sure if Gromyko knew of the missiles or if he knew that the Americans knew . Ex-Comm was unsure if the Russians knew .
 Kennedy re-read a statement he had made on September 4 saying the U.S. would not tolerate offensive weapons in Cuba . Kennedy read a statement saying the United States would not allow offensive weapons .
 Kennedy met with the Joint Chiefs, who still promoted the idea of air strikes . Before leaving for a campaign trip to the Midwest, Kennedy was on a tour of the Midwest .
 Kennedy was already late, so he asked his brother to continue the EXCOMM meetings to draw up full plans for both scenarios . Kennedy: "I'm not going to be able to go to the White House, but I'm going to get there"
 EX-COMM met on Saturday to discuss the two speeches being prepared . Saturday, October 20, at 8 p.m. ET .
 The President liked the idea of a blockade because it allowed the United States to start with minimal action and increase the pressure on the Soviets as needed . The blockade allowed the U.S. to start .
 On October 21, Kennedy met with his top advisors to discuss missiles in Cuba . Kennedy met on the 21st, October 21 with top advisors .
 The United States could have its blockade but the international community would not consider it an act of war . In sum, the U.S. could have a blockade but it would not be considered a war by the world .
 The press knew that there were offensive weapons in Cuba and that Kennedy was preparing a plan to deal with the threat . Kennedy was planning to use the weapons to protect Cuba .
 On Monday, preparations had to be made for Kennedy’s 7:00m. address to the nation . Monday, October 22, was Kennedy's first public address .
 Most wanted an air strike; most wanted a quarantine . They came out of the briefing doubting the effectiveness of the quarantine . Most wanted air strike .
 He was angry with his military for not successfully hiding the missiles . He was angered by the American ‘quarantine’ which, no matter what they called it, was an act of war .
 The Cuban’s were not surprised by Kennedy, for the United States had constantly threatened them . The Cuban's had been threatened by the U.S.
 Kennedy ordered six Crusader jets to fly a low-level reconnaissance mission . Tuesday, October 23 Kennedy ordered 6 Crusader jets fly a reconnaissance mission on a low level mission .
 The Organization of American States approved of the quarantine against Cuba . The quarantine was approved of by the OAS . Cuba is one of the most isolated countries in the world .
 They were instructed to use force to halt any ship that failed to stop at that line . They were told to stop ships that didn't stop at the line .
 Robert Kennedy rebuked the Soviet ambassador for lying to the U.S. about placing missiles in Cuba . Robert Kennedy arrived at the embassy and proceeded to rebuke the ambassador . The ambassador had lied to the United States about placing missile missiles there .
 He responded, that as far as he new, there were no offensive weapons there . He said there were 'no offensive weapons' at the scene .