 You will show understanding of the main developments and turning points . You will also be able to understand the key developments in the development of the game .
 The emphasis is on developing and interpreting a broad overview of the period studied . The focus of the study is to develop and interpret the history of this period .
 Debate whether Kennedy was more or less successful than other presidents in meeting the challenges of the Cold War in the context of the period 1945–1989 . So in this question you will focus on the named issue, Kennedy .
 Whether Kennedy was the most successful president to meet the challenges of the Cold War: 1.1.2.3.4.5.5 million Americans .
 His inaugural address in January 1961 could be regarded as inspirational – “let every nation know…that we shall pay any price…to assure the survival and the success of liberty” after the perceived caution and complacency of the Eisenhower years . The command term is the command term
 This crisis is seen as one of the most dangerous moments of the Cold War with a devastating nuclear exchange being entirely possible . This crisis was seen as a 'dangerous moment' in which a nuclear war broke out .
 President Kennedy’s record was patchy and other presidents may have been more successful in meeting the challenges of the Cold War . Kennedy's record is patchy, but other presidents might have been better .
 Kennedy’s initial judgement) foray into foreign policy, the Bay of Pigs episode in 1961, was a disaster . His first meeting with Khrushchev in Vienna also in 1961 also in Vienna left the Russian leader underwhelmed .
 Khrushchev’s perception that Kennedy was weak and a bungler may have contributed to his reckless approach to missiles in Cuba . Kennedy's perception that he was weak contributed to the decision to launch missiles .
 Kennedy’s tragic assassination in 1963 coloured perceptions and may have mythologised an otherwise patchy record as president . Kennedy's tragic assassination may have coloured perceptions .
 NSC-68 provides Truman with a good case to be considered an effective president confronting the challenges of the Cold War . The required timeframe defence spending set by NSC -68 - provides Truman's good case .
 He has been criticised for exaggerating the threat from the USSR, allowing the communists to seize power in China and mishandling the Korean War . On the other hand, he has been accused of overreacting to the USSR's threat .
 His record in pursuing arms reduction treaties with the USSR and attempting a rapprochement with China can be set against his disastrous policy of Vietnamisation and the extension of the Vietnam war into Cambodia .
 His tough approach is often contrasted with the perceived weakness of his predecessor, Jimmy Carter . Jimmy Carter is often seen as a weak figure in the United States .
 Reagan's willingness to negotiate from a position of strength laid the foundations for improved relations with Gorbachev in the summits of 1985-6 .
 Reagan was fortunate that his presidency coincided with significant internal changes in the USSR and Eastern Europe . However, it could be argued that Reagan was lucky to have coincided with changes in Russia's internal policies .
 1945 Yalta and Potsdam conferences failed to settle differences between the Western allies and USSR about Eastern Europe . The long-term future of broken down into four parts: Germany . Questions can be broadly be asked about the future of Germany .
 For the first time in peacetime, the U.S. entered into a binding political and political agreement . The U.N. is now a member of the world's largest political and economic community .
 Truman’s actions had gone beyond containment, but the outcome was a stalemate in the Korean peninsula . Truman's actions went beyond containment but were not beyond containment .
 Geneva summit between Eisenhower and Khrushchev keeps lines of communication open . Geneva summit was first of its kind since Eisenhower-Krushchev summit .
 Areas of debate (leading to 1973 Paris Peace Conference) 1975 Fall of Saigon. judgement .
 Containment policy in tatters with Americans confused and deeply divided about direction of foreign policy . Americans are deeply divided on the direction of the U.S. policy .
 SALT II derailed by Iranian revolution and Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . SALT I derailed by Iran's revolution and invasion of the Soviet Union in 1980s .
 Consideration of all of these is essential to a well-argued and historically justified answer . Consideration is also essential to an answer that is historically justified .
 WJEC GCE History – Knowledge Organiser . In Section B, there is one compulsory question .
 Debate will focus on the action of the federal governments, and debate whether that was the main reason for improvements in the lives of African Americans in relation to other relevant factors .
 Whether the action of federal governments was the main reason for improvements in the lives of African Americans: 1. 2. 1. 4. 5. 5 . 4. 4 . 5. 6. 5: 5. 4: 5: 7: 5 . 5: 10: 10.
 Federal government in the USA includes the office of President, Congress and the Supreme Court . The command term is the U.S. version of the command term .
 Roosevelt’s New Deal is often criticised for its failure to address the needs of African Americans . Evidence that African Americans did benefit from relief and recovery programmes despite high levels of African American unemployment .
 Roosevelt's 8802 forbade racial discrimination in the defence industry . Roosevelt’s 8802 banned racial discrimination against defence contractors .
 Truman’s 9980 ended racial discrimination in federal employment in 1948 . His 9981 desegregated the United States armed forces . In 1948, he also desegrated the U.S. military .
 NAACP removed legal basis for segregation in schools and more widely undermined segregation in other walks of life . The named issue NAACP, as it removed the legal basis . NAACP was founded in 1903 .
 The achievement of political rights, however significant, need to be seen against the continuing evidence of widespread social and economic inequality affecting the lives of African Americans, says Roland Martin .
 The record of federal governments in improving the lives of African Americans over the century has been mixed . There were other significant factors affecting African Americans' lives, including other factors .
 Plessey v Ferguson 1896 upheld the concept of ‘separate but equal’, as did Cumming v Richmond Board of Education in 1899, which was the foundation for legalised segregation until the 1950s . The case was the basis for legalisation of segregation in schools until the
 Anti-lynching legislation was consistently blocked . Democrat presidents such as Roosevelt, Truman and Kennedy had little or no room for manoeuvre on civil rights .
 The required timeframe reliance on executive orders/action to achieve limited progress in their administrations has limited progress, says President Obama .
 The Supreme Court began to push back against affirmative action school desegregation . The court began pushing back against the practice .
 The Reagan administration saw dramatic cuts in federal aid programmes, which adversely affected African American communities . The cuts in aid programmes adversely affected black communities .
 Reagan vetoed a civil rights bill in 1988, veto overridden by Congress . Significantly, the president's veto overruled by Congress.
 Consideration of the social and economic impact of the Great Migration in the period before the First Consideration is essential to a well-argued and historically justified answer .
 Both World Wars had positive impacts on the lives of African Americans . African Americans were affected by the two World Wars .
 The Second World War had a major impact on the economic situation of African Americans . The availability of white labour declined in the US, as the availability of whites declined .
 It stimulated the activities of CORE and the NAACP with important legal results in discrimination and electoral cases . It also stimulated CORE's activities of the NAACP .
 It had built up a compelling and irresistible impetus for action on civil rights that affected not only the USA but also perceptions worldwide . The civil rights movement in the U.S. was an inspiration for civil rights activists in the 1960s .
 By 1990, the lives of African Americans had improved but persistent inequality remained . In 1990, African Americans' lives had improved .
 1968 Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. was a major event in American history . King was assassinated in Memphis, Mississippi, in 1968 . King died at the hands of King's widow, his daughter and wife .
 Think like a historian . Consideration of all of these is essential to a well-argued argument . Analyse Concepts and perspectives . Debate Continuity and change .