 Air reconnaissance aircraft observing Cuba-bound ships photograph ten large shipping crates on the decks of the Soviet vessel Kasimov . After studying the size and configuration of the crates, photoanalysts determine that the containers hold Soviet IL-28 light bomber aircraft .
 The IL-28S are over twelve years old and have been removed almost entirely from the Soviet Air Force in i960 . The i960 version of the IL-27S were developed in the 1980s .
 Secretary McNamara meets with the JCS for a briefing on the latest intelligence on Cuba and to discuss intensified Cuban contingency planning .
 Some intelligence points to the possibility that MRBMs have been positioned in Pinar del Rfo Province . Defense Intelligence Agency analysts inform the group of analysts .
 An attack against the Guantanamo Naval Base or against U.S. planes or vessels outside Cuban territorial air space or waters . An attack on the Guantanamo naval base or against . United States planes or . vessels outside Cuba's airspace .
 Cuban armed assistance to subversion in other parts of the Western Hemisphere . Cuba has been involved in subverted activities in the U.S. for decades .
 McNamara asks that future military planning cover a variety of contingencies . McNamara: Plan should include plans that would assure that Fidel Castro is removed from power .
 The attorney general also expresses the presidents “concern over developing situation,” and urges that “massive actdvit/' be undertaken within the MONGOOSE framework.”
 On October 1, CINCLANT orders militaiy units to increase readiness posture to execute Oplan 312, the airstrike on Cuba .
 Cuban President Dortic6s calls upon the United Nations to condemn the U.S. trade embargo against Cuba . Cuba's President calls for the United States to end the embargo .
 State Department Ambassador-at-Large Chester Bowles has a long conversation with Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin . Bowles talks with Soviet ambassador-atlarge Ambassador Dobynin .
 U.S. “had some evidence” indicating that Soviet nuclear missiles were in Cuba, Bowles tells Dobrynin . Bowles was briefed by Thomas Hughes of the State Department Bureau of Intelligence and Research .
 Dobrynin had not been told of the missile deployment by the Kremlin . He repeatedly denies that the Soviet Union harbored any intention of placing such weapons in Cuba . The Soviet Union denies that such weapons were intended to be placed in the country .
 Pictures show the main components of a Soviet MRBM in a field at San Cristdbal .
 IL-28 light bombers are being uncrated at San Julidn airfield . IL-27 light bombers were being rolled out of the airfield at the time .
 A senior officer at NPIC phones CIA Deputy Director of Intelligence Ray Cline to inform him of the discovery . Cline, 89, died in 1962; Prados, 110, at age 110 .
 National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy decides to wait until morning to alert President Kennedy . Ray Cline was given the news by Ray Bundy, who decides to stay silent .
 The two-week long A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS maneuver was to have employed twenty thousand Navy personnel and four thousand Marines in an amphibious assault on Puerto Rico s Vieques Island . ‘Ortsac”— ‘’’Castro” spelled backwards
 Kennedy immediately calls an 11:45m. meeting and dictates the names of the 14 or so advisers he wants present . Kennedy calls the meeting to be held at 11.45am on Monday morning . Kennedy then dictates the name of the advisors he wants to present .
 President Kennedy briefs his brother Robert, who expresses surprise at the news . President Kennedy tells Robert that his brother is in a coma .
 The first meeting of the ExComm convenes at 11:50 a.m. October 16, 1962 . ExComm: "The first meeting was the first of the Cuban Crisis"
 At the State Department, additional discussions continue with Dean Rusk, Under Secretary of State George Ball, Adlai Stevenson, and U. Alexis Johnson .
 The USIB directs the Guided Missile and AsTHE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS tronautics Intelligence Committee to prepare an immediate evaluation of the Soviet missile sites .
 Robert Kennedy expresses President Kennedy’s ‘‘general dissatisfaction” with Avith progress under the Mongoose program . According to Richard Helms s notes, Robert Kennedy expressed his ‘General dissatisfaction’ with the program .
 SGA discusses but rejects several alternatives for eliminating the newly discovered Soviet missile sites in Cuba . The SGA also rejects a proposal to have Cuban 6migr6s bomb the missile sites . The proposal was rejected .
 Adlai Stevenson writes to President Kennedy that world opinion would equate the U.S. missiles stationed in Turkey with Soviet bases in Cuba . Stevenson: "World thought that the United States missiles in Turkey would be in Cuba" Stevenson: World thought that world would equate missiles with bases in
 Stevenson suggests personal emissaries should be sent to both Fidel Castro and Premier Khrushchev to discuss the situation .
 The SS-5S have ranges of up to 2,200 nautical miles, more than twice the range of the SS-4 MRBMs . The SS 5S have a range of more than two times the range the SS 4S and SS 5A .
 No SS-5 niissiles actually reach Cuba at any time, although this is not completely confirmed by U.S. officials during the crisis . This is not confirmed by United States officials .
 President Kennedy confers privately with Dean Rusk and Robert McNamara at 3:30m. President Kennedy, who does not attend the talks, confers with Rusk .
 Acheson again voices his opinion that the surgical airstrike is the best U.S. option . He says surgical airstrike would be the best option .
 In some cases, as v.^th Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, the moral argument becomes the deciding factor behind their support for the blockade .
 He argues that a blockade is a better alternative to a blockade . But he expresses a preference for blocking the movement of all THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS CRISIS materials into Cuba except for food and medicine .
 ExComm presents its recommendations to President Kennedy . Meeting at the White House . ExComm presented its recommendations .
 As the meeting progresses however, individual opinions begin to shift and the consensus behind the blockade breaks down . Individual opinions start to shift as a result of the blockade .
 The legality of a blockade is also examined at the State Department by Leonard C Meeker, the deputy legal adviser . Meeker is also examining the legality of the blockade at State Department .
 The first of a series of daily Evaluation'' intelligence reports is disseminated . Report: "Evalence'' is a daily evaluation of intelligence reports .
 The evaluation is the product of collaboration between the Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee and the Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee . The evaluation states that the MRBMs in Cuba could probably be launched within eighteen fiours .
 All timing revolves around the time when President Kennedy would address the nation to inform Americans of the crisis . President Kennedy's "T Hour" is the time he would announce the crisis at the time of crisis .
 A CHRONOLOGY of events would “almost certainly” lead to “strong direct pressures” elsewhere by the Soviet government . The Soviet government would have ‘strong direct pressure” on the Soviet Union, it says .
 Any form of direct mihtaiy action against Cuba would result in an even greater chance of Soviet military retaliation .
 The proposal is being attacked by several of the participants who believe it concedes too much . The proposal was proposed in a bid to win the right to the presidency .
 A nuclear warhead storage bunker is identified at one of the Cuban MRBM sites for the first time . Courses of Action on Cuba, 10/20/62, .
 White House Press Secretary Pierre Salinger is informed of the crisis for the first time by McGeorge Bundy . Bundy tells Salinger the crisis is in the midst of a crisis in the U.S. The White House is informed by Bundy .
 Lovett repfies that he does not think Stevenson is right for the job . Lovett recommends that Stevenson be assisted by John McCloy .
 State Department transmits a special “go” message to most U.S. diplomatic posts abroad instructing envoys to brief foreign heads of government or foreign ministers . A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS about the Cuban missile crisis .
 Dean Acheson briefs Charles de Gaulle and dehvers President Kennedy’s letter on the Cuban situation . President Kennedy's letter on Cuban situation was sent to the French Embassy in Paris .
 State Department Legal Advisor Abram Chayes successfully suggests changing the legal justification for the blockade presented in Kennedy’s speech . The legal justification was presented in a speech by Kennedy .
 For the first time in ADC history, aU aircraft are armed with nuclear weapons . The first time the aircraft have been armed with such weapons, the ADC aircraft will fly with nuclear warheads .
 The JCS notify the State Department that United States military forces worldwide would go to DEFCON 3—an increased alert posture—effective at 7:00 a.m. U.S. forces worldwide will go on an increased alert .
 Kennedy formally establishes the ExComm. During the meeting, attended by representatives from the Office of Emergency Planning for the first time . The ExComm was established by Kennedy in 1973 .
 October 22, 1962—^5.00m. ET. Establishment of an Executive Committee of the National Security Council, 10/22/62 .
 MacMillan warns that Premier IChrushchev, in reaction to the blockade, may try to escort his ships into the Caribbean and force you to attack them . The blockade may force the Soviet Union to attack its ships .
 October 22, 1962 —7:30 EM.: Assistant Secretary of State Edwin Martin conducts a further closed-door A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS briefing for Latin American ambassadors at the State Department . A Chronology July-November 1962, 6/18/63, P-108, P
 At around 8:oo P.M., Secretary Rusk speaks to a meeting of all other ambassadors .
 Soviet Colonel Oleg Penkovsky is arrested in the Soviet Union . He is accused of being a Soviet Colonel .
 U.S. Ambassador Foy Kohler is called to the Soviet Foreign Office and given a copy of the statement with a letter from Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy . At the same time, United States Ambassador Kohler was given the statement by the Soviet foreign office .
 Cuban representative Mario Garcia Inchdustegui responds by denouncing the quarantine as an “act of war,” and Soviet representa Soviet representative . Valerian Zorin submits a draft resolution demanding an end to United States naval activity near Cuba .
 Fidel Castro annoimces a combat alarm, placing the Cuban armed forces on their highest alert . Fidel Castro announces the alarm at the height of the Cuban military's highest alert.
 The group makes slight revisions to the proclamation and approves a new message to Premier Khrushchev . The group also approves a revised message to the premier of the country .
 Ambassador Dobiynin declines to refute Doboviks comments, saying, “he is a military man, I am not.” The ambassador arrives late at the reception, arriving late to attend .
 At a debriefing for State Department officials, Edwin Martin emphasizes to U Alexis Johnson the importance of preventing exile groups from creating an incident in Cuba during the crisis . A Chronology July-November 1962, 6/18/63, 50; Abel, 134; .
 Martin suggests that Johnson raise the issue of halting covert activities with CIA Director of Plans Richard Helms as well as with the ExComm . Johnson should raise the matter with Helms and the CIA .
 The issue of ending OPERATION MONGOOSE activities and checking the action of independent 6migr6 groups does not appear to have been discussed in the Ex1368 .
 It is unclear whether the eight-hundred-mile line is ever actually planned; diaries from the quarantine commander . It's unclear if the line is actually planned .
 Gallup poll survey taken on October 23 shows 84 percent of the U.S. public who know about the Cuban situation favor the blockade . Only 4 percent of Americans oppose the action .
 Soviet ships en route to Cuba capable of carrying military cargoes appear to have slowed down, altered, or reversed course .
 Sixteen of the nineteen Soviet ships en route to Cuba at the time the naval quarantine is anTHE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS nounced, including five large-hatch vessels .
 William Knox, a United States businessman, has a 3 i/4~hour interview with Premier Khrushchev at Khrushchevs request . William Knox was a U.S. businessman . Knox was asked to give the interview by Khrushchchev .
 President Westinghouse Electric International, Moscow, Russia, October 24, 1962, 10/26/62 . President Knox was President Knox, President Knox .
 U.N. Acting Secretary General U Thant sends identical private appeals to President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev during the crisis . U ThanPs plea, made at the request of more than forty nonaligned states, calls for the voluntary suspension of arms shipments to Cuba together with the voluntary
 TASS releases an exchange of telegrams between British philosopher and passivist Bertrand Russell and Nikita Khrushchev . Russell was a passivist and outspoken critic of the Soviet Union .
 State Department receives a letter for President Kennedy from Premier Khrushchev . State Department received a letter from the premier of the Soviet Union . President Kennedy received the letter from Soviet leader Vladimir Putin .
 A message from President Kennedy for Premier KRrushchev is transmitted to the United States embassy in Moscow . The message was sent to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow by President Kennedy . President Kennedy sent the message to the Russian premier .
 President Kennedy avoids responding directly to U Thant's proposal that Soviet arms shipments to Cuba and the United States quarantine be suspended for several weeks . President Kennedy avoided responding to the U.N. Secretaiy General U. Thant letter of October 23 .
 Premier Khrushchev writes to U Thant to say that he welcomes and agrees with his proposal . Khrushchev writes to the U.S. premier to say he welcomes the proposal .
 Admiral Alfred Ward orders the USS Kennedy to proceed toward a Lebanese freighter, the Marucla . Admiral Ward ordered the ship to proceed to proceed .
 The State Department receives a cable from United States Ambassador to NATO Thomas Finletter relaying Ankara's position on the possible withdrawal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey . A CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS: The State Dept. receives the cable .
 Finletter states his beUef that any arrangement that fails to substitute some other form of nuclear capability in Turkey would be rejected by the Turkish government . Finletter: "Any arrangement that . fails to . substitute some of Turkey's nuclear capability will be rejected" Finletter says .
 President Kennedy tells the ExComm that he believes quarantine by itself will not cause the Soviet government to remove the missiles from Cuba . Only an invasion or a trade of some sort wiU will succeed, Kennedy says .
 John Scah, State Department correspondent for ABC News, lunches with Aleksandr Fomin at the Occidental Restaurant in Washington at Fomin s urgent request . Fomin's urgent request is that the State Department should send him home .
 Scali goes direcdy to the State Department to report on the meeting to Roger Hilsman . Following the lunch, Scali heads to the White House .