 Vaaaal had aaen aeran objecta vhioh eould have baan mleallea. However, our Vaaal had an objecta that could have been a baan object .
 Havana must go through tha ttr*mMf%m&* i* could than take tba Bahaaa Btralta, and all Sorlet "" Ml route . Havana must take part of the Havana route .
 He vested thle information te be paaaed an to appropriate U8 authorities . The information will be sent to appropriate authorities .
 Tha Sorlet Dalagatlan vaa prepared to reaolre theaa praotieal problems expeditiously and if It bad any further information . It vould be paaaed on promptly to tha United States Delegation .
 In any event, In this particular eaae there had been a pure nlaundaxrtanding. a r^antinuad that today ha vlahad to dlaouaa ona partienlar &'*M6 n lP tha pooata
 Mr Khruahchar'a atataaaat. Ha oould atata that thia ooatltaant had baas fulfilladad Is ncoardanca vlth Mr. Khruhchar'A atataaat .
 All ^""H n had baa -»»»-*r» on ahipa, and valla thara vaa no iaforaation vhathar all ahlpa had left .aooardlng to tha plan, xhm ^
 In addition, launafetarjOftaV' had baen coaplataly yut out of cawlaaian. In addition to the title 'LaufetarjaV' was also called 'laufeta' and 'l
 VSBFCjf Dallam** tib*$ a* f ar aa tha lariat Union vaa ooncaraad all abataalaa vhiah la Ui rlav had baan pravantiag tha aattlanant af tha
 UMX ballavad that tha baalo prablna nov vaa to hava tha oonadfeMmta eootalnod la tha Pranidnnt'a lattar fulfillad aa Boon aa poaalbla a
 Tha Borlat Dalagation .''*% 'is*'--'**vlahiad to ant Way far IS za rlava o<mftam1n« tha motml laalaaaatatlon of tha Praaidant'a at
 V'JF-^w*^ -*»-'£' .. / 42^ ijsj^£|iell states in the Western Heal sphere to refrain froa siijijiorMut ar encoura ging eny aetirltlea directed against
 The U8, the U8«R and ftsx Cuba, agree to aceept the U Thant plan far the establance . To state that all contracting parties, I.e. the . U8 and the U.E.R and . Cuba, I
 USSR believed lnplaneotatien of auoh atapa would be a aerloui guaranty and vould give hope to the Cuban art other peopawa that a good daal of vta* had bnn dona to areata a better etaoep
 It vu unneeeaeary to repeat that a eettleaest af thia problem vould ba a graat contribution to a haalthlar atiBospharc .
 Sovlot Delegation vlahad to dlaouas today . It vaa tbaao nattajn U* -.. tha Sovlot delegation  vlahads .
 Aabaaiador Steranaon at that flrat af all ha vished to —*r ejaejajB* '""' "" ~"" an Mr luinetaer'a etat«Mnt that tha UB&ft had fulflllad l
 Aa ha had itatad earlier, thia vaa not la aooord vitho* our understanding, beeauee there vere rtUl unresolred iaauea, neatly. +rhfft e .
 The*,*** oae>pme%|a]4 *een fulflllad. It vaa only after theee iaauea vera reaelTad that va eould agree the*,*** . That's only after you agree the**e*
 Aa ve had aaid before, ve vera under the I ttt -pnoedure oonto mpl aaa d by tha partiea and the Secretary general vag ^ja* jeflir fjarttff eetlon by both ald
 The Kazmedy-Khruahoherr eorreapondenoe, vaa that of eatabllahing auitahla aafeguardarda to halt poaaibla future introduction of each ajaayms in Cuba .
 It would bo rery difficult f or bis to recpond now, point by point, to the suggestions Just moo concerning the content of tho guaraateea. Furthermore, it would borery difficult to recapond now ... but it would be difficult to . rec
 Ha wondered if It night not b« useful if Mr Kuxneteor were to giro hia a oopy of the point* ho hod cmaerated . Ha wondered whether It night was not b » useful if . Mr . Kuxneor had to g
 McCloy cemented that he did net reeognlae In Mr Kuzastsov'i language any of the Preaident'a language . Mr McCloy said he did not renegegege a good deal of Castro'a .
 Enznetsov'a statement about the ao-ealled Tulnerabla character of the IL^&8 benbera . EnzNetsov'A statement about ao'ealled character of Tulnerableabla . Tenderabla is the name of
 Be aald he had a chart, which he would be happy to glr* to Mr Kuzneteor, wllch ahowed how aueh those aircraft could be -4.4 defense .
 St. Paul, Denver, all of Mexico, Veneauela, Chile, and British Guiana, by not returning to Cuba and landing either in th. north or In tho aouth . The U.S. did not return to Cuba .
 Surely it would bo a anil loo. to lose a foir piano* or pilot* If one x±kis* wished to engage in such an operation.
 It was quite clear that one could Be* 4*a4r£b*' the ZL-aB ae a coastal defenee aircraft, and any such ^«««tb had to be **«-£&'* big grain of salt .
 Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement wai fltt^JhftU^ft&Jw the two i± sides to be sble lsmedlately to deal with th* ^iftifrsjsjjj frFlfoJen M providing guarantees to Cuba and
 Messrs Stevenson and MeClsy had touched upon sojm questions which had been discus sod earlier, he wished to sake s brief eonasst . Severer, sines Messrs. Stevenson and . MeCly had touched on sojms questions which .
 W »*& 4 ft Profit f* of vhat vu offenaiTe or dafenslre vould mm ensaclfi* la * tHJifsjrj discuesionj la any evanj the TSBR oeold
 MGJeaara, and even tat ateitted that ■ay vespon oould b« regarded either aa offensive or defensive .
 The U8OT believed that any state had the right to be eeaeemed vith its secra-ity and to decide for Itself vhat »m vcr« required for its defenses .
 Tbt USSS did not vish to bo drown into discussion of vhat the Cuban gevemntnl Tejejfled as offensive or defensive; ruch a dlsousilen could not brine us alo^r W% oolutlon of
 Tho USSR hod not hoard any objection*? by tho XM to thlo principle ao for, and if the UB had changed Its vlov it should say so . If the USSR had changed its vlov, it should have said so . The UB should
 The Sorlot Delegation aeans vera needed by Cuba, Cuba . tho mi/vas sot authorised to speak for Cuba; it vas not aathorlBod to be tho veiee of another sovereign state .
 As far as tho substance of tho Batter vas concerned, tho forlot Delegation hod ooHYineingly proved la tho tho oeurse of earlier diovaasions that tho LjpEtflftjNWftto the JL~3$ saes
 The UBSB hod icaoicd vhat the IB eonsldered to be offensive veepens sal thus had fulfilled its nasal tieenl . Tieenl it vas nov for tho xm to toko appropriate stops. The IB was eons
 The UNI had fulfilled its ooasdveoats; It had roaoie l lto alssiles and had proTided for verification by agreciagry .
 Be did art mlsk/te dvoll on it, but vished to stress that the U.S. appreech to this question vu . Be did not do so, but stressed that the United States is not ready to answer the question . Began to
 Bevlehcd to state that the tfBSfi l of missiles, vhich the UB called offensive veepons, asast that no varbeads related to malax iah veapena vould tcbbHii on Cuban oil .
 Any discueaion about eoae verification vas jn tulle— fiend could only protract the problem end divert our attention . Therefore, any discue aion about verification could only divert attention away from the problem .
 Stevenson had said that missiles vihhcut vsrhemds eould net be called veepons, but by the same token varheads vithout aisslles vere of no value either and could not be used, tt )er. Ambassador ""* Stevenson
 Kuxneteor said he viahed to stresa another point in order to maksNggggT steptcvard the solution of the problem end .
 Be said be vlshed to state that varheeds had been reserved as soon as the denial cwf to remove missiles had been adopted .
 As to s4s*««2*tyi§jB/lSBf|ping removed on the nine ships the list of vhich bed been f*n*|^ v~ ^^leMjs^j^laied that he now vished
 He stressed that the U.S. should pay attention to this problem also .
 So far the USSR bad ©beerred a lack of interest for this question on the part of the U.S. The United States had tried to avoid the subject. So far, the USSR had avoided the subject .
 Perhaps Castro's language vas undesirable to the US, but it did reflect the legitimate demands of ths Cuban people . Perhaps . Perhaps Castro’s language was undesirable to . the US. Perhaps . perhaps undesirable .
 Ba wondered vhat vhat Rr » Jaatlap^ ' thought vaa unacceptable -toataaw . It vaa neoeeeary ta kaev thia beete** it tha USSI hoard tha United States -riava .
 In any event, xtak tha Soviet Tieve expreeaed earliar vara vara in aooord vith tha agreentnt . Nov it vaa lspoortact to diacuaa aubatanca of tha natter .
 In thia ooanaetion, the Soviet Delegation had oxpre aeed aoaa riava on thia setter . The Ui had a hotter ldoa of how thii ilnoiojont should bo verded .
 Salagation eofea* ve PatfsSpfljf JS*f^gej^ej »tood with regard to thia problem . Th arefei it veuld ba useful if the United States danralopod rash a deeueent and
 USSR balirrad that Cuba vaa ao throat aran nov, but if the U.S. dsalrad suah guarasteaa, tha USSR thought that Cuba ahould aatar into iom eaasltaatirta . Cuba vould
 U8 vould hart to dlaeusa thla natter vlth CubaBe said ha vished to note that tha Shaam propoaal for a UV proaaaee provided far Tarifiaation of efellsstlaa^WSartafes
 Ba thought that tha two iidaa had already dene a graat daal together; aaxqr anflilana had already been resolved aad . If tha tap alas aldaa swiMnwil, thla natter could be resolved too .
 Ba aald ha had just talked to Noaeov an tha phaoa and baan infexaed that tha Interpretation of tha course of Soviet ahlpa as pat forward by tha lariat TWe&atlan vas eorraet . Baald ha said that
 Apparently thara had baan sons lack of alarlty la tha Isnguajt of prarloua oownml rations vlth ragard to tha Straits of Florida and tha furthar tfctxxa ±nt±aa itinarary of
 Koseov had reeaivad information that U8 halisjajpagf* V«f* was already flying orer acaa Boriat abipa .
 Vltb regard to bombers, va had dieeueueeed this questlan in great detail tba other night . VltB regard to bomber, va said he had diedeueeed the questlan .
 Ba had given fiva citations to prove that tba United States had alvays regarded tboae aircraft as M^^ngl^e ^» the category ef offensive veapons, baglaaiag vltb a quotation from tba Preeident'e October
 Mum* ta» atftttllsft had been made manifestly dear from tba rery etart. ■a t ean i m p fi i j i itt a* "W that he alao vlahad to eaaaant on Mr Kusnet
 Ha said he vlabed to atate that the question vas net ef Cuba but that that ef canpllanee vltb the agreement . Ha said a lot to remove the H>2£ aircraft/ vas act/ to comply vltB tba agreement .
 Ambassador Stevenson cts said that tba U8 did net vlsb te daisy agreement by raising that myax paint . In fact, ve granted te ©onelude C agreement 10 days age. Turning ta varbaads, Ambassador Stevenson said .
 It could not p er form on this point, so U8 had agreed te Inspection at sea^— so vhy could net such Inspection so he applied te varhaads as vail, vhlch vere a ecaponent of rockets .
 Kuznetsov's remark thatriOB had shavn no Interest in and had avoided the question ef guarantees was incorrect . Russian President Vladimir Putin has been accused of corruption .
 He said he believed the United States had made Its position crystal-clear, and that position vas stated in the President's latter .
 Ambassador Stevenson stressed that before one eould speak eeTvnat should be done upon completion of the transaction, agreement should be reached on the transaction itself . In any event, Ambassador Stevenson said that before speaking, he believed that .
 Ha then said bo had. also notleed the* Mr Xaxnotaer had ohoeen his wrti rtrj carefully ""when he »■ ■ ■ »^rf 1^14 that varheada had . Tro on renoved. Ha then . said bo
 Mr. Kuaneteor eeemed to ezelude thoee varheada net related to tho veapons reooYed .
 Tho topH cation that othor nuclear warheads remained in Cuba vaa extrenely die . The USSR Mold &y atomo* t* all nucloar varheada had boon .
 Mr Kuxnotaor rocallod tabaseador Btevonecn'a r e fer ence to prove that tho ZL-16 aireraft had always eiW*Sitaailet.'ty tho United States aa offanalra weapons
 Both aidoa mat ju nu ao d fro* tho aVennedy4Qsnubehev lottara which feraed tha baala for agreeaent, rathar than froa what had boon aald fc-f »— .r ■ft
 If vo vara no* to engage In a dlaousalon of those questions vfaleh had boon ralaod In tho course of polemic a, then there would bo no pregreea, vo vould not bo able to reooh agreement, and
 Mr Koxneteor said he wished to state most emphatically tha* Mr, MKlay's fcrterpretation of his mrki vu incorrect . Both aides ahould handle vlth great care vhat had been agreed aa baala far thoao dell
 Russia says no warheads relatinf to U.S. weapons would be relatable to Cuba in Cuba . Russian President Vladimir Putin says Russia is ready to defend itself from the United States . Putin: "No warheads will be relatiated to Cuba"
 Since this was so, any discussion about verification was now pointlass. Since this is so, all discussion of verification is now pointless .
 Mr MoCloy implied that soeethine; slsa mi*ht be prasant in Cuba, that vas Incorrect. Whan Mr MoCoy implied soeithine; soeekine; . slsaMi*ht was prasant . in Cuba .
 Be also wished to stress that varhece¥^M>eem, ... loadad on ships and rsacrad as soon as tha decision had bean adopted, W raoewej the so-called offansiTe missiles .
 Discussion of control would be pointless, he said . Ibarefore, he wanted to repeat tfcet amy ;.-■••. discussion of control of control .
 The USSR oould only i discussions as an attempt to prevent the normalisation of the situation and to delay the settlement of the problem b7 . The USSR tried to prevent normalising the situation by delaying the settlement .
 SteTaneon's remark that the U83t eould not perform vlth respect to ground inspection, Mr Kuanetsor said that tha UBSft* *» response to a United States suaestlofi, bad made it poesible for the United
 Mr Steressea vas aware af the situation *t*L*mmJf+k'00mt Inayectioa, and Mr Khrushchev's letter . Meant, of course, tiMmieTlMJje*ilaM'^li£d
 M*. taanetser then said that he wished to come back to the question he intended to discuss today and which the OS side was tryimf to avoid . The OS side tried to avoid the question, which he said he wanted to discuss .
 The U88t had already considered this question sad it had already been referred to in Mr Khrushchev's words .
 If one traced down tha aala aoopoa of conflict, oca would aaa that it was not tha USSB but tha United States that had baas responsible for what had happened la Cuba . The USSJt had given assurances and had takaa certain steps .
 Tha vail country of Cuba mx threatened by a big country which had wantad to put aa and to tha reels* oat Cuban prevailing in Cuba and to prevent the/people fro* livlag as they pleased . Cuba was threatened by the big country that had
 The U.S. could not agree with the situation now obtaining la Cuba . A •"" f **• the United States could not . agree with . the situation . The United States. could . not agree . with the . situation now obtained la Cuba. A •."" f
 U.S. could not aad would not give assurances with regard to non-invaalon until it was satisfied that soae agraeaant satisfactory to it was raaehad . In Udr connection, he wished to draw attention to Mr Theodore Soransoa's B
 Soviet Union believed that sueh agreeawnt already existed and was contained in the Kannady-Xhrushchar letters . Ihe Soviet Union thought suehawnt was already existed .
 In tha US, the jmpt believed Itaaoessary to discuss the question of United States guarantees to Cuba . At any rate, la vlev of the fact that views likaue Mr Soraason's ware being proaoted in the U.S.
 Mr Kusnetsov then euoted at length froa Bortioes' October 8 gpaach at tha M, tha TD« nagasinc^ April 26, 1961 eeeW about tha Bay of Pigs episode, and tha Septeaber 9, 196s
 It vas f or this rvuea tfcatftfct USSI conaidarad it iaposiible to ignora tht very important questioa esVl and assurances to ba given to Cuba . USSI says it is not obliged to give assurances to
 Zt vas for this reason that th*| it important to have clear-cut assurances by tha 08 vith regard to nan-laWfvreaee and non-intervention in Cuba . Zt was for this . reason that . th* | it important that th
 It vas important to hara a olaar ansvar vbathar tha OS waa prepared to give such assurances, from tht discussion Mr Stevenson had had vith Mr Ittkp Mikoyea . UB8X gained the impression that tha United States was prepared ta
 V.. , :""-V s*a±±mem laaatad In tha 08 and soma latin American countries ralatad to this problem, Includin g Cuba . V.. : ""- V s*A±±Mem laa atad
 Baa function of tha teams vould ba to obsarre compliance by tha partlas vith tha obligation* undertaken . Ha wl mi l l l that he realised he bad takaa aueh Una, but then tal* jMfclJSi ISis
 WpBelegatlcn vaa not prep ar ed to give It nov, parbapa it could do ao later . If poaaible toaorrov. would be appreciate as answer froa the 03, but if the Wpatlcn . vaa
 Steveneon notad tha lateness of tha hour and aald ba wished to Bake a brlaf reply . Steveneon did notad the lateness and wished to bake a cake .
 The project was to verify the removal of missiles, and it had suggested removal of warheads . It had suggested removing warheads but that bad apparently been rejected .
 The U3SX apparently had rejected the reaoval of the IL-28 aircraft and naiclear bombs .
 The trouble was that aa tha two sides ware unable to agree on the terms of the transaction, and Castro's objections apparently prevented the completion of the deal . Castro reportedly objected to the deal, but the deal was completed .
 Yost and himself would be aisMrtrfi available for further discussions if such discussions would prows fruitful .