 All 24 MRBM launchers now appear to have reached full operational readiness . The U.S. has deployed all 24 of the 24 launchers in the region .
 One nuclear storage facility is essentially complete, but non e of the bunkers observed is yet believed to be in operation .
 There are indications that the U-2 lost yesterday over Banes was brought down by the SA-2 system . There are some indications that this was the case .
 Cuban military units remain at a high state of alert and the Castro regime is making a maximum effort to whip up troop and public morale . Cuba's military units are in high alert .
 As of 0700 EST, two or possibly three more Soviet ships are heading for Cuba in addition to the two dry cargo ships and four tankers we have been watching . Two of these ships are headed for Cuba, as of today .
 The tanker GROZNY should have reached the quarantine line early this morning . The tanker is believed to be the first to reach quarantine line . The quarantine line is expected to be completed by Monday morning .
 One Soviet transport aircraft which reached Brazil is there to pick up the body of the Soviet ambassador . The body of Soviet ambassador was picked up by a Soviet transport plane .
 Another scheduled for Cuba via North Africa and Brazil turned back at Morocco . Another scheduled to Cuba via Brazil and Cuba via Morocco turned back .
 No significant redeployment of major Soviet ground, air or naval forces has been noted . The Soviet Union did not redeploy any of its forces .
 The general posture of Soviet ground forces in forward areas is one of precautionary defensive readiness . The Soviet military posture is a "precautionary posture"
 The overall total of Soviet submarines on extended operations is somewhat greater than normal . A fourth F-class submarine may be in the area of the Cuban quarantine line .
 Khrushchev's bid for reciprocity withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuba and Turkey looks like the first step in a series of moves to demonstrate the USSR's readiness for a negotiated solution .
 Soviet spokesmen continue to play down the possibility that the Cuban crisis could lead to general war . The Cuban crisis has been dubbed the "Cuban crisis"
 U Thant is thinking seriously of accepting Castro's invitation to visit Cuba, and might go as early as Tuesday . He is considering a trip to Cuba, Cuba, as well as Cuba's president .
 Only fragmentary mixed reaction to President's rejection of Khrushchev's CubaTurkey proposal . There is thus far only fragmentary reaction .
 Missile support equipment, including about 50 vehicles, was moved into the vicinity of Guanajay IRBM Site 1 between 23 and 26 October . About 50 vehicles were moved in the vicinity, including 50 vehicles .
 At the MRBM sites, the missile-launching complexes are being checked out rapidly, and automatic antiaircraft weapons and personnel trenches have been prepared during the last few days .
 Camouflage is being extended and is becoming more effective . Dispersersion of personnel and equipment also is evident, says U.S. Army .
 Construction of probable nuclear storage facilities at both MRBM and IRBM sites was continuing on 26 and 27 October . Construction of possible storage facilities is continuing on both sites .
 Microwave relay towers have been noted at some of the MRBM and IRBM sites photographed on 27 October . There are high frequency antennae at Sagua La Grande Sites 1 and 2 .
 These indicate the development of command and control communications systems . Command and control systems were developed in the early 1950s .
 A missile propellant offloading and transshipping facility now has been identified at a double-fenced area 50 miles west of Havana at Punta Gerardo .
 American photographic reconnaissance aircraft crashed about noon Cuban time on 27 October in the BanesAntilla area of northwestern O riente Province . The body of the pilot was found in the wreckage .
 The U-2 overflew six SA-2 sites before the flight terminated in the vicinity of Banes on the north coast of Cuba .
 The SA-2 is estimated to* have a maximum effective altitude capability of 60,000 feet and limited capability to 80,000ft . The SA2 is believed to have been able to reach an altitude of up to 70,500 feet .
 established by the regime in order to place the country on a war footing . MB^B^^MJjj^^^MBI^^M ^counT^ss^spec^u^omm^^eesnacM5een .
 Internal repercussions of the crisis include snags in communications and transportation . Hospital treatment has been restricted to emergency cases, reports state .
 A national emergency committee has been set up to draft workers to fill jobs wherever they are needed . The committee was set up on 26 October to draft jobs where they were needed .
 Four Soviet tankers and two Soviet dry cargo ships are still en route toward Cuba . Two or perhaps three additional Soviet vessels are also en route to Cuba .
 LISICHANSK cleared the Bosporus on 25 October with 32,000 tons of crude oil . One of these, the Lisichansk, cleared the Bosporus on 25 October . The LISCHANSK is one of the largest oil
 The MICHURINSK passed through the Kiel Canal on 26 October en route to Cuba from Leningrad with timber and 2,300 tons of unknown cargo . The MichurinSK is the first ship to pass through the canal .
 Another dry cargo vessel, the CHERNYAKHOVSK, may also have started for Cuba . The ship is believed to be headed for Cuba, Cuba .
 She was observed moving in a westerly direction in the Baltic on 25 October . She has been regularly engaged in the Cuban trade in the past .
 The Soviet tanker GROZNY probably reached the U.S. quarantine line early this morning . It is believed to have reached the United States quarantine line .
 A Soviet IL-18 transport scheduled to pick up the body of the Soviet Ambassador to Brazil was en route to Rio on 27 October . The body of Soviet ambassador to Brazil is believed to have been transported to Rio .
 IL-18 scheduled for a trip from Moscow to Havana via Morocco, West Africa, and Brazil, turned back at Rabat for reasons as yet unknown . IL18 was scheduled to make its way to Havana from Moscow via Morocco and West Africa .
 We have noted the following Soviet military developments . An assessment of their significance will be issued later this morning by the USIB Watch Committee .
 No significant redeployment of major ground, air, or naval forces has been noted . The U.S. military has not redeployed any significant ground or air forces .
 Elements of most of the major commands are continuing what appears to be normal training . The U.S. military continues to train in the area .
 One U.S. T-29 aircraft outbound from Berlin in the central corridor was intercepted by two Soviet FIREBAR aircraft on the afternoon of 27 October .
 J-2, USEUCOM, comments that this incident and other upgrading of air defense capability suggest that the Soviets may be thinking of some sort of corridor harassment . The Soviets are upgrading their air defense capabilities, says J.2 .
 There is no evidence that ground forces of the western military districts of the USSR have moved or are preparing to move to the forward area . Ground forces have not been moved or prepared to move in the region .
 United States attaches in Moscow have been denied permission to visit the Belorussian, Kiev, and Carpathian Military Districts . U.S. attaches in Russia have been refused permission to go to military districts .
 The general ground force posture in the forw ard area_ is that of . precautionary defensive readiness . Mission missions report no large scale movements on the roads .
 There are no suggestions of a Communist military move in the Berlin area .
 His call for reciprocal Soviet-US withdrawals of offensive weapons from Cuba and Turkey under international supervision was designed to encourage U.S. to intensify his mediatory efforts .
 Moscow probably will make further proposals calculated to deter U.S. military action against missile sites . Moscow probably wants to make such a move as costly as possible in political terms .
 The 27 October bid for an exchange of commitments regarding Turkey and Cuba probably represents Moscow's maximum position . Moscow's bid for a deal with Cuba is likely to be Moscow's most ambitious .
 The USSR's next step may be to reduce these demands to a U.S. guarantee not to attack Cuba and to respect Cuban sovereignty in exchange for a Soviet commitment to cease work on the missile sites .
 Soviet spokesmen continue to play down the possibility of a general war . Spokesmen emphasize the USSR's readiness to work out a peaceful solution . The USSR continues to emphasize the peace process .
 He expressed the belief that the USSR would make a strong response to U.S. actions . But he refused to speculate what form Soviet reaction might take .
 A Soviet diplomat in Geneva told a Western colleague on 24 October that although he had no idea what the USSR's reaction would be, he was ""certain"" the Kremlin would not start a war over Cuba .
 He said the Soviet Union could not be treated like Belgium or Luxembourg . He warned that Soviet ships would be defended if necessary .
 Ambassador Kohler reported that Kharlamov seemed to reflect a genuine desire for conciliation . Ambassador: "In general, however, he seemed to seem to have a genuine interest in conciliation"
 The Soviet official said it was time for the two sides to sit down together and work out a solution . The official says it is time for both sides of the fence to talk about the situation .
 USSR has floated a trial balloon regarding another heads-of-government meeting in Vienna . The USSR wants to hold another heads of-government meetings in Vienna, Austria .
 Soviet embassy officials in Vienna approached a friend of Austrian Foreign Minister Kreisky on 25 October with the suggestion that neutral Austria could play a role in the Cuban crisis .
 Kreisky asked if he could help ease tensions by offering Vienna as the site for a summit meeting . Vienna is Vienna, Austria, the site of a summit summit meeting.
 Kreisky told the Soviet ambassador on 26 October that Austria would be glad to do what it can to facilitate negotiation . Kreisky said he would be willing to help facilitate negotiations .
 It was evident that Kreisky would welcome a summit in Vienna, both for the sake of Austrian prestige and as a personal boost in the forthcoming Austrian elections . The summit is expected to take place in Vienna on Sunday .
 The first evidence of direct Soviet pressure on a U.S. ally to dissociate itself from the United States policy on Cuba has come from a report on the Soviet ambassador's interview with Greek Foreign Minister Averoff on 26 October .
 The ambassador warned that by supporting the United States in the crisis, Greece was taking a ""most dangerous"" position for its own interests . After delivering a memorandum on the Cuban situation, the ambassador delivered a Soviet memorandum .
 USSR would not allow the U.S. to make another attempt to ""subjugate" the Cuban people, he said . He said that although the United States would not provoke a war, the USSR would work for a peaceful settlement . The Soviet Union did not want to provoke a
 Most of the bloc has not yet been heard to comment on the U.S. rejection of Khrushchev's 27 October proposals .
 According to the Hungarians, the President was unresponsive to the ""reasonable" Soviet proposals because he is interested in maintaining tension, possibly in connection with the U.S. election campaign . The Hungarians say the President is unresponsive because he wants to maintain tension .
 Panic buying in Bucharest, however, apparently continues . Some dimunition of public alarm in Poland indicated by the latest reports that scare buying has ablated . Panic buying also ablated in Poland .
 Tito may meet with prominent neutralists, according to unconfirmed reports from Belgrade . If the situation does not improve, however, Tito is expected to meet with neutralists .
 Nkrumah sent Tito and Nasir messages on 25 October urging a ""concerted effort" to prevent further deterioration of the situation . Tito was the leader of the African National League of Nations .
 Chinese Communists continue to strike the most militant notes in the bloc . The Chinese Communist Party is the largest Communist Party in the world .
 According to the Peiping radio, United States determination to ""unleash direct military invasion against Cuba" becomes more apparent as additional events unfold each day . United States determined to "unite direct military invasion against Cuba"" becomes apparent .
 U. Thant is thinking seriously of accepting Castro's invitation to visit Cuba . Thant: "I'm thinking seriously" of accepting the invitation to Cuba .
 He may go to Cuba on 30 October, hoping to take with him a substantial group of technicians . They could be used as expert observers at missile sites if they are allowed to inspect them .
 Swedish officials have indicated the need for Stockholm to be formally ""correct" because of the Baltic situation . Sweden has made it obvious to United States representatives that they expect the United States to enforce the quarantine . Sweden have indicated that Stockholm should be formally "correct"
 The Swedish shipowners' association recommended that Swedish ships submit to American searches under protest . The association reserves the right to claim damages .
 The master of the Coolangatta disregarded instructions to this effect when he refused to stop on 26 October . The master was ordered to stop .
 Belgian shipowners reportedly decided at a secret meeting that no Belgian ship will visit Cuba . Belgian ship owners reportedly decided to ban ships from Cuba .
 In Berlin there are some indications Soviet and East German efforts to create unrest and anxiety over the Cuban situation . In Berlin, there is some indications that the Soviets and East Germans were behind efforts to destabilize Cuba .
 A Soviet Embassy official told a German journalist that the USSR is powerful in Berlin and able to take the initiative . A Soviet embassy official said that the Soviet Embassy is in charge of Berlin .
 East German border guards have asked some Berlin-bound motorists their opinions of the Cuban situation . The West Berlin SED has launched a ""hands off Cuba"" propaganda campaign .
 British Foreign Secretary Lord Home called in Soviet Charg6 Loginov and told him that the dangers in the Cuban situation come not from the U.S. blockade, but from buildup of Soviet missile bases .
 The War Office has restricted the travel of bloc attache's to the London area . The move is due to be carried out by the UK's diplomatic community .
 Soviet attaches have made numerous requests to visit air bases, especially those with USAF units . Soviet attaches make numerous requests for visits to air bases .
 He believes there has been no comparable response to U.S. leadership since the decision to intervene in Korea . He feels this is all the more remarkable since there is no illusion about the risk involved .
 Swiss Foreign Minister Wahlen considers that Soviet retaliation is more likely in Turkey and Iran than in Berlin or Cuba . Wahlen: Russia's retaliation is likely to be in Turkey, Iran and Iran, not Berlin .
 Kennedy-Khrushchev exchange of letters pertaining to Cuban and Turkish missile bases . There has not yet been any reaction in Western Europe to the exchange .
 J|analysis of the Soviet motivations in Cuba esT^natesthat one strategic consideration may have been the belief that the Cuban missiles, because they provide less warning time than ICBMs , would pose a n ew and devastating threat to the SAC bomber .
 Other objectives are to test the willingness of the United States and its Allies to stand up to a confrontation . The U.S. and its allies will be tested for their credibility, the U.K. says . The United States is testing the credibility of its commitments around the world,
 President Ayub told the U.S. Ambassador on 26 October that one reason Pakistan has not publicly supported the United States on Cuba is that official statements by United States allies outside the American hemisphere would merely broaden a dispute . Ayub said the dispute should be handled expeditiously by the
 Colombia decided to limit its offer to naval forces when the War Minister threatened to resign if land forces were sent off at a time of serious internal security problems . Colombia's War Minister said land forces would be sent off if the country sent off .
 Venezuela has had difficulty controlling Castro-supported guerrillas and other belligerent groups . Venezuela also has had problems controlling rebels, including rebels from Cuba .
 Venezuela on 27 October became the first Latin American country to order full-scale mobilization of its armed forces . Venezuela is the first country in Latin America to order a full scale mobilization of the country's armed forces. Venezuela is also the first nation in the region to mobilize its military forces .
 President Betancourt, long a leading advocate of action against Castro, wants to ""put an end once and for all" to what he called Cuba's threat to Venezuelan security . President Betanourt wants to put an end to the threat to Venezuela's security .
 President Goulart, in a 25 October reply to President Kennedy's letter, adamantly reconfirmed Brazil's opposition to military measures against Cuba other than the quarantine . President Kennedy wrote that Brazil would not consider military action .
 Goulart showed very little concern over the threat to the hemisphere of the missiles in Cuba . He said there was no threat to Cuba .
 He pointed out that any form of intervention in an American state inspired by alleged incompatibility of its political regime is deeply displeasing to the conscience of the Brazilian people . He then stated that  intervention in the U.S. inspired by . alleged incomprehensibility of the
 President Goulart told the United States Ambassador in Rio that he had ordered leaders of the stevedores' union not to strike against handling American ships because Brazil supports the quarantine . Brazil supports quarantine .
 According to a broadcast from Rio the dockers decided to suspend the boycott because the government had shown disapproval . The dockers suspended the boycott after the government showed disapproval of the boycott .
 President Goulart told Ambass. dor Gordon that he had informed the Soviet Charge 1 that the Soviet aircraft which may land at Recife on its way to Havana would be inspected by the Brazilian Air Force and any cargo removed .
 As of 0700 EST, two or possibly three more Soviet snips are heading for Cuba in addition to the two dry careo ships and four tankers we have been watching . Two of these ships are headed for Cuba .
 Khrushchev's bid for rpciprocal withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuba and Turkey looks like the first step in a series of moves to demonstrate the USSR's readiness for a negotiated solution .