 Living Cities Podcasts EU Confidential Westminster Insider Campaign Confidential our apps Play Store App Store Play Store .
 The Marxist revolutionary turned Cuba into America’s Cold War enemy for decades . Fidel Castro dies at age 90 .
 Fidel Castro, the bearded Cuban strongman who made the tiny island into a thorn in the side of U.S. presidents for more than 50 years, has died . Castro made the island a thorn-in-the-side of the United States .
 The United States had long been used to Latin America being filled with neighbors who were compliant, or at least manageable . The U.S. is now used to having neighbors who are compliant, but not so compliant .
 Castro and his revolution demonstrated those countries could no longer be taken for granted . Castro's revolution gave the Soviet Union a toehold in the region .
 Castro became something of a hero to many on the American left, until decades of stalemate and stagnation clearly demonstrated his shortcomings . Castro was a hero for his efforts to end decades of stagnation and stagnation in the U.S.
 Though Castro is not featured, the depiction of the Cuban revolution is seen as a backdrop to the gamesmanship between Michael Corleone and Hyman Roth . The story hits many of the story's high points, albeit in a greatly condensed form .
 American mobsters were working in partnership with Cuban leader Fulgencio Batista . Batista was being paid millions of dollars in the 1950s to make ‘The Pearl of the Antilles’ into a place where casino gambling and other vices could flourish .
 Lansky, a Jewish gangster known for his business acumen, had long personal ties to Batista . Lansky even attended his second wedding to the Cuban strongman . The gangster was a close friend of Batista's .
 Batista also had ties to other American businesses, including those which made millions on sugar or nickels . Batista's ties to the U.S. also included those who made millions of dollars on sugar and nickeles .
 Others knew him as a thug prone to having his opponents jailed, beaten or executed . He viewed himself as a benevolent pro-American dictator, but others knew him a thug .
 In this regard, he was not much different from many other military strongmen in the region, he said . He said: "I'm not a military strongman but I'm a strongman in the Middle East"
 "but he was also, according to some, overly enamored with the trappings of gangsterismo," the author says . "He was also said to be over-enamored" with gangsters, the author adds .
 He carried a 15-shot Browning pistol on his person at all times and was more than willing to engage rival gangs in confrontation . He was more willing to confront rival gangs .
 In 1952, he was running for office when a military coup by Batista short-circuited the electoral process . The coup by the military ended his bid for office in 1952, but he was never elected .
 Castro and supporters launched an attack on July 26, 1953, on the Moncada army barracks . Castro and his supporters launched the attack . Castro's supporters were killed in the attack on the barracks .
 Castro ended up in jail until Batista, perhaps feeling a little overconfident, pardoned him . Castro was in jail for three years . Batista pardoned Castro after a failed bid to get him out .
 Castro, his brother Raul Castro and an Argentine revolutionary named Ernesto “Che” Guevara, gained momentum . Batista became increasingly unpopular as the decade went on, Castro became increasingly popular .
 Castro also came to the U.S. to raise money, though he dialed down revolutionary rhetoric when he did that . Castro also went to the United States to raise funds for the Cuban revolution .
 U.S. government had hopes for Castro, but those soon faded . Castro was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1950s and '60s . Castro died in 1961 .
 Castro started locking up his enemies — and executing some of them . Castro was known for locking up some of his enemies . He was executed in prison .
 Castro said he was indeed a Marxist-Leninist and opened diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union in 1960 . Castro said in early 1960, Castro was a Marxist Leninist .
 To its horror, the United States realized it had a genuine communist revolutionary 90 miles away, one who clearly knew he was more valuable to Nikita Khrushchev than he could ever be to the U.S. The United States was horrified by the discovery .
 The Soviets also appreciated this bearded, cigar-smoking revolutionary in combat fatigues as something of a romantic reminder of their own past . The bearded revolutionary was also a romantic symbol for the Soviets .
 Dwight Eisenhower and then John F Kennedy tried to get Castro on board — or out of the picture . Dwight Eisenhower tried to persuade Castro to get on board or out .
 In April 1961, the newly inaugurated Kennedy launched a CIA-planned invasion of Cuba that failed completely . Kennedy launched the invasion in April 1961 .
 It was known as the Bay of Pigs and came to symbolize everything that go wrong in a military operation . The Bay became a symbol of everything that goes wrong in military operations . It became known as 'Bay of Pigs' and symbolized everything that went wrong .
 Maxwell Taylor indicated, among other things, “that the Soviet Union had somehow learned the exact date of the amphibious landing in advance,” according to a Washington Post article in 2000 .
 As the Kennedys launched new covert schemes via Operation Mongoose to topple Castro, the Cuban leader drew closer to the Soviets . The Soviets gained control of the U.S. in the 1950s .
 In October 1962, the United States detected the presence of those missiles . The U.S. detected the existence of the missiles in 1962 .
 Dobbs: The installation was further along than U.S. intelligence perceived . There were more missiles than thought at the time, some of them were fully deployed and there were thousands of Soviet troops on the islands .
 Kennedy administration was horrified enough by what it did know . But the Kennedy administration did not know what it knew .
 After contemplating an immediate attack on Cuba, Kennedy opted to go public with its knowledge and blockade the island . Kennedy opted not to attack Cuba, but instead to blockade it .
 Dobbs: Castro made it clear to Khrushchev that he would have no problem if the Soviets launched their missiles . Dobbs says Castro made clear to him that he wouldn't have any problem if they launched missiles . Castro made no problem, Dobbs tells CNN .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev stepped back from the brink and resolved the matter . Ultimately, the matter was resolved and Kennedy stepped back .
 Castro watched powerlessly on the sideline as the Soviets agreed to remove their weapons . Castro was watching as he watched the Soviets agree to remove weapons from the Soviet Union .
 His accused assassin, Lee Harvey Oswald, was known to be distributing pro-Castro leaflets in New Orleans in the months before the assassination . Oswald's accused assassin was also known to have distributed pro- Castro leaflets .
 Any other role Castro or his friends or his enemies might have played in the assassination remains pure speculation .
 The United States was left to use an economic boycott to try to bring Castro down . The U.S. was left behind to use economic boycotts to bring down Castro .
 Guevara was killed in 1967 trying to export revolution to Bolivia, but Castro survived . Castro seemed able to survive anything .
 Castro became a romantic figure to some on the American left . Castro was a leader of the Cuban revolution in Cuba .
 Even David Dellinger, a noted pacifist, would visit and write in praise of Castro’s revolution . Even noted pacifists would write in support of the revolution .
 Later, there would be a spate of American hijackings to Cuba, by people who thought Castro would appreciate their revolutionary fervor .
 Cuban exiles in the U.S. fought long and hard against him, sometimes at the expense of their own lives . At the same time, Cubans in the United States fought against him .
 Over decades, the exile community would generate a number of notable political figures . Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio, Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Mario Diaz-Balart, and Lincoln Diaz-Bartart are among those who have been exiled .
 Castro could cite successes when it came to health care, literacy and international sports, among other things . Propped up by the Soviets, Castro was able to cite successes in health care .
 Cuba also increasingly became a police state . Great numbers of Cubans tried to flee by sea, most notably in the massive Mariel boatlift of 1980 . Cuba also became an increasingly police state in the 1980s .
 Castro diverted resources to exporting his revolution to other Third World countries . Castro diverted vital resources to export his revolution abroad . Castro's revolution was exported to the Third World .
 By the mid 1970s, Cuban troops would be fighting in Africa, most notably in a prolonged war in Angola . Cuban troops were fighting in Angola during the war .
 Castro’s durability would prevail in Latin America, but without his durability . Friendly movements would prevail but without Castro's durability, they would not prevail .
 When the Soviet Union was dissolved, Castro found himself without a benefactor to counterbalance the effects of the U.S. boycott . Castro was forced to rely on the United States to provide a source of support .
 Tourists were once again welcomed, sometimes in what had been gangster-run hotels . Tourists had been welcomed in gangster hotels .
 Castro turned the reins over to his younger brother, Raul Castro, in 2006 . Castro turned over the reins of power to the Castro family in 2007 .
 Castro’s revolution has outlasted Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations . It was noted at the time that Castro's revolution had outlasted seven U.S. presidents .
 Opposition leader Nikanor Melia's arrest comes after Irakli Garibashvili was sworn in as Georgia’s new prime minister on Monday . Melia was the opposition leader of the opposition in Georgia .
 Armenia-Azerbaijan ceasefire proves short-lived again again . Both sides trade accusations as violence over Nagorno-Karabakh continues . Armenia and Azerbaijan have been fighting in the region since April .
 Germany is one of the most powerful countries in the world . Germany's economy has been hit hard by an economic downturn in recent years . The country's unemployment rate has fallen to 50 per cent in the past year .
 French election 2022: French election in 2022 and beyond . French election will take place in 2022 . French presidential elections will be held in Paris on June 18, 2018 .
 Elections in Europe is Europe's most important election in the world . The European Parliament is currently sitting on the balance of power in the EU .
 The latest news, data and analysis on the world’s pandemic response . Coronavirus in Europe . The world's largest outbreak of disease in the world .
 Migration Latest news, analysis and comment on migration in Europe and beyond . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter . Follow us on Twitter @CNNLiving .
 Defense Secretary Barack Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency in the U.S. State Department . He has been accused of being too secretive about his decision to step down from the White House . The U.N. has been in talks with the Obama administration over the years to
 The European Union is the largest economic bloc in the world . The EU has the largest stake in the European Union presidency . The European Parliament is currently sitting in a power vacuum .