 The crisis is seen as one of the most important confrontations of the Cold War . Together with the earlier Berlin Blockade, this crisis was seen as a Cold War confrontation .
 There was a coup in Cuba in 1959 that may have been the moment when the Cold War came closest to a nuclear war .
 The American government refused to import anything from Cuba after that . The U.S. government refused any of its imports from Cuba .
 In 1962, the U.S. government was worried that the USSR would attack America from Cuba . Cuba is near enough that the missiles could reach almost any city in America .
 Cuba was seen by the United States as a communist country, like the Soviet Union . The U.S. saw Cuba as a Communist country, but Cuba was not considered communist .
 In October 1962, American ships blocked Soviet ships carrying missiles from going into Cuba . The incident happened in October 1962 . The U.S. ships blocked the Soviet ships from going in Cuba .
 The Soviets and Cubans agreed to take away the missiles if America promised not to attack Cuba . U.S. agreed to remove the missiles as part of a deal with the Soviets and Cuba .
 The United States and the USSR were the main parties in the Cold War that began in 1945 . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were the two main parties during that Cold War .
 The Monroe Doctrine kept powers in Europe from getting involved in South America . That would also make the Monroe Doctrine useless, which would also keep Europe out of involvement .
 Kennedy launched a number of covert operations against Castro's government in 1961 . In late 1961, he launched a series of operations against the government .
 Cuba thought the United States would invade because of a resolution by the U.S. Congress to allow military force . In February 1962, the United. States launched an economic embargo against Cuba . In September 1961, the Cuban government feared the United .
 The United States also announced a military exercise in the Caribbean to be held the following month . The U.S. also announced plans to hold military exercises in the region .
 Castro and Khrushchev agreed to place secret strategic nuclear missiles in Cuba in case the U.S. invaded . The missiles were placed in Cuba by the Soviet Union in response to the threat of an American invasion . Castro and Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchell agreed to put the missiles
 Khrushchev thought that the U.S. would invade Cuba soon . Like Castro, he thought the United States would invade the island soon .
 If Cuba were to stop being a Communist country it would hurt Khrushchev's reputation around the world, especially in Latin America . If Cuba stopped being Communist country, it would have hurt his reputation in the world .
 On October 14, United States reconnaissance saw the missile bases being built in Cuba . The bases were seen by the U.S. on October 14 .
 The crisis ended two weeks later on October 28, 1962, when the President of the United States John F Kennedy and the United Nations Secretary-General U Thant reached an agreement with the USSR to destroy the missiles in Cuba if the U.S. agreed to avoid invading Cuba . The
 Khrushchev wanted the Jupiter and Thor missiles in Turkey to be removed . The missiles were removed from the country in order to remove them from Turkey .
 The United States removed them but forced Khrushchev to keep that a secret . The U.S. removed them from the Soviet Union in order to keep it secret . U.K. kept it a secret, but the United States kept it secret for years .
 Fidel Castro took power from General Batista on January 1, 1959 . Fidel Castro became Cuba's first president in 1959 . Castro took over from Batista and ruled Cuba from 1959 .
 From 1952 to 1959, Batista was a military dictator in Cuba . He was very right-wing with Mafia connections & the support of the Eisenhower administration . Batista ruled Cuba from 1952 until 1959 .
 The United States was interested in Cuba because of the many businesses that they had there, even though the country was a dictatorship . The U.S. had many businesses in Cuba even though it was the country's dictatorship .
 When Castro came to power in Cuba, he nationalized American companies in Cuba . He took the private property from those companies and made it the property of Cuba, to use .
 America bought the most Cuban sugar, because America bought most of the sugar . This was a disaster for Castro, because it was a big mistake for him .
 Russia saved the Cuban economy by buying Cuban sugar for high prices . However, Russia saved it by buying the sugar at high prices.
 He signed a contract with Nikita Khrushchev, the Russian chairman at the time . He signed the contract with the then-chairman of the Soviet Union at the height of his career .
 The contract said that the USSR would buy 1 million tons of Cuban sugar per year, in exchange for Castro's Communist support . Castro declared himself himself a Marxist-Leninist on December 2, 1961 .
 Castro wanted a Communist state close to United States . He wanted a chance to get the American missile sites out of Turkey, which was close to Russia . Castro wanted to feel safe from the United States.
 He knew that if a second attack was made from the United States, Cuba might lose and he would be removed from power . Cuba knew if it attacked again, Cuba would lose and be removed .
 Castro asked Khrushchev for the missile sites to be built on Cuba so that he could defend himself against any American threat . Castro said he wanted to defend himself from any threat from the U.S.
 The United States was angry when they found out about the missile sites . The U.S. was angry that they were going to find out about them . Kennedy's options were limited to what they could do .
 Kennedy would look weak to the USSR and the rest of the world . Options: Do nothing Avoids any immediate war . Kennedy would also look weak in the eyes of the USSR .
 Diplomatic pressure would avoid a war and might convince USSR to remove missiles . USSR would probably not give up and could end up making it look more powerful than U.S. and its allies .
 Would make it difficult for the USSR to send military equipment and other supplies . Would make the USSR difficult for sending military equipment .
 On October 20, Kennedy chose to blockade Cuba to stop all ships going there, rather than listen to his advisers, who wanted to attack . Kennedy chose not to attack Cuba, but to block ships going to Cuba .
 The USSR's first ships arrived at the blockade on October 25 and were prevented by the United States Navy from reaching Cuba . Khrushchev's options were limited by the U.S. Navy's blockade .
 Kennedy's advisers said that the letter looked like it had been written by Khrushchev himself and not his official writers, who would normally write it .
 They also said that it seemed to be written by a man who was under stress . They said it seemed like it was written by someone who was stressed .
 If indeed war should break out, then it would not be in our power to stop it, for such is the logic of war . The British Prime Minister said: 'If indeed war broke out, we would not stop it. Such is such a thing such as war'
 The knot may come so tight that even he who tied it will not have the strength to untie it . And a moment may come when that knot will be tied so tight he will not be able to unt tie it .
 And then it will be necessary to cut that knot, says President Obama . "You yourself understand perfectly what terrible forces our countries possess," he says .
 Let us relax the forces pulling on the end of the rope; let us take means to untie the knot . Let us not only relax the . forces pulling . on the ends of the . end of a rope, let us relax and untie . the . knot .
 An invasion of Cuba would make Khrushchev look bad and could also lead to a nuclear war . The war could also be a disaster for the U.S. if it happened .
 The U.S. must take its nuclear missiles out of Turkey if they want Russia to take their missile out of Cuba, Russia says . It also said that the United States must take out its nuclear missile missiles from Turkey if it wanted Russia to remove them from Cuba .
 U.S. missiles in Turkey were close enough to Russia that they could reach most of the important cities of Cuba and the United States . This would have been a fair trade because of Turkey's proximity to Russia and Cuba's proximity would have allowed the missiles to reach the important U.
 The problem for Kennedy was that he could not publicly agree to remove the United States missiles from Turkey . Turkey would then not be protected and would not be happy with removing the missiles . Turkey was not happy with Kennedy's decision .
 Kennedy and his advisers did not know if Khrushchev was still in power . Another problem was that Kennedy didn't know if he was in power at the time of the crisis .
 They thought that someone in the Russian government might have overthrown Khrushchev . The Russians thought that a coup was imminent . They thought it might have taken place .
 They thought this because the second letter was so much different than the first. They thought it was because of the fact that the first letter was different. The second letter is so different that it was different to the first, they thought .
 Kennedy decided to send a secret message to Khrushchev saying that they would remove the missiles from Turkey in a few months as long as they did not tell the public about it . Kennedy said that the missiles would be removed in the next few months if they were removed .
 Kennedy then sent an official letter to Khrushchev agreeing to the conditions of the first letter and not mentioning the second . Kennedy then agreed to the terms and not mention the second letter . The letter was signed by the president of the Soviet Union .
 On November 1, the missile sites were removed, and the problems were over . The missile sites are removed from the site .
 The missile sites in Turkey were removed, but not in the way Khrushchev had wanted . The U.S. saw Kennedy as the hero who had fought Communism and won . The missile missile sites were removed .
 Content is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike license . Use this license to share your photos and videos with us .
 Some content of the original page may have been edited to make it more suitable for younger readers, unless otherwise noted . The content of this article has been edited by the author of The Daily Mail .