 He has served and lead in a variety of assignments to include Squadron Command, Deputy Group Command, Minuteman III ICBM Instructor, B-52 Wing Weapons Officer . He has also served as the Director of Operations for Operation ENDURING FREEDOM .
 In 2010, he led the United States Army OEF electronic warfare enterprise as the U.S. Forces – Afghanistan, Command Electronic Warfare Officer . In 2010 he led a United States forces in Afghanistan as the command of the OEF .
 Colonel Glenn has authored two Chief of Staff export policies titled USAF EW Export Baseline and USAF Directed Infrared Countermeasures Export Baselines . Colonel Glenn is a former Air Force Director of Staff .
 October 1962 provides a defining perspective and analysis of how U.S. nuclear deterrence performed . However, crucial events months prior to October 1962 provide a crucial perspective .
 The opportunity for nuclear deterrence to have saved the day came and went without much notice on 17 September 1962 . The opportunity to have nuclear deterrence came to an end in 1962 .
 The fact that nuclear weapons were not used during the crisis lends itself towards the convenience of a nuclear deterrence success . A closer look at the actual events and covert letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev prior to October 1962 support the notion that nuclear deterrence failed .
 Kennedy’s lack of resolve, explicitly communicated to Khrushchev, was the cause of the deterrent failure, he says . Kennedy's "lack of resolve" was the reason for the failure of the embargo .
 If U.S. nuclear deterrence has not had a perfect record of success, implications on national policy are profound . The implications on United States national strategic policy, based primarily on deterrence, are profound, he says .
 Nuclear deterrence was causal for the lack of war between great states during the Cold War . Nuclear weapons’ legitimate primary purpose was and remains to deter use of nuclear weapons by other states, he says .
 Only purpose of nuclear weapons is to keep others from using them . Abolition then would seem reasonable since the only purpose of using them is to stop others using them. Abolition is reasonable since that's not the purpose of the weapons .
 WSJ article is missing in how they define nuclear deterrence success . One important aspect missing in the article is that they define success .
 If one is going to suggest something as radical as eliminating nuclear weapons entirely, then we should be firm on how preliminary assumptions are defined .
 Not having clear answers to the questions of its success has served as an opportunity allowing revisionist, who argue its failure, to gain traction . Not having answers has allowed revisionists, who say it is a failure to succeed, gain traction.
 It is the benchmark case study of nuclear deterrence strategy that has been analyzed and dissected for decades . It is a benchmark case-study of nuclear strategy that's been analyzed by decades . The U.S. has a long history of nuclear diplomacy .
 For the most part, the scholarly deliberation was based on interpretations of evidence available up to 2001 when covert letters between President Kennedy and Premiere Khrushchev were published .
 Analysis of letters suggest a much different picture of what was going on between the two ultimate decision makers during the crisis . Analysis of these letters suggests a different picture . Analysis suggests the letters were written by the two leaders of the country .
 To deter a state actor is to dissuade him from initiating a verboten action, the government says . To deter state actor from taking action is to discourage him from doing so, he says .
 First and foremost, deterrence is a psychological process that resides in the mind of the targeted opponent . deterrence is the psychological process, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Communication is required to identify the offending action to the opponent who is to be deterred . Communication is needed to identify an offending action .
 Schelling uses the metaphor of a tripwire that is overtly advertised to the opponent . Schelling says the tripwire is a "tripwire" that can be advertised to opponents .
 It could also be thought of as a red line that is drawn and announced to an opponent . The red line is a line that could be used to draw and announce to opponents .
 The incentive for the opponent not to cross the red line is the latent consequences supplied by the deterring state in the form of a threat . The deterrent state must also be communicated to the opponent .
 Once the tripwire has been set and the opponent made aware, specified inaction is the goal . Once the opponent has been made aware of it, the goal is to make specified inaction happen .
 If the opponent decides to act and violate the expectation of abstinence, deterrence by definition has failed . If that happens, deterrence has failed, deterrence will fail, the government says .
 There are a series of coercive, brute force actions, or inaction available to both sides once abstinence has ended . The original strategy of deterrence has been discredited and voided, says author .
 The failure of the first tripwire will weaken the credible value of deterrence in the opponent’s calculus as he contemplates further action . This does not mean a state cannot attempt to deter that same opponent again .
 When state leaders include the use of nuclear weapons in their threats to deter their opponent, it is considered nuclear deterrence . State leaders use nuclear weapons to deter opponents from using nuclear weapons .
 One is that nuclear deterrence would be a success if no nuclear weapons were used once any red line had been drawn by either side of a conflict . Another is that no red line should be drawn by both sides of the conflict .
 The other way to define nuclear deterrence success is to be consistent with statecraft definitions . Statecraft definitions are consistent with the statecraft definition of nuclear deterrence .
 If a state leader seeks to deter another state from a specific action and explicitly or implicitly threatens use of nuclear weapons, then deterrence has failed . If the opponent violates the 3 restriction, then the threat has failed, says CNN.com .
 The success of nuclear abstinence view is often an oversimplified bifurcation of the conflict outcome and disregards the contents of the threat that was used in an attempt to deter . Successful nuclear abstinence views are often oversimplied and disregarded .
 A state that has a significant nuclear weapon capability could seek to deter another state by drawing a red line and clearly communicating an exclusively conventional threat with no explicit or implicit intention to use nuclear weapons since they maintain a “no first strike” policy .
 Those who subscribe to this view would call this a nuclear deterrence success if the opponent did not act . But they would not call it a failure if the . opponent did act . Those who believe this is a success would call it .
 The problem with the former is that it violates the pre-nuclear age definition of deterrence of deterrence . The problem is that the former does not comply with the current definition .
 This view has been pervasive since the beginning of the nuclear age and continues today . Yet this view is pervasive since it began to be pervasive, it has been said .
 In effect, this view attempts to equate preservation of the use of nuclear weapons with deterrent success . Even if nuclear weapons were never a part of the opponent’s calculus that resolved himself not to act, the view is wrong .
 At best, this is a leap in logic; at worst, it is a misperception of legitimate means of violence, nuclear or conventional . At worst, the U.S. should not use nuclear weapons, or conventional ones, as a weapon of choice .
 This was, of course, short-lived as the Korean War proved that nuclear deterrence did not necessarily imply success in avoiding all wars and state level violent conflicts . The Korean War was the first time nuclear deterrence had been tested in the country .
 Mankind had capability to exterminate itself long before nuclear weapons . Mankind had the capability to 4 exterminate themselves long before .
 Churchill himself in 1925 noted the advances in military technology . This view was common after The Great War and was acknowledged by Churchill himself .
 There are some who are skeptical that an inanimate object could change our nature . Over the decades, two camps have emerged in this debate .
 One camp includes scholars John Gaddis, Phillip Gordon, Ernest May and Jonathan Rosenberg that posit ‘nuclear revolution’ is one that has kept major powers from warring with each other . Elspeth Rostow suggested that the atomic bomb be given the Nobel Peace Prize .
 World leaders in the past have made decisions that led to mass casualties on a scale of tens of millions . Simply put, aversion to mass casualty did not prevent world leaders from making such decisions, writes CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "Awareness to avoid mass casualties did
 This 5 is especially salient when one considers the decisions that were made by strategic leaders between the two world wars in light of their perceptions of the horrors of the first go .
 This view of U.S. nuclear deterrence is the primacy of perception and the role of psychology . Another aspect of this view of the United States nuclear deterrent is perception . This view is the view of how the nuclear deterrent works .
 Proponents of nuclear deterrence having a perfect record of success rely on emotional rhetoric that often makes no distinction between one nuclear warhead detonation detonation and the apocalypse .
 This rhetoric surfaced at the beginning of the nuclear age and continues today . It was a form of rhetoric that surfaced in the early nuclear age, and today it continues .
 A more responsible assessment by political leaders would be to forego the nuclear rhetoric that makes no distinction between the apocalypse and mass casualties . Politicians should forego nukes that make no distinction .
 Scale matters, especially when assessing the difference between the end of civilization and a major world war . The scale of a major war is a key factor in assessing the impact of civilization .
 A man-made 6 detonation only equates to 1/1000 of the destructive power of a hurricane . The associated destructive power is 1% of the power of the nuclear bomb .
 The challenge of logically proving the success of nuclear abstinence view is that it cannot be proven using any scholarly method . Putting rhetoric aside, the challenge of . logically proving . the . success of . nuclear abstinence views is that, it cannot . be proven by any scholarly . method .
 In order to prove nuclear deterrence succeeded in the past, one would have to prove that a red line would have been crossed if nuclear weapons did not exist, he says . He says .
 60 years of hyperbole has satisfied U.S. policy makers for decades . Yet this type of proof seems to have satisfied United States policy makers . Yet, it seems to be that the proof is consistent with 60 years' hyperbole .
 The danger in acceptance of this type of proof is the potential for coincidence to be treated as causal . The danger is that coincidence is treated as a causal, not just coincidence .
 The better way of defining nuclear deterrence success is simply to ask a more relevant question . The best way to define success is to ask the question: 'What do you think about nuclear deterrence?'
 John Lewis Gaddis, who is a known advocate for nuclear deterrence success,27 emphasized how a state decision maker’s performance in executing strategy should be approached .
 This view remains true to the original definition and purpose of deterrence . This view is true to its original definition of deterrence, the author says . The U.S. military says it will continue to work with the U.K.
 It also properly characterizes nuclear weapons as inanimate objects of war with no volition of their own . Nuclear weapons are inanimate weapons of war, not volition .
 The strategist considers whether or not nuclear weapons are the right means for the ends . In formulating the threat using this definition, the strategist considers .
 If the opponent decides to act and nuclear weapons were included in the threat, then nuclear deterrence fails . Nuclear deterrence fails irrespective of whether the threat is carried out or not .
 Examination using the success of nuclear abstinence view is fairly short and somewhat underwhelming . Examination of the view using the view of abstinence abstinence view was fairly short . The view is somewhat less conclusive than that of the previous view .
 Several questions remain unanswered regarding major crises since . However, several questions still remain unanswered .
 The pivotal point of answering the question of whether or not nuclear deterrence failed or succeeded hinges on if there was a red line that was drawn, if the associated threat included the use of nuclear weapons, and if the opponent violated it .
 The red line must be drawn prior to the opponent’s 8 opportunity to violate it . Establishing the actual sequence of events is important since the opponent's 8 chance to violate the red line .
 The crucial actions months prior to October 1962 provide a defining perspective and analysis of how nuclear deterrence performed . October 1962 is the anniversary of the first American nuclear strike .
 Practical analysis of nuclear deterrence performance in the crisis is best served by focusing on the two key decision makers, Kennedy and Khrushchev, to apply a parsimonious model .
 The leader’s inner circle is the subject of many of the most difficult questions in the world's most powerful leaders . The leader's inner circle should be focused on the statements and views of others .
 This increases the number of assumptions significantly regarding each decision that was made by both key leaders . This is the first time the U.S. president has made a decision to take a decision .
 As the number of assumptions increase, as Ockham’s razor holds, the more likely the analysis will be overcome by superfluity and miss the mark . The best explanation for the outcome is the simplest one with the fewest assumptions .
 The transcripts were originally classified and first commercially published in 2001 . Kennedy and Khrushchev understood their direct communications would be protected from public access .
 There was no need for political spin in these letters since the information would not be subject to public scrutiny . The letters would not have been subject to the public scrutiny, the author says .
 John Mearsheimer posits that strategic leaders are apt not to attempt to mislead other state leaders because of an inherent mistrust and the ability of both sides to corroborate the facts . John Mearheimer: Leaders are apt to not try to mislead others because of a shared mistrust .
 These letters introduce a humanization effect between the two leaders that appears to be missing from most scholarly assessments of the crisis before the letters were published . These letters also introduce a 'humanization effect' between the leaders, says Julian Zelizer .
 In April of 1962, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and his Minister of Defense, Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, began a discussion of a plan to move Soviet nuclear forces to Cuba .
 U.S. has Jupiter missiles in Turkey located just across the sea . This discussion took place on the shore of the Black Sea while the two were contemplating the fact that the United States had Jupiter missiles .
 The Soviets would have had about ten minutes of warning before the warheads of these missiles would reach their targets . The warheads would have been able to hit targets with ten minutes to spare time .
 Short warning timeline would increase the likelihood that their land based InterContinental Ballistic Missiles would be hit before they could be launched in response to a first strike . The short warning timeline increases the likelihood of a strike .
 By comparison, their ICBMs would take approximately 30 minutes to hit their targets in the US, thereby giving the U.S. more time to respond . The United States would not lose any of its bombers and bombers on the ground if they were hit .
 Khrushchev gained the approval of Fidel Castro for the concept of the nuclear weapons deployment via the Soviet Ambassador to Cuba, 10 Alexander Alekseyev .
 The movement of the nuclear forces was named Operation ANADYR and officially approved by Khrushchev on 7 July 1962 . The decision set the Soviet Government into a motion that could not be easily reversed . The movement was intended to keep the operation covert and to have the assets in place by
 Khrushchev’s attempt to setup a nuclear deterrent tripwire against a U.S. invasion of Cuba that ultimately failed since he was caught during the process of building the threat to make the threat credible .
 Khrushchev was deploying forces to prevent, what his intelligence agency was assessing to be a . certainty, a U.S. invasion of Cuba . The Cuban government was trying to prevent an invasion .
 Soviet policy was based on belief that the U.S. would not be satisfied with the outcome of the Bay of Pigs failure of April 1961 . The Soviet Union planned direct support of counter-revolutionary forces to ensure success in the next attempt .
 The United States was planning direct support of the counterrevolutionaries in Cuba and had named the effort Operation MONGOOSE.41 It is important to note Khrushchev’s explicit intent with Operation ANADYR .
 Khrushchev was acting on what he believed was the only way to deter an American invasion and that was to introduce nuclear weapons into the equation if only from a geolocation standpoint .
 Supporting personnel and equipment started to flow during July 1962 . The U.S. was well aware of the fact that the Soviets were shipping significant amounts of equipment to Cuba .
 U-2 reconnaissance flights in August 1962 had revealed only defensive surface-to-air missile systems like SA-2s being setup in Cuba . The U.S. reconnaissance flights had shown only defensive missile systems .
 On 4 September 1962, President Kennedy publicly announced the United States assumption that the Soviets were not placing offensive weapon systems in Cuba . President Kennedy made the announcement in September .
 The phrasing used leaves little doubt that this constitutes a clear red line . But there are two different interpretations of what is implicit in this statement of the gravest issues . Both interpretations of the statement of this statement are different .
 Kennedy was referring to war with the Soviets that either included the use of nuclear weapons or not . Kennedy was explicitly referring to a war that included nuclear weapons . The president's comments were made in the interview .
 This implies that nuclear weapons were not a factor in Kennedy’s threat to the Soviets at this time . The latter implies that the threat to Russia was not nuclear weapons .
 Following this logic, one can assess that nuclear weapons were never a part of Kennedy’s deterrent threat . Kennedy's nuclear threat was never part of his deterrent threat, says author .
 In effect, nuclear weapons would become irrelevant to the crisis and that the same result would have been reached had neither side had them . Nuclear weapons would be irrelevant in the crisis, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 In this case, nuclear deterrence success would be difficult to argue if possession of nuclear weapons was irrelevant to the tripwire Kennedy was setting for the Soviets . In the U.S. it would be hard to argue that nuclear weapons were irrelevant .
 Kennedy reinforced his threat during a 6:00 pm press conference on 13 September 1962 . Kennedy reinforced the threat at a press conference .
 Kennedy’s nuclear deterrence red line had been set first on 4 September and reinforced 9 days later . Kennedy set the red line 9 days after he first set it .
 The choice to cross the red line or not was, at this point, up to Khrushchev . The choice was up to him, and he made it up to his decision .
 The cargo ship Indigirka departed Severomorsk for Cuba on 17 September 1962 . It contained nine IL-28 bombers with six atomic bombs and three Luna battalions that included 12 missiles with 12 nuclear warheads . The ship's cargo ship included nine bombers and six nuclear bombs .
 Khrushchev would have likely met bureaucratic resistance if he would have decided to cancel Operation ANADYR at this point . Operation AnADYR was launched in 1961 .
 Khrushchev’s 28 September 1962 letter to the President was an acknowledgement of Kennedy's red line . Vivid acknowledgement of the red line can be seen in the letter to President .
 I must tell you straightforwardly, Mr President, that your statement with threats against Cuba is just an inconceivable step. I must say straightforwardly . Mr President's threats against Cuban citizens are just inconceivable steps, he says .
 Under present circumstances, when there exist thermonuclear weapons, your request to the Congress for an authority to call up 150,000 reservists is not only a step making the atmosphere red-hot, it is already a dangerous sign that you want to pour oil in the flame, writes
 Despite all this, Khrushchev continued his actions which were in violation of Kennedy’s unambiguous red line . Despite this, he continued to violate the clear red line.
 Kennedy would emphasize his frustration that Khrushchev did not heed the threat after he had crossed the red line . Later, he would emphasize he would be frustrated that he did not .
 Kennedy’s 22 October 1962 letter to Khrushchev stated, It was in order to avoid any incorrect assessment on the part of your Government with respect to Cuba that I publicly stated that if certain developments in Cuba took place, the United States .
 The central issue for the failure of nuclear deterrence in this crisis is Kennedy’s lack of credibility and his inclination to avoid nuclear war that was clear in his covert dialogue with Khrushchev . The failure of the nuclear deterrence is the result of Kennedy's inability to avoid war, writes
 Kennedy expressed this aversive demeanor in his 17 July 1962 letter to Khrushchev . Kennedy expressed his displeasure in the letter to the Soviet Union leader .
 At this point, Khrushchev could have concluded that Operation ANADYR was a risk worth taking . Kennedy would likely attempt to communicate with him before initiating military action .
 If Khrushchev was an opportunist, Kennedy had given him flexibility to act first then ask for forgiveness afterwards . Kennedy had, in effect, given him the flexibility to ask forgiveness afterwards, he says .
 Kennedy essentially played his hand after Khrushchev had violated the red line, even if Kennedy was not yet aware of it . Kennedy essentially set up the trap in order to protect his country .
 Kennedy covertly told Khrushchev via his 22 October 1962 letter that no sane person would ever use them . Kennedy said in the letter that 'no sane person' would use such a weapon .
 U.S. nuclear deterrence lacked credibility with the Soviets in 1962 because Kennedy explicitly signaled a lack of resolve to ever use them . In other words, the United States lacked real credibility with Soviet Russia in 1962 .
 He concludes that nuclear weapons were decisive because of the US’s strategic superiority over the Soviets . He concludes .
 Few would dispute the superiority of the US’s conventional and nuclear weapons capability at the time of the crisis . The U.S. was the dominant superpower in the Cold War .
 Trachtenberg associates this imbalance as causal for the Soviet’s capitulation . He offers two statements, one by a U.S. senior military leader and the other by a senior Soviet diplomat, to blame for the fall .
 The number of assumptions for these to directly relate to Khrushchev’s final decision are numerous if you disregard the fact that both statements are coincidental to the outcome . Both statements were coincidental .
 Kennedy or Khrushchev had a strategic imbalance condition that mattered to either of them regarding the situation in Cuba . One assumption of this statement reflects the reality of intent with Kennedy or the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy made statements that indicate he thought he thought the military imbalance did not matter . Kennedy said he didn't think the imbalance in the U.S. military was a problem .
 It seems much more likely that statements made by each of the final decision makers, under a condition of anonymity, reflects the realities of why they chose their actions . Secondary players that made statements on the outcome, after the fact, could be coincidental .
 Trachtenberg is suggesting the only reason for Khrushchev’s eventual capitulation was a strategic imbalance . Kuznetsov offers no empirical evidence to establish what the Americans would never be able to do to the Soviets again .
 Kuznetsov was referring to the notion that the Soviets were 16 compelled to change their plans for Cuba . It certainly could be that he was simply referring .
 Diplomatically, this appeared to be somewhat of a retreat for the Soviets which was not ideal for them . The Soviets appeared to have retreated from the Soviet Union .
 Kuznetsov could have been expressing his own personal dissatisfaction with the crisis outcome without any association or thought to why Khrushchev made his decision .
 Khrushchev had won a pledge from the United States to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey . It is a non-sequitur to directly associate the calculus of Khrushvich to a statement from a deputy minister that may not have known .
 Khrushchev’s 28 September 1962 letter to Kennedy said the armed forces were in peak combat readiness . However, this notion was debunked by this letter, which states, “We have . been compelled to order our armed forces to be in peak . combat readiness”
 Khrushchev perceived that the Soviets were equally as strong as the U.S. regarding military force . In addition to the Soviet Union's military might, he also believed that the US was equally strong .
 Khrushchev made decisions based on the balance of power in his mind . Whether that was a tangible reality or not is irrelevant, he says .
 Nuclear war did not happen during the crisis because it was not a viable option on the table for both Kennedy and Khrushchev . Nuclear war was not an option for both of the two leaders .
 It is reasonable to conclude that these particular two men did not want to start a major war, regardless of their nuclear arsenals . Therefore, it is reasonable that they didn't want a major nuclear war .
 Ultimately, the outcome of the crisis will likely continue to lend itself towards the convenience of a nuclear deterrence success . However, a closer look at the actual events prior to October 1962 support the notion that nuclear deterrence failed .
 Based on the stated intent of Khrushchev, there is little doubt that offensive nuclear attack was not a factor in his decision to move nuclear forces to Cuba . The U.S. moved nuclear forces in Cuba in 1959 .
 The fact that he continued to do so after Kennedy’s red line indicates that he did not believe the U.S. would use nuclear weapons against the Soviets if he was caught, he says .
 Believing the notion that nuclear deterrence always works because it is somehow a special case raises a concern if our national leaders buy into a myth .
 Victorians of the 1900s, before World War I, had a strong sense of security and faith in a seemingly new nature of mankind . The Victorians were being influenced by revolutionary technologies in the early 1900s .
 Stephen Cohen reminds us of Norman Angell’s 1910 over-optimistic assessment that war between Austria, Britain, France and Germany would not happen because of economic interdependence . Angell's 1910 assessment was based on economic inter-independence .
 Two world wars and 18 many limited wars since have proven that mankind’s reluctance to mass violence ebbs and flows . World War II was the first world war of the 20th century . The U.S. has been involved in two world wars since then .
 The suggestion that nuclear deterrence will eliminate the use of nuclear weapons in the future is reminiscent of the Victorians, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: The suggestion of a nuclear deterrent will eliminate use of nukes is a throwback to Victorians .
 Senior U.S. military leaders must recognize and articulate the distinction between relying on nuclear arsenal possession as an instrument of assurance for United States public and the requirement for credible deterrence . Recommendations should be made to senior military leaders .
 Military strategists must stay grounded in a world of capabilities, not intentions that can change in a matter of hours, they say . The U.S. military says it's a "world of capabilities," not intentions .
 Supreme Commander Elliot Cohen reflects that, “In all wars…brains matter.” Supreme Commander . Author, Elliot Cohen, reflects that in all wars, brains matter .
 The challenge of using deterrence as a national strategic policy is that will and resolve must be perceived by your opponent . Moreover, the challenge is that your will and resolution must be seen as your opponent's will .
 Apparent lack of resolve can still be offset by capability as long as the opponent acknowledges it, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I don't think it's a sign that I'm not going to get over it"
 The real danger is when will, or lack of, influences decisions to reduce military capability, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 If the U.S. no longer has the capability to annihilate any opponent because our targeting policy dictates so, it would be a colossal shift in the credibility of our nuclear deterrence policy .
 If opponents retain capability to annihilate the US, then the US nuclear deterrence strategy has lost significant coercive leverage . Further, if opponents retained capability to kill the U.S., the US has lost coercive leverage, the strategy has been weakened .
 This strategy surrenders the “balance of terror” towards Russia by signaling to Putin that the U.S. does not hold its population centers at risk when we have no assurances that it is reciprocated . This strategy also surrenders the ‘balance of terrorism�
 Call the strategy something else besides deterrence, and articulate to the American people the risks the U.S. is accepting . The strategy should be called "deterrence"
 The sufficient aversion to mass casualties that nuclear power leaders have demonstrated since the end of World War II does not guarantee future abstention . Nuclear leaders have shown they are not afraid of mass casualties in the past .
 For the US, there is nothing magical about possessing nuclear weapons that make a state impervious to nuclear attack . Strategists should not be hopeful in assuming they are the ultimate insurance policy against another world war .
 A Critical Appraisal of Postwar American National Security Policy , 214. A critical appraisal of U.S. national security policy, 214.1 .
 Nikita Khrushchev Remembers is published by Nikita Krushchev, ed ed. and ed. ed. Gwu.edu/NSAEBB .
 American Strategy and the Shifting Nuclear Balance, 1949-1954,” International Security, International Security . International Security , 48. American Strategy .
 Fursenko and Naftali have a different interpretation of the nature of this meeting between Khrushchev and Udall as a reflection of Soviet “anxieties” and being “tired of the imbalance” between the U.S. and the Soviet Union
 Drea, Edward J History of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Vol 6, McNamara, Clifford and the Burdens of Vietnam 1965-1969 . Drea: McNamara and Clifford were responsible for the Vietnam War .
 Johnathan Rosenberg, John L. Gaddis, Philip H Gordon, Ernest R May, and Ernest R. May, are the authors of the new book .
 History of the Office of the Secretary of Defense, Vol 5, The McNamara Ascendency 1961-1965 . McNamara was secretary of defense during McNamara's administration .