 It was a business or academic committee, a social group, a church board, a government agency . Maybe it was a social committee, maybe it was an academic committee . The committee was formed by a group of friends and family members .
 Forty years after his tragic death, President Kennedy continues to fascinate the public . President Kennedy's tragic death remains a mystery to many .
 Analysts dissect his political and oratorical skills, oratorics skills, and legacy . Analysts say he was a good oratoric leader, but his legacy remains unknown .
 His relatives — America’s royalty in some eyes — are frequent newsmakers . His relatives are often newsmakers in the U.S.
 The youthful president has engendered both inspiration and disappointment . President Barack Obama has been in office since 2009 .
 A fascinating facet of Kennedy’s legacy involves the decisionmaking procedures he used among his closest advisors . A fascinating part of Kennedy's legacy is that he used to rely heavily on his advisors .
 Yale social psychologist Irving Janis studied these episodes carefully and concluded that too often decision makers are blinded by their own needs for self-esteem .
 Fears of shattering the warm feelings of perceived unanimity — of rocking the boat — kept some of Kennedy’s advisors from objecting to the Bay of Pigs plan .
 JFK revamped his decision-making process to encourage dissent and critical evaluation among his team . JFK revamped the process after a huge blunder in 1963 .
 This article will consider how groupthink might have affected JFK and a major television enterprise, and how it can affect you . It will consider the impact of groupthink on JFK and the television industry .
 In 1961, CIA and military leaders wanted to use Cuban exiles to overthrow Fidel Castro . CIA wanted to overthrow Castro . Castro was Castro's first president .
 After lengthy consideration among his top advisors, Kennedy approved the covert invasion . Kennedy approved a covert invasion of Vietnam in 1968 .
 Lacking air support, necessary ammunition and escape route, nearly 1,200 surrendered . Lacking . ammunition and necessary ammunition, they surrendered . Nearly 1,000 surrendered .
 CIA analysts fault the wishful thinking that the invasion would stimulate an uprising among Cuba’s populace and military . Other CIA analysts say the invasion is not likely to stimulate a revolution .
 Planners assumed the invaders could simply fade into the mountains for guerilla operations . Planners thought they could easily fade into mountains for guerrilla operations .
 Eighty miles of swampland separated the bay from the mountains . Trouble was, eighty miles of swamp land separated from mountains .
 Presidential advisor Arthur Schlesinger, for instance, presented serious objections to the invasion in a memorandum to the president, but suppressed his doubts at the team meetings . President Obama's administration says the U.S. will not engage in the Iraq invasion .
 Attorney General Kennedy privately admonished Schlesinger to support the president’s decision to invade . Attorney General Robert Kennedy privately told Schlesingers to support his decision .
 JFK called on each member of the House to vote for or against the invasion of Iraq . JFK also called on members of Congress to vote in support of the invasion .
 Each member of the House knew Schlesinger had serious concerns, but not all of them . The House of Representatives will hold a hearing on the issue .
 President Kennedy later revised his group decision-making process to encourage dissent and debate . President Kennedy revised his decision to allow dissent in order to encourage debate .
 A United States naval “quarantine’s” would block further offensive weapons from reaching Cuba . A U.S. naval "quarantine" would block more offensive weapons . The United States has been criticized for its anti-Cuban policies .
 The Pentagon directed the Strategic Air Command to begin a nuclear alert . The Pentagon has directed the Air Force to begin an alert for nuclear weapons .
 On October 24, the world held its breath as six Soviet ships approached the blockade . Six Soviet ships were seen approaching the Soviet Union blockade .
 U.S. ambassador Adlai Stevenson publicly pressed his Soviet counterpart to confirm or deny Soviet missiles’ existence in Cuba . At the U.N. Stevenson said Soviet missiles were in Cuba, but the missiles were not in the country .
 Stevenson heard CIA's case for air strikes and Stevenson's counsel for negotiation . He heard the CIA’s case for strikes and counsel for negotiations .
 A prominent Christian televangelist, despondent about his rocky marriage, had sexual intercourse with a church secretary . Groupthink and the Seductive Televangelist .
 This televangelist and his wife regularly appeared on international TV, providing physical and spiritual care to hurting people . The couple regularly appeared in international TV .
 Their headquarters and conference center displayed a wholesome, positive atmosphere . The organization was founded in 2003 .
 The operation included opulent five-star hotel, white limousine, corporate jet, and corporate jet . Yet the operation was quite lavish and included a white limo, white . limo .
 The distraught secretary contacted ministry headquarters, wanting justice . She contacted the distraught secretary who contacted ministry HQ .
 Several insiders were aware of the sex scandal and cover-up, but turned a blind eye . Several insiders knew of the cover up but turned the blind eye, sources say .
 Many of these top leaders enjoyed privilege, esteem, comfort, and wealth from the successful ministry . Many of them also enjoyed privilege .
 The televangelist confessed his sexual episode to the local newspaper and stepped down . Eventually, fearing media exposure, he confessed to the story to the newspaper .
 The ensuing turmoil became an international soap opera complete with sexual intrigue, power struggles, and legal morass . The resulting turmoil became a soap opera .
 The builder's wife divorced him because of his involvement with the televangelist’s wife, who divorced the TV ministry, married the builder and tried to start another TV ministry . The builder and his wife were divorced because of their relationship .
 After prison, televangelist wrote a book admitting wrong, joined an inner city ministry, and remarried . He has since written a book, joined a ministry and married a woman .
 The PTL scandal exhibited several possible symptoms of groupthink, such as belief in the group’s inherent morality, rationalizations, stereotyping adversaries, and pressures to conform .
 Desires for approval, pride, greed, and a false sense of well-being stemming from being accepted member of a wealthy, influential inner circle apparently stifled dissent . Desire for approval and pride was apparently stifling dissent .
 Richard Dortch, Bakker’s second in command, later admitted, “We were wrong. We were wrong” Bakker's second-in-command later admitted that he was wrong. Richard .
 Kennedy’s presidency provides some potent examples of this psychological theory about flawed group decision-making . As we have seen, Kennedy's presidency provides examples of Groupthink .
 JFK's Bay of Pigs advisors accepted the CIA's flawed plan almost without criticism . JFK’s Bay of Pigeot advisers accepted the flawed plan without any criticism .
 Leaders underestimated Castro’s military and political capability and overestimated their own. Leaders underestimated their own, he says . Castro was the Cuban leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Jim Bakker and his PTL Christian ministry leaders rationalized away sexual and financial impropriety, to their peril . Bakker's PTL leaders rationalize away financial and sexual improprieties to their own peril .
 Seek to structure groups to avoid blind conformity and encourage healthy debate . Seek to create a group of groups that avoids blind conformity . Find out more about how to structure your groups .
 The CIA’s Internal Probe of the Bay of Pigs Affair,” Studies in Intelligence: A collection of articles on the theoretical, doctrinal, operational and historical aspects of intelligence, 42:2, Winter 1998-1999 .
 President Kennedy's Speeches at the Kennedy Museum in Dallas . The doctrine of the UPC is definitely heretical . They deny the Trinity in the Trinity .
 John 1:21 and Matthew 11:14 appear to give different answers to this question . John says the Bible's answer to the question is "yes" and "no"
 Rusty Wright is an international lecturer, award-winning author, and journalist who has spoken on six continents . He is a former associate speaker and writer .
 Probe Ministries is a non-profit ministry whose mission is to assist the church in renewing the minds of believers with a Christian worldview and to equip the church to engage the world for Christ . Probe Minations is based in New York City, New Jersey .
 Probe fulfills its mission through its Mind Games conferences for youth and adults . Probe fulfils this mission through our 3-minute daily radio program, and our extensive Web site .
 Permission is granted to use in digital or printed form so long as it is circulated without charge, and in its entirety . Use of this article in the UK News Online . Please contact the author for any information you may need .
 Two dark chapters in American history are slavery and the treatment of the American Indian . Kerby Anderson, January 16, 2006, is the author of the book, "American Indians in American History"
 The Bill of Rights is the first ten amendments to the Constitution . Kerby Anderson, June 18, 2001, is the author of the 2001 book .
 Weaver makes a case for 18th-century philosopher Leibniz’s contention that this fallen world is still the best of all possible worlds . Weaver argues that this fall world is the best possible world . Weaver: We need to find a way to live in a fallen world
 Tom Davis builds a case for why we should study the Bible, drawing on both the Old Testament and New Testament scriptures . Weaver: Why Bible Study Matters April 3, 2022 .
 Weaver looks at anti-God arguments from three prominent philosophers, showing why belief is God is more reasonable than their objections to His existence . Weaver also looks at the arguments against the existence of God in a new book .
 Cara Polsley was paralyzed in a car accident that left her paralyzed . She is still overcoming major obstacles with God's grace . She shares her story of the big, magnificent answers to prayer .
 Probe VP and Discovery Institute Fellow Dr. Ray Bohlin presents 'Natural Limits to Biological Change' January 26, 2022 . Probe VP Dr. Bohlin will be presenting the talk at the Discovery Institute’s Dallas Conference on Science and Faith in Dallas .
 Weaver has put together an intellectual response to the problem of evil that includes a theology of evil and suffering . Weaver includes a philosophical/theological series of proper defenses of God and his righteousness considering evil .
 Dr. Weaver: 'Return of the God Hypothesis' for Regular People January 9, 2022 . Weaver: Return of the god hypothesis for regular people will be broadcast on January 9 of 2022 .
 Ray Bohlin provides an overview of Stephen Meyer’s Return of the God Hypothesis . Bohlin looks at how recent scientific discoveries provide evidence for an intelligent creator .
 Probe's 2020 survey of Americans' views on sexual issues and how they navigate the relationship between religion and science . Science November 22, 2021 .
 Sue Bohlin reflects on God's question to Adam after he fell and broke the creation . November 17, 2021, will be the 100th anniversary of Adam's fall .
 Probe Ministries is the brainchild of Sue Bohlin and the founder of Probe Min Ministries . Probe MinMinistries was founded in 1972 and is now run by Probe International . Probe International is the organization of Probe International and Probe International.
 There's no media found for the request !!"",""rtmedia_upload_progress_error_message"  "There are some uploads in progress. There's some uploading in progress."
 "Media upload is disabled. Do you want to cancel them?""
 "Please select some product options before adding this product to your cart" "Sorry, this product is unavailable. Please choose a different combination." "Please chose a different product combination"