 This article draws on an international assemblage of sources to recover the history of the involvement of the Organization of American States and the U.N. in the Cuban missile crisis .
 Latin American citizens and officials helped shape the peaceful outcome of the crisis, says the OAS . It argues that through the mechanisms of the . OAS and the UN, Latin . American citizens helped shape . shape the peace outcome, argues the UN .
 This article challenges dismissive portrayals of both Latin American countries and multilateral organisations . It joins the growing literature on how supposedly weak Latin American nations have used international organisations to influence world affairs .
 The ‘Great Ones’ that the author referred to were not the usual suspects, however . The 'Great Ones' were not usual suspects . The Great Ones, however, were not always suspects .
 The author was not calling on the U.S. or the Soviet Union to resolve the crisis . Instead, the article emphasised the importance of multinational organisations .
 Bolivian journalists were not the only ones who turned to the Organization of American States and the United Nations for help and hope during the Cuban missile crisis . U.S. and U.N. turned to OAS for help during the crisis .
 U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk proposed diplomacy and OAS action as 1 ‘Responsabilidad de los grandes’, El Diario, La Paz, 25 Oct.62.62 .
 Latin American organisations remain under-appreciated in the vast literature on the Cuban missile crisis . Yet the actions of Latin Americans and their multinational organisations are under appreciated .
 The first wave of triumphalist histories of the crisis focused on the United States . The second wave on the Soviet Union and, to a lesser extent, Cuba, also focused on Cuba . The U.S. and Cuba were both involved in the crisis .
 Only recently has begun to broaden the scope of analysis to include the global repercussions of the crisis . Even in this latest turn of the literature, multinational organisations are still largely absent .
 The few histories of the crisis that do mention the OAS allude only briefly to the organisation’s approval of the United States quarantine, without taking into account the fact that OAS support was actually a crucial element of President John F Kennedy's diplomatic strategy . The OAS was
 Histories of the OAS itself pay only slightly more attention to the role that the organisation played in the Cuban missile crisis . Histories portray the organisation as a simple tool that the United States used to impose its agenda on weaker neighbouring countries .
 Historians have focused especially on United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson’s presentation to the Security Council and his heated questioning of Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin .
 The United Nations served as more than just a stage for Stevenson’s theatrics . The OAS was more than a tool of U.S. hegemony, and the U.N. served as a tool for U.K.
 This article draws on an international assemblage of sources to recover the history of OAS and UN involvement in the Cuban missile crisis . It draws on international sources to reconstruct the history .
 In a previous article on the Cuban missile crisis, I touched on the OAS debates but focused more on governmental and public responses within specific Latin American countries . In the previous article, I focused on the debates within Latin America .
 This article expands upon my previous work by taking a closer look at international organisations and their role in the crisis . This article takes a look at the role of international organisations such as the International Organisation of State .
 The OAS provided the legal basis for the quarantine of Cuba, which made it easier for the United States to avoid resorting to a unilateral act of war and gave all parties involved time to negotiate .
 Cuban proposals ultimately helped pave the way to a peaceful resolution . Once the quarantine had been established, the UN served as a forum for Cuba's proposals .
 US and Soviet leaders deserve much of the credit for avoiding nuclear warfare . But focusing exclusively on them overlooks the ways other people and organisations contributed to the outcome of the crisis .
 The world teetered on the brink of a nuclear Armageddon, actions and perceptions that might have appeared insignificant under normal circumstances took on heightened importance in encouraging the central actors to step away from the brink and towards peace .
 In analysing OAS and UN actions during the Cuban missile crisis, this article sheds new light on the history of inter-American relations and the utility of international organisations .
 It demonstrates that multilateral organisations have proven their worth by slowing the pace of dangerous events to allow for opportunities for negotiation . It shows that, at moments of great tension, multilateral .
 The OAS and UN provided venues for both central and peripheral actors to fight their battles, propose their solutions and voice their perspectives . The UN and OAS provided venues to both .
 This article challenges dismissive portrayals of Latin American countries and their multilateral organisations . It joins the growing literature on how supposedly weak Latin American nations have used international organisations to influence world affairs .
 This new history of the Cuban missile crisis shows that international relations in the Americas were not limited to U.S bullying and Latin American submission . The new history shows that the crisis wasn't limited to United States bullying .
 Latin American governments and citizens leveraged the foundational missions of their multinational organisations to support a cooperative approach to defusing a shared existential threat . The Latin American government and citizens are working together to defuse the threat of terrorism .
 Even the Cubans, who are usually portrayed as hot-headed warmongers excluded from the missile crisis negotiations, in fact used the UN to propose peaceful resolutions .
 The OAS did not appear to be the most promising mechanism through which to coordinate quick, decisive hemispheric action . Prior to the Cuban missile crisis, the OAS had not been a promising mechanism .
 The OAS was founded at the Ninth International Conference of American States in Bogotá, Colombia, in 1948 . It had the lofty goals of achieving peace and justice, promoting solidarity .
 The year before the OAS was formed, the nations of the Americas had gathered in Brazil for a regional security conference . The OAS formed the year before it was formed in Brazil .
 Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, also known as the Rio Pact or Rio Treaty, was signed in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil . Rio Pact is the result of a treaty signed by the U.S. in the 1950s .
 The Rio Treaty was more explicitly focused on hemispheric mutual defence than was the OAS Charter . It warned that an armed attack by any State against an American State shall be considered an attack against all the American States'
 The OAS’s most prominent acts of hemispheric ‘defence’ against external threats had been denunciations of international communism .
 In late August 1962, the Guatemalan government had contemplated calling a meeting of foreign ministers to invoke the Rio Treaty . The government was nervous about an increasing Soviet military presence in Cuba .
 Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Edwin Martin dissuaded him . The Guatemalan ambassador to the United States approached the U.S. about the idea . Martin says he dissuaded the ambassador from pursuing the proposal .
 Martin’s concerns about lack of evidence, other members of the U.S. government identified further hurdles to multilateral action . Martin: "There is not enough evidence"
 CIA: Some Latin American countries with firm anti-communist foreign policies would not endorse direct intervention in what they perceived as Cuba’s internal affairs . Others, like Brazil, Mexico and Haiti, would probably agree to participate only in an informal meeting, the CIA reported .
 Bolivia and Chile could not attend any OAS meetings, formal or otherwise . A boundary dispute over the Lauca River would probably keep them from attending any meetings . And if that were not enough, a boundary dispute could also keep them out of the OAS .
 Disagreements over the nature of the Cuban threat and the appropriate level of response, as well as completely unrelated conflicts, make the OAS unlikely to take decisive action .
 The OAS eventually decided to address the Soviet military build-up in Cuba in early October . The only action the members of the OAS could take was to issue a vague press communiqué calling for further action .
 The OAS declared that ‘the most urgent of the serious problems that face the hemisphere is the Sino-Soviet intervention in Cuba as an attempt to convert the island into an armed base’
 The State Department’s confidential report on the meeting acknowledged that the ‘phraseology not as strong or specific as we would have preferred on some aspects’16 .
 Vice-President Johnson recommended convening a meeting of the OAS 'to make it quite clear that the entire hemisphere considers that the Rio Pact has been violated' Johnson feared trusting the ambassadors with such a responsibility .
 The prospect of working with the OAS became more appealing . Kennedy and other members of the Executive Committee began turning away from the military option .
 Kennedy settled on a two-pronged strategy of establishing a quarantine around Cuba to prevent the delivery of additional weapons . He issued an ultimatum to First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev that he remove the missiles already on the island .
 U.S. officials were careful to call the action a quarantine rather than a blockade in order to avoid thorny legal questions . Officially, Kennedy and other United States officials called it a quarantine .
 Rusk had proposed that the OAS would play a crucial role in laying the legal foundations for the quarantine . The OAS will play a key role in setting up the legal framework for quarantine .
 The U.S. proposed the quarantine, but it was up to the Latin American members to approve or reject it . In calling the meeting, the United States was setting the agenda for the OAS, the U.N. proposal .
 Dean Rusk and Edwin Martin were confident that they could get the two-thirds required – 14 member countries – to pass a resolution invoking the Rio Treaty . Others were not so sure that they would get enough votes to invoke the treaty .
 Kennedy confessed that he was not certain of getting OAS support . That morning, in a conversation with former president Dwight Eisenhower, Kennedy confessed to him that morning . Kennedy: "I'm not sure of getting support. I'm going to get it"
 'If we don’t get the two-thirds, then we’ll do it under our own act of self-defense’, Kennedy told his predecessor . ‘We’re going to do it in self-defence,’ he told his
 The State Department sent top-secret instructions on 21 October to U.S. ambassadors across Latin America to coordinate the hemispheric response . The State Dept. also sent top secret instructions to United States ambassadors .
 The instructions told the ambassadors to wait until they received another message with the single word ‘GO’ and the date and time of Kennedy’s speech . They were told to wait for another message to tell them what happened .
 The ambassadors were to set up meetings with the chiefs of state of their host countries half an hour before the speech . Then, the ambassadors would set up . meetings with chiefs of states of their . host countries . The summit will take place in a bid to boost the confidence of the British
 At meetings, they would deliver a letter from Kennedy along with the text of his speech . Kennedy would deliver the letter to the White House and deliver it .
 The State Department told the ambassadors to ‘strongly emphasize’ the importance of passing an OAS resolution ‘as promptly as possible’
 At 7pm Eastern time on 22 October 1962, President Kennedy alerted the world to the presence of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba . Kennedy called on the OAS and the UN to take action . The OAS Confronts the Crisis .
 Kennedy requested an immediate meeting of the OAS ‘to consider this threat to hemispheric security’ Kennedy’s words jolted OAS into action .
 At the time of his speech, the OAS’s Inter-American Economic and Social Council had just begun a conference in Mexico City .
 Kennedy’s announcement prompted a rush for the exits, as diplomats and functionaries hurried to the airport and crowded onto planes in order to get to Washington DC in the next morning .
 The Argentine ambassador to the OAS couldn’t find a seat on an aircraft and had to be replaced at the last minute . Many of them arrived exhausted after flying all night, and the Argentine ambassador was replaced by the ambassador .
 Every OAS member country answered Kennedy’s call to action . Venezuela and Uruguay also had to send substitute representatives .
 Bolivia sent a representative to the emergency meeting about the missile crisis . Bolivia had suspended its participation in the organisation in protest over the lack of OAS attention to its dispute with Chile over the Lauca River .
 The Council of the OAS convened its extraordinary session on the morning of 23 October . Dean Rusk wasted no time in laying out the United States proposal and the stakes of the decision .
 Rusk laid out a two-part proposal in a speech to the council . Rusk said the Soviet intervention in this Hemisphere with 'major offensive weapons challenges as never before'
 He asked that first, the Council constitute itself provisionally as an Organ of Consultation and, second, that it approve the quarantine and issue a call for the immediate dismantling and removal of all missiles .
 The second part of the proposal, if approved, would be the most forceful action that the OAS had ever undertaken . The OAS has been criticised for not taking action on the issue .
 OAS member states have to hold a vote to invoke the Rio Treaty and approve meeting as an ‘Organ of Consultation’ in order to consider urgent problems . According to OAS procedures, member states must hold a meeting to invoke treaty .
 The Guatemalan ambassador had already advocated unsuccessfully for OAS action against the Soviet build-up back in August . Guatemala's ambassador declared that 'Categorical definitions must prevail'
 In his view, the presence of the missiles proved that Cuba had become a Soviet satellite and a beachhead for a communist invasion of the Americas . The presence of Cuban missiles proves that Cuba has become a communist beachhead, he says .
 Nicaragua’s ambassador and a few others argued that the U.S. proposal for a quarantine was not enough to defend against the greater communist threat . Furthermore, Nicaragua's ambassador said a quarantine would not be enough to protect itself .
 Salvadorean representative explained that ‘for us, the danger doesn’t end with the missiles. The danger doesn't end with missiles, he said .
 He urged the council to look beyond the immediate danger of the missiles and put an end to Cuba's other destabilising activities .
 Peru’s representative spoke up next, reviewing the long history of inter-American security cooperation . Peru had brought charges of communist intervention against Cuba in the OAS in the past .
 Costa Rica’s representative expressed the hope not only that the United States proposal for a quarantine would pass, but that its approval would be unanimous and that the OAS Council would address larger issues .
 Costa Rican representative: U.S. response to missiles was a good start, but it was not enough to resolve the threat to the region . Cuba and communism posed an overall threat, he says .
 Castro’s efforts to destabilise their governments were just as great an existential threat as the Soviet missiles . In their view, Castro's destabilising governments was just as much as Soviet missiles, they said . Castro's efforts were seen as a great threat to their governments .
 Their statements demonstrate that collective action against Cuba was not simply a U.S. policy imposed by the United States .
 Three of the biggest and most powerful nations in the region demonstrated notable restraint . While most countries responded positively to the idea of collective action against Cuba, three of the most powerful countries did not .
 In contrast to his colleagues’ long speeches about communist threats, the Brazilian representative’s response consisted of one sentence . The Brazilian representative responded with one sentence.
 He voiced support for the preliminary proposal to convoke the Organ of Consultation, but said nothing about the missiles, Cuba or communism . He also said he supported the proposal for convoke an organ of consultation .
 Mexico’s representative also avoided making any specific remarks about the missiles in Cuba . He merely stated that even though his government had sometimes voted against hemispheric action, he had received instructions to approve of the convocation .
 Colombia’s representative, who was president of the OAS Council at the time, limited his remarks to a onesentence approval of the proposal for convocation . Colombia's representative also limited his comments to a one-one-one approval .
 These less enthusiastic responses indicated that not all the governments of Latin America perceived the Cuban threat in the same way .
 That afternoon, the OAS turned to the more controversial issue of the specific measures that the organisation and its member countries should take to guarantee the security of the hemisphere .
 The Brazilian representative said that his country would support the quarantine to prevent more weapons from arriving in Cuba . But he would have to abstain from approving the use of armed force to remove the missiles already on the island .
 Brazil's leftist leaders feared that endorsing military intervention would set a dangerous precedent . Brazil’s government still maintained diplomatic relations with Cuba, but it still maintains diplomatic relations .
 Brazil’s representative insisted that the proposed resolution be broken into smaller parts to allow his country and others to draw a distinction between approving the preventative measure of a quarantine and the more interventionist measure of an armed invasion . He threatened to abstain from voting on any action at all
 The Mexican, Chilean and Bolivian representatives explained that their constitutions prevented them from approving the joint use of armed force . They could only vote only for a resolution that allowed each country to decide its own actions .
 Some of the most influential ones in the Americas did not just blindly follow the U.S. lead but instead used their reservations to protect their leftist credentials at home and their ability to determine their own foreign policies . These countries are some of the few that still maintained relations with Cuba .
 By breaking the proposed resolution into smaller parts, they sought to find ways to defend both their national sovereignty and hemispheric security . The proposal was broken down into smaller chunks .
 The OAS ultimately accommodated Brazil’s demands and voted on the resolution both in whole and by section . As a result of these reservations, the resolution was approved by the OAS .
 The vote on the resolution as a whole passed unanimously, but when broken into specifics about the actual measures, the section on quarantine passed with 16 votes in favour and three abstentions . The section on the use of armed force passed without a vote of approval .
 Brazil, Mexico and Bolivia inserted a note into the final record of the meeting clarifying that their support for the resolution as a whole should not be interpreted as support for an armed attack against Cuba . The note was inserted into the record to clarify that support was not intended to support an armed
 The votes demonstrated that all the member countries of the OAS perceived the missiles in Cuba as an urgent threat . They shared the common goal of ending the crisis, but they did not all agree on the best methods of doing so .
 The OAS vote was enough to provide a legal foundation for the quarantine . Even though the vote was not entirely unanimous, it was enough for quarantine .
 Instead of being a unilateral U.S. act of war against Cuba, now it was multilateral defence of hemispheric security . Furthermore, the multinational nature of the organisation changed the character of the quarantine .
 In establishing the quarantine around Cuba, the OAS thus served its foundational functions of encouraging peace, promoting solidarity and defending the member states’ sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence . The quarantine was established around Cuba .
 For the United States, the OAS vote demonstrated Latin American support for U.S. policy . The vote was a legal justification for exercising United States power . For the US, the vote was shown Latin America support for its policy .
 A multilateral quarantine established with Latin American consent was an attractive alternative to unilateral U.S. military intervention . And from the Latin American perspective, the quarantine was attractive to Latin America .
 Latin American countries were able to use Kennedy’s reliance on the OAS to endorse the quarantine as leverage to strengthen both the organisation itself and individual national sovereignty .
 In its response to the missile crisis, the OAS reinforced its own utility as a tool for both weak and strong nations to exert power, coordinate action and, most importantly, pursue nonviolent resolutions .
 OAS Secretary-General of the OAS sent the text of the resolution to UN secretary-General U Thant . The resolution was passed to the UN Secretary of-General Thant after the 23 October meeting .
 He appended to the message letters from individual Latin American countries, including Argentina, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Colombia, Panama, Panama and Nicaragua and El Salvador .
 Adlai Stevenson informed the other members of the UN Security Council that the OAS had adopted a resolution calling for the removal of the missiles . That same day, the United Nations Security Council voted to remove the missiles from Syria .
 Venezuela’s representative to the UN, who was 44 May and Zelikow, The Kennedy Tapes, 212. May, is 44 May . Venezuela's representative to UN, Venezuela's former UN representative .
 Thant was appointed acting secretary-general in November 1961 following the death of Dag Hammarskjöld, who died on 30 Nov.62, with the title retroactively applied to his time in office .
 Argentine and Dominican governments have offered to participate in the naval quarantine . The Argentine, Dominican governments followed through with their offers by deploying ships .
 U Thant expressed conflicting feelings about the juridical basis for the OAS resolution, especially the part that authorised the use of armed force . He told his fellow UN representatives that he ‘considered it imperative that the Security Council take measures to stop nuclear weapons from arriving in Cuba
 UN’s failure to request that the International Court of Justice issue an advisory opinion on the question of regional enforcement action earlier in 1962 as ‘a tragedy’ ‘By this non-action’, Thant reflected, ‘the Security Council implicitly endorses �
 U Thant had to accept the OAS’s quarantine, but there was still a great deal of room for the UN to determine its own response to the Cuban missile crisis . The UN had to quarantined itself from Cuba .
 Some people believed that the UN was actually the more appropriate multilateral forum for resolving the crisis and the one most likely to do so peacefully . The UN is the most likely forum to resolve the crisis in a peaceful manner .
 As U Thant put it, his office was ‘deluged with cables and letters’ throughout the crisis . As people begged him to intercede, he said: ‘Cables and letters' were sent to his office .
 Individuals wrote, as well as heads of state and local, national and international organisations . Heads of state, heads of states and national organisations also wrote .
 The messages expressed a wide range of emotions, from fear to anger to defiance to hope . The messages express a range of emotion, including fear, anger, defiance and hope .
 Some proposed solutions, others sought an international audience for their position, and still others merely beseeched the UN for help .
 UN archive contains the hundreds of cables that the organisation received during the tense days . These pleas are preserved in the UN archive, which contains the thousands of cables sent .
 A few of the messages voiced support for the blockade, but the vast majority of people and organisations that wrote to the UN seemed more worried about Kennedy’s quarantine than Cuban missiles . The majority of those who wrote to UN seemed concerned about Kennedy's quarantine, rather than Cuba’
 Some of the people who wrote to the UN had very specific – and creative – ideas about the steps the organisation should take to ensure peace .
 G de Vries from Berkeley, California, proposed that Thant 'meld the two monsters USSR and USA into the minerals of mountains' Canadians were especially vocal in proposing solutions, perhaps believing that they had a less biased perspective than their neighbours .
 The Welland Committee for Nuclear Disarmament in Ontario advised the UN to appoint inspection teams in order to confirm that there were, in fact, nuclear facilities in the country . ‘Dramático aniversario de la ONU’, La Nación,
 Paul Simon from Toronto wrote to ‘suggest a UN initiative in establishing zone of non-belligerence around Cuba suggest a request to Canada, Mexico, and Brazil for placing naval units under UN’ Solomon Kalnitsky proposed the most elaborate scenario .
 Kalnitsky felt compelled to volunteer himself as a ‘counter cross-examinator’ to make Stevenson admit harboring arming Cuban exiles basis for the Cuban crisis .
 Cubans were the organisation’s most prolific correspondents . People from across the Americas turned to the UN, but Cubans had the most prolific .
 Cuba had been suspended from the OAS in January 1962, so the UN was the only multilateral forum where Cuban citizens and groups could make their voices heard . Cuba was suspended from OAS by the end of 1962 .
 The Cuban government may have received instructions and encouragement from the Cuban government, authors say . The messages were more defiant and more uniform than others .
 Members of the Cuban government also used the UN as a global forum to air their points of view . Members of Cuba's government also use the UN to air out their views .
 The Cuban President gave a speech before the UN General Assembly in which he favoured world peace and only armed himself in defence .
 For the version of Dorticós’s speech published in Cuba, see ‘Cuba en la ONU’, Cuba, Havana, Nov.62. For the . version of this article, please click here .
 Cuban ambassador: Those who possess the only foreign base in Cuba against the will of our people’, Cuban ambassador insisted .
 According to the Cuban president and ambassador, their country was one of many victims of the United States’ cynical and dangerous policies . Furthermore, he pointed out, the U.S. had bases all over the world ‘that are aggressive bases against member states of this organization’
 Other countries want the UN to take a more active role in resolving the nuclear showdown . Cubans were using their perspectives on the crisis to express their perspectives .
 45 member states, mostly non-aligned countries, petitioned the secretary-general to intervene in the conflict . Algeria, Egypt, Morocco, Mali, Guinea and Ghana are among the countries petitioning for intervention .
 Diplomats asked Thant to appeal to the United States, the Soviet Union and Cuba to ‘take no action that would ‘exacerbate” the crisis’ He planned to speak at the Security Council meeting that very evening .
 I have been asked by the Permanent Representatives of a large number of Member Governments of the United Nations to address an urgent appeal to you in the present critical situation . I have also been asked to address the . urgent appeal .
 Representatives feel that in the interest of international peace and security, all concerned should refrain from any action which may aggravate the situation and bring with it the risk of war .
 In their view, it is important that time should be given to enable the parties concerned to get together with a view to resolving the present crisis peacefully and normalizing the situation in the Caribbean .
 Thant used the numerical weight of the UN to pressure the superpowers to consider the global implications of their actions . By framing his message as a request from multiple member countries, Thant .
 Thant appeared to have listened to the petitions of the UN ambassadors, as well as to the hundreds of cables pleading for help . Thant spoke to the UN Security Council at its televised meeting on 24 October .
 Dorticós said if the U.S. would give assurances not to commit acts of aggression against Cuba, Cuba would have no need for weapons . He reminded the Cubans of his own proposal that if the United States .
 Thant suggested that this offer could be the basis for a peaceful resolution to the crisis . Thant asked the Cubans to suspend construction on the missile installations in order to allow a period of negotiations .
 The secretary-general closed his remarks with the hope that 'good sense and understanding will be placed above the anger of the moment'
 The most urgent danger when Thant sent his messages and gave his speech was the fact that Soviet ships were steaming toward the quarantine zone . The Soviet Union ships were moving toward the quarantines .
 Khrushchev agreed to Thant's proposed suspension of activities to allow for a period of negotiations . The Soviet leader welcomed Thant’s initiative and agreed to his proposed suspension . The proposal was rejected by Thant .
 Thant received a somewhat more tepid reply from Kennedy, in which the U.S. president also agreed to the prospect of initial talks . That same day, Thant also received the United States president's reply .
 Thant asked Khrushchev to instruct his ships to avoid quarantine zone and Kennedy to do everything possible to avoid confrontation with the Soviets . Thant then sent two more messages to the two leaders, setting a time for preliminary negotiations .
 Both parties agreed immediately, thankful that Thant’s intervention had allowed them to back a small step away from the brink while still saving face . Thant: “Both parties agreed to back down, but not necessarily agree to a compromise .
 Thant had neglected to involve Cubans in his initial diplomatic efforts, perhaps because of the most immediate danger was a confrontation on the high seas . He later endeavoured to include them in the process of negotiating a peaceful end to the crisis .
 On 26 October, after Thant had got Kennedy and Khrushchev to agree to preliminary talks, the secretary-general reached out to Cuba’s leaders . The talks were held in Cuba on 26 October .
 President Dorticós’s proposal that his country would give up their weapons if the U.S. could prove, ‘by word and deed’, that it would not carry out aggression against Cuba .
 He rejected the very premise of the quarantine, calling it ‘an act of force and war’ and a violation of Cuba’s sovereignty .
 He argued that Cuba had violated no international law in accepting Soviet weapons . Cuba was merely defending its own security and sovereignty, he said .
 Thant seized the opportunity to gain Cuban cooperation in the peace negotiations . Thant says he hopes to gain the Cuban government's cooperation .
 Thant also reminded Castro that other people and nations had a great deal at stake in the outcome of the crisis . In the same message, Thant said other nations and people had a very large stake .
 The secretary-general wrote of his hope ‘that it may also be possible for action . which would reassure other countries which have felt themselves threatened by recent developments in Cuba’ Two days later, on 30 October, on a chartered Brazilian plane, left for Havana .
 By the time the UN secretary-general travelled to Havana, the height of the missile crisis had already passed . But by the time he arrived at the end of the crisis, it had already been over .
 Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for a US pledge not to invade the island . The news of the removal of the missiles broke the news on 28 October, 1962 .
 The United States and the Soviet Union had embraced Cuban President Dorticós’s original proposal . But without any Cuban participation in the process, the U.S. and Soviet Union embraced it .
 Thant’s mission to Havana took on the new goal of placating Cuban leadership enough to convince them to allow international inspection of missiles’ removal .
 Thant's mission to Havana failed to accomplish its main objective . Under these inauspicious circumstances, it is little wonder that Thant’s mission failed .
 The secretary-general held two meetings with Cuban leaders, one on the record and the second private . The meetings were held in Cuba .
 In the first meeting, he told Prime Minister Castro, President Dorticós, Foreign Minister Raúl Roa and Cuba’s UN representative that he insisted that any inspections on Cuban territory had to be approved by the Cubans .
 Thant said that he had informed the United States and Soviet leadership that ‘before sending a team to verify , the most important thing is to obtain prior consent from the Cuban government’80 But Castro adamantly refused to consent to any sort of inspections, either on the part of
 President Dorticós spoke up at the meeting as well, asking why Cuba should submit to inspections if the U.S. did not agree to similar inspections on United States territory . The Cuban president also asked why the United States should not have similar inspections .
 The Soviet ambassador to Cuba and the general in charge of the missile sites thanked Thant for his efforts to find a peaceful resolution to the crisis . Thant was the Cuban president of the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Thant asked when the dismantling of the missiles would begin, and was shocked to learn that the process was already under way . Thant said it would be concluded within the week . The dismantling of missiles will be completed within the next week .
 The secretary-general thanked the Soviet officials for their visit, which he interpreted as an effort by Moscow to communicate to the UN that Khrushchev was following through with his end of the agreement .
 The Soviet ambassador and general left, but Thant’s military attaché remarked that this first-hand information from an authentic source had made the trip to Havana ‘extremely worthwhile’ The next day, though he still did not manage to convince the Cubans to agree to
 Castro started the discussion in a bitter mood, notes Thant's confidential notes reveal . Castro was in a "bitter mood" at the start of the meeting, Thant says .
 He denounced both Kennedy and Khrushchev for excluding Cuba from the negotiations . He told Thant he was planning to make his displeasure with the Soviets public in his radio broadcast that evening .
 He proposed that the United Nations could inspect anything outside the Cuban territorial waters . Thant asked Thant to convey this view to both United States and Soviet leaders .
 After trying one last time to convince the Cubans to allow inspections on the island, Thant admitted defeat . Thant tried to convince Cubans that inspections on island would be allowed .
 He managed to convince Castro to ‘practice restraint’ and soften the tone of that evening’s speech . Thant also inquired after a United States Air Force pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson, who had been shot down over Cuba on 27 October .
 Castro agreed to return the pilot’s body as a humanitarian gesture of goodwill .
 The secretary-general also revealed that he had been ‘reliably informed’ that the dismantling of the missiles was already in progress and would be completed soon . Secretary-general said he was 'reliable informed' that dismantling was already underway .
 He concluded by acknowledging Cuba’s humanitarian gesture of returning Major Anderson's body to the U.S. He also acknowledged Cuba's humanitarian gesture .
 After his return from Cuba, Thant continued to work to make sure that Kennedy and Khrushchev’s agreement could be implemented even without on-the-ground inspection and verification of the missiles’ removal .
 Thant hosted many meetings between the U.S. and Soviet negotiating teams at UN headquarters . Thant held many meetings over the next two months between the United States and Soviet negotiators .
 To address United States concerns about verification, Thant raised the possibility of inspections at sea . Thant: Inspections at sea could be made at sea to address U.S. concerns .
 Castro suggested the idea in a private meeting with the UN secretary-general . This was actually Castro’s idea, which he had suggested in his private meeting . Castro said: ‘This is actually Castro's idea,’
 Castro had already publicly committed himself to his intransigent five-point demands . He needed Thant to broach the idea for him to avoid looking weak . Thant needed to avoid appearing weak .
 The UN secretarygeneral served a similar face-saving role for Castro as he did for Kennedy and Khrushchev . He used his position as a neutral go-between to propose solutions that the three world leaders had privately suggested to him .
 The Cuban leader remained bitter about the way they had treated him during the missile crisis . Castro moderated his public statements after meeting with Thant years later .
 Idlewild Airport would be renamed John F Kennedy Airport in 1963 after the president’s assassination . Idlewild airport would then be known as JFK Airport .
 Cuban leaders’ suggestions become important parts of the basis for the resolution of the missile crisis . Thanks to the UN and its secretary-general, Cuban leaders' suggestions became important part of the resolution .
 Cuban Revolution supporters were desperately looking for a silver lining to the humiliating affair . This fact was immediately apparent to observers at the time, especially supporters of the Cuban Revolution .
 Cuba’s President Dorticós proposed dismantling of the bases in exchange for an end to U.S. aggression . Revueltas reminded his readers that the first person to propose the dismantling was Cuba's very own President .
 Latin America should show profound gratitude to the Soviets and the Cubans for protecting the Cuban Revolution and world peace . He argued that the people of Latin America need to show deep gratitude .
 Latin Americans entrusted the OAS and the UN with the responsibility of laying the groundwork for negotiation . Latin Americans trust the UN and OAS to lay groundwork for negotiations . OAS has been tasked with setting up a framework for talks .
 The two international organisations rose to the occasion and served their foundational purpose of using diplomacy and strength in numbers to help resolve international conflicts .
 The OAS was the first to act, providing hemispheric support for a nonviolent alternative to a U.S. military first-strike or a declaration of war . The United States has been criticized for a military first strike or declaring war .
 The quarantine became a legal, multilateral defence of hemispheric security rather than a unilateral act of war . Thanks to the OAS vote, the quarantine became legal .
 The UN and its secretary-general, U Thant, played a crucial role in slowing down the pace of the confrontation . The UN helped slow down the confrontation once the quarantine went into effect .
 Thant used his position as intermediary to both buy time for negotiations and propose the basis of the ultimate peace agreement . Thant was responding to the pleas of government officials and hundreds of frantic civilians .
 'Hot-headed' Cubans gave Thant some of the foundations for his proposals . Ironically, it was the ‘hot-headed’ Cubans who gave him the inspiration .
 Cuban President Osvaldo Dorticós was the first to argue that his country would not need weapons if the U.S. stopped its aggressive behaviour . Fidel Castro suggested that verification of the missiles’ removal should take place in international waters .
 Latin Americans trusted their international organisations, they used them to play a crucial, and heretofore unrecognised, role in helping resolve a dangerous confrontation . Latin America trusted international organisations to help resolve a serious crisis .
 Latin Americans challenged the idea that superpowers alone could influence the outcome of global events . In so doing, Latin Americans reinforced the legitimacy of multilateral action . Latin Americans also challenged the notion that the world's superpowers could influence events .
 Este artículo utiliza un ensamblaje internacional de recursos for recuperar la historia del involucramiento of Estados Americanos and las Naciones Unidas .
 Señala que a través de mecanismos de la OEA y la ONU, ciudadanos y funcionarios latinoamericanos, ayudaron a configurar el resultado pacífico de la crisis . Señ
 El artículo desafía los relatos that otorgan poca importancia tanto a los países latinoamericanos como a organismos multilaterales . Se une a la creciente literatura that muestra cómo
 Este artigo utiliza-se de a conjunto internaional de fontes dedicadas a recuperar a . recuperação do envolvimento da Organização dos Estados Americanos and da Organ . das Naç
 OEA and ONU mecanismos ajudam ajudaram a definar a resultado pacífico da crise . Argumenta that através dos mecanisms da OEA e da ONU, cidadãos latino-americanos
 Este artigo rechaça representações desdenhosas tanto da América Latina quanto das organizaças multilateralais, e, ao fazê-lo, junta-se ao .