 Soviets and Cubans to give their behind-the-scenes versions of how the world approached nuclear war during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis . After more than a quarter of a century of official silence, the Soviet Union and Cuba are preparing to tell their stories .
 The Soviet decision to cooperate with the Harvard project reflects the Kremlin's new foreign policy line under Gorbachev . The Harvard project is part of a joint effort with the Kremlin .
 The Cuban missile crisis is being held up as a case study in how the superpowers avoided a nuclear apocalypse by demonstrating a willingness to compromise . As Soviet rhetoric shifts from confrontation with the West to cooperation, the Cuban crisis is held up .
 The Soviet and Cuban contribution has largely been confined to statements published in the 1980s . The Soviet-Cuban contribution has been limited to statements .
 Former Soviet ambassador to Cuba, Alexander Alexeev, published reminiscences in a Soviet magazine, Planetary Echo . Alexeeev is a former Soviet diplomat to Cuba .
 The article marked the first detailed account of the crisis by a ranking Soviet participant . Alexeev asserted that some of the 42 medium-range Soviet missiles in Cuba were fully operational by the time the United States announced its blockade of the island .
 Western officials and scholars have been arguing for years over whether the Soviet missiles had already been equipped with nuclear warheads by the time the crisis broke . Western officials have been debating for years whether the missiles were already equipped with warheads .
 The former ambassador also said that a local Soviet commander was responsible for shooting down an American U2 plane over Cuba on Oct. 1962 . The incident triggered the most tense phase in the two-week crisis . The U2 was shot down over Cuba in October 1962 .
 Neither president Kennedy nor Soviet leader Khrushchev ever learned the truth about this vital episode . It is now clear that neither president Kennedy or Soviet leader Nikita Khrushche ever learned of this .
 Khrushchev was even more horrified than Kennedy about what had happened,"" said Blight, who visited Moscow last month to organize the conference . "They went to bed not knowing that Khrushchev was ... horrified," he said .
 Soviet officials have told the Harvard team that a high-level military cover-up kept the former Kremlin chief in the dark . Soviet officials tell Harvard team they are concerned about the cover up of the events .
 "This leads us to believe that we may have been luckier than we think,"" said Blight .
 Soviet participants in the conference are expected to include former foreign minister Andrei Gromyko, former ambassador to Washington Anatoliy Dobrynin and KGB agent known as "Mr X" Alexeev opened a back channel through ABC News .
 Edward M Kennedy will head the American delegation, which will also include John Kennedy Jr., Robert S McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Ted Sorensen and Pierre Salinger .
 Harvard historians are convinced that personal factors also play a role . High-level Soviet participation at the conference fits in with the new Kremlin line as proclaimed by Gorbachev .
 "They are elderly people and they don't want to carry their secrets to the grave,"" said Blight . Blight said the elderly people are "elderly people"
 Harvard hosted a seminar on the Cuban missile crisis last year that was attended by three Soviet academics and former Kennedy administration officials . Harvard hosted the seminar last year .
 None of the Soviet participants in last year’s meeting had first-hand knowledge of key events . Unlike the Soviet officials who will be attending this month's conference, none of the . Soviet officials will attend the conference, which will be attended this month .
 Key motivation was the wish to protect the Cuban revolution from a U.S. /military intervention . According to the former ambassador, the key motivation was to protect Cuban revolution .
 The U.S. administration got word of the Soviet preparations, which began in July 1962 . The United States confirmed the presence of Soviet missile sites in Cuba through aerial reconnaissance .
 Some of our ships were still en route but they contained only auxiliary supplies and equipment for our military contingent,” wrote Alexeev. “It was possible to do without, which it was . possible to ... do without," he wrote .
 Castro reacted angrily when Khrushchev decided to dismantle missiles without consulting or informing him . The former ambassador said Castro react angrily to the decision to dismantle the missiles . Castro said he was angered by the decision .
 Soviet radio began broadcasting the text of the letter at a time when its end had not even been completed . Alexeev says Soviet radio broadcast the text . According to him , Soviet radio . began broadcasting . the text at a . time when it was not even completed .
 The Moscow conference will open with a video recording of Kennedy’s televised speech on Oct. 31 . Kennedy called on the Kremlin to remove the missiles from Cuba in a televised speech .
 Some Soviet officials maintain that the crisis could have been defused with much less tension had Kennedy decided to use quiet diplomacy rather than public pressure .