 Less attention has been given to the state of U.S.-Cuban relations in the aftermath of the missile crisis .
 Scholars assumed Kennedy was in the process of reevaluating his hostile policies toward Cuba . Scholars have assumed that Kennedy was trying to change his policies .
 This article challenges those assumptions by closely examining what Kennedy and his administration intended for Cuba . It challenges the assumptions that the Kennedy administration intended to Cuba .
 It suggests that the Kennedy administration never renounced its policy of overthrowing Fidel Castro . The Cuban coup suggests that it was never a success in overthrowing Castro .
 Scholars have focused on dramatic events and policies during the Kennedy administration, including the Bay of Pigs invasion, the assassination plots against Fidel Castro, and the Cuban missile crisis .
 Scholars assumed Kennedy was in the process of reevaluating his hostile policies toward Cuba and indeed his entire cold war stance . Scholars have assumed, however, that Kennedy was changing his stance toward Cuba .
 In his seminal essay, “The Education of John F Kennedy,” Divine suggested that the eventful nature of the missile crisis had a transforming effect on the young president .
 Kennedy once embraced the cold war verities of Dean Acheson and John Foster Dulles . Kennedy had once wholeheartedly embraced the Cold War verities .
 Kennedy pledged to the Soviet Union not to invade Cuba and had ordered the dismantling of Operation Mongoose . Kennedy had pledged to Russia not invade Cuba .
 According to Schlesinger, the administration no longer needed to concentrate on Castro, since it had ‘destroyed’ Castro’s influence in Latin America . The administration was able to focus on Castro because it had "destroyed" Castro's influence .
 By the mid 1970s, this appealing interpretation of a maturing president who abandoned his confrontational ways encountered the reality of startling new evidence . Historiography.
 The Senate Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities, popularly known as the Church Committee, revealed that the United States had participated in plots to assassinate foreign leaders, including Castro .
 The Church Committee could not say definitively whether Presidents Eisenhower or Kennedy authorized the plots . Individual senators, such as Howard Baker, felt certain that the Central Intelligence Agency operated with presidential approval .
 The Church Committee discovered, however, that assassination plots continued after the missile crisis . The Committee discovered the assassination plots continue after the crisis .
 A ballpoint pen was rigged with a poisonous hypodermic needle intended to produce Castro’s instant death . Cubela Cubela was given a pen with a poisoned needle to carry out the assassination .
 In the previous month, Desmond Fitzgerald of the CIA’s Directorate of Plans had assured Cubela that the CIA operated with the approval of Attorney General Robert F Kennedy . Desmond Fitzgerald told Cubela the agency operated with approval of the Attorney General .
 The Church Committee further disclosed that on June 19, 1963, President Kennedy approved a sabotage program against Cuba . Kennedy approved the sabotage program on June 20, 1963 .
 This new evidence provided a challenge to the keeper of the Kennedy flame (i.e., Schlesinger) as he prepared his 1978 biography of Robert Kennedy . The new evidence provides a challenge .
 Schlesinger had exclusive access to the attorney general’s papers and diary . He understood that the U.S. continued its war against Castro through 1963 .
 He offered various excuses, suggesting that Cuban exiles forced the Kennedy administration ‘into action against its will’ or that the CIA and exiles attacked Cuba without authorization . He also suggested that the administration had to harass Cuba in retaliation for Cuban meddling in Venezuela .
 Schlesinger also suggested that Robert Kennedy knew of CIA support for militaristic Cuban exiles, such as Manuel Artime . He said Kennedy also knew of support for the militaristic exiles .
 Schlesinger denied that the Kennedy brothers contemplated assassination . Yet, he said assassination was illogical in view of the noninvasion pledge and the Daniel and Attwood initiatives .
 President Kennedy pursued a dual-track policy toward Castro, Schlesinger says . Kennedy pursued an ideological antagonism and accommodation, he says .
 Paterson had available to him the published record and additional documents that he had obtained through the Freedom of Information Act . Paterson also had access to additional documents he obtained through Freedom of
 Paterson displayed uncertainty about what “dual-track” policy meant . Paterson: "dual track’s policy is not a matter of policy"
 Paterson ended his essay with a series of questions, wondering whether Kennedy truly wanted to improve relations with Cuba . Paterson: "I don't think he really wanted to change Cuba"
 Paterson concluded that “it does not seem likely” that Kennedy would have normalized relations with Cuba in the post-1963 period . Paterson: ‘It does not seems likely’ that Kennedy .
 Two influential studies published in the late 1990s have also offered commentary on President Kennedy's Cuban policies .
 In The Kennedy Tapes, May and Zelikow included an extensive analysis of Kennedy’s policies in their compilation of the audio transcripts .
 May and Zelikow depicted Kennedy’s subsequent anti-Castro policies as “petty harassment” The U.S. was not trying to bring down Castro, nor to drag the United States into an open or direct intervention in Cuba .
 In their study “One Hell of a Gamble,” Fursenko and Naftali informed their survey of the missile crisis with some documents from the archives of the former Soviet Union .
 Kennedy focused on improving the relationship with the Soviet Union and achieving the limited test ban treaty . But they essentially agreed with Divine, holding that Kennedy .
 Fursenko and Naftali noted that Robert Kennedy contacted the Soviet Union in May 1963 through a “back channel” communication and ensured 1.5 million people were safe in the U.S.
 Under the weight of new documentary evidence, Naftali apparently revised his judgment . The former judge was initially skeptical of his decision .
 The new documentary evidence on U.S.-Cuban relations sustains Paterson’s pessimistic judgment about the future of the relationship as they stood in late November 1963 . Paterson's pessimistic judgment remains a pessimistic view .
 The Kennedy administration pursued an aggressive, belligerent policy toward Cuba in the year after the missile crisis . In fact, the evidence shows that the Kennedy administration had an aggressive policy .
 The United States approach to Cuba derived from the way the Kennedy administration interpreted its pledge to the Soviet Union not to invade Cuba in the aftermath of the missile crisis . The U.S. approach was based on the promise to not invade Cuba .
 Kennedy offered noninvasion pledge for removal of missiles from Cuba in 1962 letter to Khrushchev . Kennedy's letter was sent to Soviet chairman Nikita S Khrushchech on October 27, 1962 .
 U.N. pledge was never guaranteed by a formal document in the United Nations . But that pledge has never been guaranteed .
 UN Security Council would guarantee noninvasion pledge and removal of offensive weapons systems from Cuba . All sides would give reciprocal guarantees to refrain from subversion and sabotage . U.S. would guarantee the removal of weapons from Cuba and remove them .
 Kennedy declined to give an unequivocal public pledge not to invade Cuba in 1962 . At his news conference on November 20, 1962, announcing the lifting of the naval quarantine of Cuba, Kennedy declined .
 Kennedy: Our objective is to preserve our right to invade Cuba in the event of a civil war . As Kennedy privately told the National Security Council the next day, the U.S. had to protect Cuba from guerrilla activities .
 Rio pact called for multilateral action against aggression in the Western Hemisphere . Rio pact was formed in response to the threat of aggression in Western hemisphere .
 The resolution would permit the administration “to do pretty much what we please,” Ball’s words . It would allow the U.S. to count on persuading twothirds of the members of the Organization of American States to support an invasion of Cuba .
 Kennedy met with Soviet leader Anastas Mikoyan on November 29, 1962 . Kennedy made manifest his policy on Cuba in a combative, three-hour meeting with Mikoyans .
 Kennedy repeatedly assured Mikoyan that it was not the intention of the U.S. to invade Cuba . Kennedy: "The United States was not going to invade"
 Cuba might become a site for an arms buildup by Chinese Communists . Cuba might even become a center for arms buildup . China might even build up an arms program .
 The Soviets had adhered to the October 27 agreement, whereas the U.S. added conditions . The Soviets and the United States added conditions to the agreement .
 Mikoyan supported Castro’s demand that the “agreement cut both ways,” for 5.5 million people . Mikoyans: “The agreement cuts both ways.” Castro wants the agreement to be cut both way .
 Kennedy denied the U.S. or any other nation in the Western Hemisphere trained Cubans for military action against Cuba . Kennedy denied that the United States or any . other . other nations in the . Western . Hemisphere trained Cuban soldiers for military . action against . Cuba .
 There would be no formal U.S.-Soviet understanding to end the Cuban missile crisis . There would have been no formal agreement between the two countries to end it .
 The Kennedy administration resumed its pre–October 1962 war against Castro shortly after the removal of offensive weapons systems .
 By early December, Bundy circulated a memorandum that contained an overt program of diplomatic and economic opposition to Cuba and a covert one of extensive sabotage against Cuba . Bundy circulated the memo .
 Kennedy asked what could be done about the rising price of sugar, which benefited Cuba . Kennedy: "What can be done?" is to help Cuba .
 Studies by the Departments of State and Agriculture gloomily concluded that global market conditions accounted for the increase to ten cents per pound . The U.S. could not unilaterally set world market prices for sugar, they said .
 Kennedy wanted to shorten the eighteen-day preparation period from alert to full-scale invasion . Kennedy wanted troops to send troops to Cuba quickly in case of an uprising .
 Exile groups staged hit-and-run raids on the island and on ships transporting goods to and from Cuba .
 The raiders purchased arms in the U.S. and launched their attacks from the Bahamas . They were attacked by the raiders in the Bahamas in 2009 .
 Kennedy administration instructed exiles to cease attacking Soviet ships in the Caribbean . Kennedy administration told exiles not to attack Soviet ships .
 Rusk bragged that Cuba’s trade with the Atlantic community had dropped by one-third from 1961 to 1962 . Rusk said that trade between Cuba and Atlantic community dropped by a third from 1961- 1962 .
 The Kennedy administration also began the process of ejecting Cuba from the International Monetary Fund . Cuba was ejected from the IMF in 1973 .
 Despite these measures, the Kennedy administration remained frustrated about Cuba . The Kennedy administration was frustrated about the Cuban situation .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara told colleagues that “the elimination of Castro was a requirement” In April, McNamara said that if present policies could not accomplish that objective, then new policies must be developed .
 Bundy confessed that he was coming to believe that the administration could not set a certain date for Castro’s overthrow . Bundy: "I’m not sure if the administration can’t set a date for the overthrow"
 McNamara brought up the idea, often suggested by Robert Kennedy, of staging an attack on Guantánamo, blaming Castro, and then exploiting the situation . McNamara said the attack would have been a success in Cuba .
 NSC officers would inspect the military readiness of the Guantánamo garrison, speculating that Castro might retaliate against the increasing U.S. pressure . NSC: Castro may have retaliated against the growing American pressure .
 The CIA offered an integrated program of propaganda, economic denial, and sabotage against Cuba . Cuba was the focus of the CIA's program of economic denial and sabotage .
 The agency assumed that the U.S. did not currently intend to invade Cuba or provoke an invasion . The agency assumes that the United States did not intend to attack Cuba .
 NSC officers kept the president and the attorney general apprised of the details of U.S.-supported raids by Cuban exiles . The president and attorney general were briefed on the raids .
 Higher Authority conducted a major review of the program on November 12, 1963 .
 Cuba still belonged to Castro, and the Cuban strongman retained the loyalty of the military . Castro still owned the Cuban military, and Cuba still belongs to him . Castro's government was overthrown in 2009 .
 Castro’s “grip was weakening,” the CIA was attempting to exploit dissension and dissidence within the military, the report says . But Castro was “weakling” and “wrenching” in Cuba, the author says . The
 Kennedy briefly inquired about the efficacy of the attacks and then authorized a continuation of the program . Kennedy then authorized the program to continue .
 Havana exhorted Latin American revolutionaries, such as the Movement for the Revolutionary Left in Venezuela, to study and train in Cuba . Havana certainly exhorted . Cuba invited them to Cuba to study, train and study .
 The U.S. had no hard evidence of direct Cuban support, in the form of arms or troops, of insurgent groups . The United States had no evidence of Cuban support for insurgents in the 1980s .
 Khrushchev made clear to Castro in May 1963 that the Soviet Union would not support armed insurrection in Latin America . U.S. intelligence analysts also understood that . United States intelligence analysts understood that Khrushchev made clear .
 Castro has repeatedly suggested, through a variety of intermediaries, that he was interested in a rapprochement with the United States, officials say . Castro has said he is interested in rapproaching with the U.S.
 The Kennedy administration needed evidence to justify its continuing war against Cuba . As such, the Kennedy administration had to justify the war .
 Evidence surfaced on a Venezuelan beach in early November 1963 . Venezuela announced it had discovered a cache of Cuban arms . The arms were allegedly left for insurgents determined to disrupt the upcoming presidential election .
 In February 1963, after meeting with President Rómulo Betancourt, Kennedy wrote to McCone that “it is obvious that the Communists in Venezuela support Castro’s government,” he wrote .
 The president was shown where the Cuban coat of arms had been sanded off the rifle . The rifle is now being used in the Cuban military .
 In fact, some have subsequently questioned the validity of the discovery . The discovery was made in the 1980s, but some have since questioned its validity .
 Former CIA chief of station in Caracas implied CIA operatives planted arms . Joseph Burkholder Smith implied that CIA operatives engaged in a form of “black propaganda” and planted the arms .
 In May 1963, the CIA submitted a paper to the NSC on additional actions against Cuba . The CIA submitted the paper to NSC in May 1963 . It was the first time the CIA had been asked to take further action against Cuba.
 Schlesinger suggested that Kennedy gave a conciliatory speech about Cuba, reinforcing the Attwood and Daniel initiatives . Kennedy gave the speech in a speech reinforcing his initiatives .
 Hersh says the CIA inserted a reference to Castro as a “barrier” to remove . Hersh cites interviews he had with lawyers on the Church Committee . The CIA inserted the reference in the speech .
 Bundy informed Johnson that Kennedy's speech was designed to encourage anti-Castro elements in Cuba to revolt . Bundy told Johnson that the speech was intended to encourage rebels in the armed forces . Bundy: Kennedy’s speech was “designed to encourage ... anti ... rebels”
 Kennedy indeed opened indirect lines of communication with Castro . As he intensified his war against Cuba, Kennedy opened indirect channels of communication .
 Daniel and Attwood initiative can't be characterized as a meaningful diplomatic effort . But neither the Daniel nor Attwood initiatives can be characterized by a meaningful diplomacy effort .
 Daniel met with Kennedy in Washington on October 24, 1963, and then interviewed Castro on November 19 and November 22 . Daniel interviewed Castro in Washington, D.C. on November 18 and 19, 1963 .
 Kennedy told Daniel that the U.S. objected to Cuba’s subversive activities in Latin 34 . Kennedy said the United States primarily objected to the Cubans .
 Kennedy had previously made similar statements about the flexible nature of U.S. policies in conversations with Brazilian officials and British Guiana .
 Kennedy claimed that he focused on whether a country maintained its diplomatic independence . Kennedy accepted the principle that every country has the right to choose its internal political and economic philosophies .
 Attwood had interviewed Castro in 1959, served as Kennedy’s ambassador to Guinea . Attwood joined the United States mission at the U.N. in 1963 .
 Attwood began preliminary discussions with Cuba in September 1963 . With the knowledge of the president and the attorney general, Attwood made the move . Attwood's first Cuba visit was in 1963 .
 Attwood speculated that Castro wanted to normalize relations with the United States . Attwood said he was prepared to renounce subversion and eject Soviet military personnel from Cuba, and adopt a policy of nonalignment .
 Kennedy also denied Attwood permission to accept a Cuban invitation to travel to Cuba for discussions . Kennedy also said Attwood would not be allowed to accept an invitation to visit Cuba for talks .
 The Kennedy administration also showed no interest in Castro’s repeated request that the U.S. cease its campaign of sabotage and terrorism against Cuba . Castro asked that the United States cease its attacks on Cuba .
 President Kennedy did not pursue a dual-track policy toward Cuba during the last 13 months of his administration .
 At the minimum, the administration required that Castro sever his ties with the Soviet Union and renounce his commitment to revolution . Castro was forced to sever ties with Soviet Union, renounce commitment to the revolution .
 Whether the administration would acknowledge a nonaligned Communist state in the hemisphere remains problematic . The U.S. has not acknowledged nonaligned communist states in the region .
 The Department of State warned that any approval of a Communist Cuba would strengthen Latin American Communists, threaten foreign investments, provoke a regional capital flight, and undermine the Alliance for Progress . The State Dept. of State also warned that approval of Cuba would threaten foreign investment .
 Bundy: "Things would have to get rougher for Castro before he would consider any deal" Bundy once put it out that things had to get tougher for Castro . Bundy once said that things would 'have to get rough' for Castro to consider a deal .
 The CIA’s classified account of its operations in Guatemala, 1952-1954 . CIA: Guatemalan operations in 1954 .
 Betancourt, Castro, and Trujillo and U.S. foreign policy, 1958-1963 . The U.N. policy of foreign policy in the United States has been described as 'cold'
 United States Congress, Senate, Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities . Committee: "Governmental Operations" Committee .
 Alleged assassination plots involving foreign leaders involved foreign leaders . Senate Report no.5.th Cong. 1st sess., Senate Report No. 1 .