 The group is composed of American President John F Kennedy and his advisers . The group was formed by the former President of the United States .
 The results are consistent with much experimental evidence showing that reference levels play an important role in determining preferences, scientists say .
 The results extend the notion of reference-dependent risky choice to the group level, where experts are dealing with an issue of great importance . The results also extend the concept of reference dependent risky choice .
 Leaders must assess the relative merits of competing alternatives in making important decisions . Leaders must also assess the merits of the competing alternatives .
 The context effect is the reference level, or standard of comparison, against which the potential outcomes of choice are evaluated . One such context effect can be seen in the context of a decision .
 Prospect theory aims to explain and predict individual decision making under risk . The most prominent of these models is prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky, I979), which aims to predict individual decisions .
 Most of this research has been conducted with individuals making hypothetical or low-stakes decisions, often in a laboratory setting . Most of the research is conducted with people making hypothetical decisions .
 Few studies have investigated the reference dependence of crucial decisions made by groups of experienced decision makers . Few, if any, studies have looked at reference dependence on crucial decisions .
 It is an open question whether the predictions derived from prospect theory will hold true for such groups as well as individuals . Consequently, it is open question if the predictions held true .
 CCC 0894-32571941040243-18 Received I I I Janurrry 1994 0 1994 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
 Case studies of well-documented group and organizational decisions can advance our understanding in two ways . At the current stage of research on decision making under risk, case studies can help us understand our understanding of risk-taking .
 First, they can indicate whether prospect theory predictions are valid beyond individual level . They can indicate if prospect theory is valid beyond the individual level, they say .
 Case studies can suggest additional determinants of risky choice that can supplement prospect theory, and thus provide a more comprehensive understanding of decision making in complex and realistic settings . Second, case studies suggest additional factors that can be added to prospect theory .
 In this paper, we follow this approach in applying prospect theory to a crucial decision made under uncertainty by a group of talented and experienced decision makers .
 In particular, we examine the role of the reference point in the Cuban missile crisis of 1962 . We examine the importance of this reference point as a reference point to the crisis .
 The extensive documentation of the CMC, which includes transcripts of group meetings, enables investigators to trace the decision makers’ perceptions and actions during the crisis .
 The CMC is an excellent case in which to study reference level effects at the group level . For these reasons, it is a good case to use the CMC to forge links between theories of individual and group decision making .
 To guide our analysis, we focused on a set of questions relevant for testing and extending prospect theory to the group level . We asked the questions relevant to testing and extended prospect theory .
 We derived propositions relating prospect theory to group-level decision making . After exploring these questions through our analysis of decision making during the CMC, we derived propositions related to prospect theory .
 These propositions, in turn, can be used to guide future research on group decision making under uncertainty . These propositions can also be used in future research .
 According to Kahneman and Tversky’s analysis ofchoice under uncertainty, individual attitudes toward risky options are depicted by a value function .
 Reference dependence: carriers of value are gains and losses defined relative to a neutral reference point . Reference dependence is defined by the point of reference to the reference point at the time of a given event .
 Location of the reference point affects the perceived attractiveness of outcomes by defining the possible outcomes of choice as positive or negative . The location of a reference point can affect the attractiveness of the outcomes of a choice .
 The literature contains many examples of examples of preference reversals that occurred through a shift in the reference level and the subsequent reframing of decisions . Even though objectively the choices were unchanged, the decisions were unchanged .
 The neutral reference level implied by the characterization of the choice as people dying is 0 dead; hence the choice is between a certain loss and potentially greater losses combined with the chance of returning to the reference level . In contrast, the choice between people dying and returning to a reference level is between
 Individuals are often risk averse in choices involving gains but risk taking in losses . This is illustrated in prospect theory by the S-shaped value function that is concave for gains but convex for losses .
 The dramatic reversals of preference produced by different descriptions of the same option in the lives saved/lost dilemma occur because of the conjunction of a framing effect with attitudes toward risk that differ for choices involving losses or gains .
 Loss aversion entails a bias in the evaluation of gains and losses, because losses are felt more strongly than gains of equivalent magnitude . Loss aversion is a bias, and it can be applied to any of the world's economic policies .
 This notion is illustrated by a value function that is steeper for losses than for gains . This is true for losses, but for gains, the value function is more steeply steeped for losses .
 People are reluctant to accept even chance gambles in the absence of very favorable payoffs . People are also reluctant to take gambles even if they have a good chance .
 Prospect theory concerns the behavior of individuals . Most crucial decisions under uncertainty are made by groups, says prospect theory . But prospect theory concerns individual behavior .
 Group risk management is of practical as well as theoretical importance . Study of group risk management has practical and theoretical value .
 Kameda and Davis have observed that research in this area has for the most part proceeded independently and with little conceptual connection to work at the individual level .
 The two levels of analysis have remained largely separate, even though comprehensive explanations of decision making under uncertainty are likely to require both . The decision to make decisions under uncertainty will likely require both.
 Some empirical studies have found that group and organizational level decision making under risk is consistent with predictions implied by prospect theory . However, some empirical studies show that such decisions are not consistent with the theory .
 These studies suggest that group and organizational risk taking is affected by the reference level used to frame the decision . These studies are consistent with research findings on individual decision making .
 Prospect theory is also relevant to research on choice shifts, which has found that group discussion tends to enhance the point of view initially dominant within the group .
 It becomes important to identify the reference levels that individual group members are using to frame the decision they are making . The reference levels are often used to frame decisions for individual groups .
 We discuss the Cuban missile crisis and its effects on group decision making during that crisis . We then describe our analysis of reference level effects on decision making .
 A summary of key events surrounding the Cuban missile crisis is as follows . The crisis was triggered by the Cuban government's decision to launch a missile attack on Cuba .
 Soviet military aid to Cuba increased significantly during the summer of 1962 . Soviet military assistance increased significantly in the summer .
 The increase was justified by the Soviets on the basis of the threat of an imminent American invasion of the island . The increase in troop numbers was justified in the Soviet decision .
 The Soviet government denied any intention to place nuclear weapons in Cuba . On 1 1 September the Soviet government in response denied any plans to put nuclear weapons there . The Cuban government denied the plans .
 It claimed its rockets were so powerful that there was no need to locate them elsewhere than in the Soviet Union . It also claimed that U.S. military action against Cuba would provoke nuclear war .
 Kennedy replied that nuclear weapons in Cuba were unacceptable to the U.S. Kennedy replied on 13 September that it was unacceptable to Cuba .
 President Kennedy received photographs taken from a U.S. U-2 aircraft showing that the Soviet Union was building launch sites in Cuba for both medium and intermediate-range nuclear missiles .
 From this day until the end of the crisis, a group of advisers met secretly and often to debate potential course of action . The National Security Council's Executive Committee was later formally designated .
 A week of secret meetings among Kennedy and his advisers culminated in the imposition of a naval blockade on Cuba . The blockade was imposed against offensive weapons only . Kennedy’s address to the nation on 22 October .
 The blockade was intended to prevent further Soviet military shipments to the island . It was meant to impress upon the Soviets the seriousness of American intentions to remove the missiles . The blockade brought the world under the cloud of possible nuclear war .
 Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to dismantle bases and pull Soviet missiles out of Cuba in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . The crisis ended on 28 October when Russian leader agreed to remove Soviet missiles and dismantle bases in Cuba .
 Considerable documentation of the decision-making process that occurred before 22 October has been placed in the John F Kennedy Library and is now available . Data includes documentation of decision making process .
 These sources, supplemented by published accounts, provide traces of the decisionmaking process leading to the blockade of Cuba . These sources provide trace traces of decisionmaking .
 Also, the ExCom held informal meetings for which there seem to be no records . Also, there are no records of informal meetings held by ExCom .
 A small amount of sensitive material has been expunged because it pertains to intelligence sources or methods . As a result of the expunge, some of the material will not be published .
 The focus of this analysis was on the initial seven-day period commencing from the discovery of the missile bases on 16 October to the announcement of the U.S. course of action on 22 October .
 The data were analyzed using historiographical methodology . The methods were similar to those used in Chandler's Strategy and Structure and Janis's Grouprhink .
 Propositions were induced by examining subjects’ direct statements regarding the issues under discussion . Propositional positions were induced using direct statements from the subjects .
 The case was revisited to determine whether the data supported the proposed relationships . Subsequently, the case was re-examined to determine if the data was valid .
 The main category of information for which the data sources were examined pertains to the reference level employed . The data sources examined pertain to the main category, the data .
 In attempting to answer the questions under investigation, we relied as much as possible on direct statements made by key decision makers . We relied on the statements of key decision-makers to answer questions .
 "To the fullest extent possible. our discussion of the process of decision is based on direct statements made by the decision makers as they were engaged in their task. Thus, to the fullest . our discussion is based upon . statements made . by the . decision makers .
 Where possible we have supported our interpretations with direct quotes . We have included these quotes in the text so that readers may judge for themselves the reasonableness of the conclusions .
 The data from this research suggest that group choice in uncontrolled environments is also reference dependent . The data suggests group choice may be influenced by reference dependent environments .
 The executive team in the present study relied on one reference point in their evaluation of the alternatives . The study was conducted by the University of Cambridge .
 JFK committed the United States to a reference level of zero nuclear missiles with which to evaluate the situation in Cuba . This reference point originated with JFK’s statement on 13 September 1962 in which he publicly committed the U.S. to zero nuclear missile levels .
 The pledge to act in the event of Soviet placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba drew the line for both the U.S. and Kremlin leaders beyond which the Soviets could not go . The pledge indicates the existence of a neutral reference level against which events in Cuba would be evaluated .
 The reference point was the only one used in the first two meetings, where it was referred to over a dozen times during the course of discussion . Moreover, this reference point has been used only once or twice in two meetings .
 An entrepreneur recently suffered a $2 million loss, and must now decide which of two new projects to pursue . Consider the case of an entrepreneur who has suffered a loss, choosing between two new ventures to pursue.
 One project provides a certain return of $1 million; the other offers an even chance of $2 million or nothing . One project is worth $1.1 million . The other is a project with an even-even-chance chance of nothing .
 In other words, if the reference level does not shift to reflect recently suffered losses, current choices undergo a negative transformation . The reference level shifts to reflect recent losses .
 In this case, the probability of the decision maker choosing the riskier option (i.e. an even chance of earning $2 million or nothing in this example) is increased . The probability of an even-even-even chance of a higher-risk option is increased in this
 Individuals who have recently suffered losses are more likely to accept risky options they would otherwise have rejected . Because of loss aversion, individuals who have recent losses are less likely to take risks .
 Evidence for the negative framing/loss aversion hypothesis is found in JFK’s 22 October address to the nation .
 "The substance of these remarks is entirely consistent with prospect theory," he said . The substance of this is consistent with prospects theory .
 Current reality represents a negative deviation from a neutral point of reference . That is, the current reality . The current reality is, according to CNN.com .
 Decisions about how to respond to the current situation appear as choices between a certain loss, on the one hand, and potentially greater losses combined with a chance to return to the neutral reference point . Decisions seem to be between the risk of greater losses and a chance of returning to the
 At Point B, diminished sensitivity to further losses results in the overweighting of certain losses in relation to losses that might be more substantial but might be avoided . At point B, the weighting of these losses can be reduced to point B .
 Most people at Point B are inclined to avoid the certain losses by risking further losses, in an attempt to return to the neutral reference level . As a result of this, most people in Point B risk further losses in an effort to avoid further losses .
 Kennedy’s speech to the nation on 22 October. That is precisely the situation described in his speech . Kennedy's speech was exactly what he called the situation .
 The presence of any nuclear missiles in Cuba represented a negative deviation from the neutral reference point and created the perception of a certain loss . Given the location of the reference level, the presence of the . Cuban missile launch was a loss to the reference point .
 Accepting the Soviet missiles in Cuba would also have lost credibility in non-military domains, such as in terms of the credibility of U.S. commitments . Accepting Soviet missiles would have also lost credibility of the United States, the author says .
 The greater danger of war, however, was uncertain and therefore preferable to the high certain costs associated with a nonmilitary response . The risk of war was greater than the risk of a war .
 Groups making decisions under risk will adopt a reference point with which to frame their problems . Proposition 1: Groups making decision under risk adopt reference point to frame problems . Proponents say groups making decisions will be able to frame them as a point of reference .
 Groups that adopt reference points that do not reflect recently suffered losses will frame their choices negatively, and therefore be risk-accepting . Groups that adopted reference points don't reflect recent losses, they will frame them negatively .
 Groups will manifest susceptibility to the status quo bias because of the existence of loss aversion at the group level of analysis . Loss aversion is a form of group loss aversion .
 JFK and his advisers as they perceived it was considerable risk, says JFK's advisers . JFK and advisers chose the risk level of the option chosen by JFK as it was perceived as considerable .
 If Soviet missiles in Cuba had been believed to threaten the security of America’s cities, then it could be argued that the choice of a naval blockade was both cautious and judicious .
 The issue of the strategic impact of the missiles was not even raised during the ExCom’s first meeting, and did not overly concern those who were most influential .
 Mac: "I asked the Chiefs [Joint Chiefs of Chiefs of Stam that this afternoon, in effect. Mac, I asked, "What do you think? What do we think?"
 JFK agreed that the missile bases did not affect the strategic balance of power . JFK said the bases were not a threat to the U.S. military .
 You may say it doesn’t make any difference if you get blown up by an ICBM flying from the Soviet Union or one that was ninety miles away . It doesn't matter if you're blown up in the air by a nuclear missile or by a missile that's ninety miles
 Kennedy knew that the Soviets did not intend to fire the Cuban missiles, ‘because if they were going to get into a nuclear struggle, they have their own missiles in the Soviet Union,’ he said .
 The U.S. placed nuclear missiles along the Soviet border in Turkey in the late 1950s . In the 1950s, the United States placed nuclear missile bases in Turkey .
 Reference level effects may partially explain why the placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba provoked a military confrontation . If a more cautious policy was called for, as it seems from JFK’s own perception of the risks, then reference level effects could partly explain why .
 A diversity of factors determine the reference outcome in everyday life, says author . "Diversity of factors determines the outcome of everyday life," says author.
 The reference outcome is usually a state to which one has adapted; it is sometimes set by social norms and expectations . It sometimes corresponds to a level of aspiration, which may or may not be realistic .
 The group adopted its reference point of zero nuclear missiles in Cuba . The findings are consistent with this statement, but also suggest additional influences .
 These factors operated jointly rather than independently such that their effects on reference point selection were mutually reinforcing . Moreover, these factors operated . rather than . independently such . such . their effects were mutually . reinforcing, the study found .
 ExCom members had become accustomed to the absence of missiles in Cuba . The prevailing expectation was that the Soviets would never risk violating the status quo by placing them there .
 JFK and others accepted unanimous judgment that Khrushchev would not send nuclear weapons to Cuba . JFK and the others accepted the unanimous judgment of Soviet experts .
 As it turned out, the prevailing expectation regarding Soviet intentions was incorrect . As it was revealed, the Soviet intentions were incorrect .
 The arms build-up in Cuba during 1962 caused considerable consternation in the USA . It was fueled in part by the impending Congressional elections in the US .
 The dangers posed by the Soviet arms build-up and rumors of nuclear missiles on Cuba were used to attack the Kennedy administration . As the fall Congressional electoral campaign heated up, the dangers of the Soviet weapons build up were used .
 These attacks found their mark because Cuba was the ‘Achilles’ heel’ of JFK and his administration . Cuba was JFK’s Achilles heel, says historian John Avlon .
 Disaffection with Communist influence on Cuba was growing . Castro remained in power, despite the botched invasion at the Bay of Pigs a year earlier and the policy of isolationism toward Cuba .
 I say that believing very strongly that would have been an act of prudence, not weakness . I say I believe strongly that it would be a very good thing to say 'I'm sorry'
 Sorensen implied that JFK’s public warning to the Soviets was an attempt to neutralize political criticism without incurring much military risk . The warning may have been a way of neutralizing political criticism .
 Sorensen’s comments raise the possibility that events would have unfolded differently, and that there might not have even been a crisis, had the administration selected a reference level that correctly anticipated the Soviet missile deployment . In addition to the possibility of a crisis in the 1980s,
 Sorensen: Reference level of zero nuclear missiles was carefully chosen to defuse a troublesome domestic political issue . The reference level was chosen by the South Korean government, he says . The decision did not reflect a careful analysis of the strategic implications of the missiles, he adds .
 JFK’s public commitment to no Soviet missiles on Cuba unintentionally established the standard against which the implications of missile attacks on Cuba would come to be measured . Regardless of these facts, JFK's decision to avoid any Soviet missiles was a mistake .
 Sorensen suggests JFK might have committed to a different reference level rather than risk nuclear war . JFK and others believed that Khrushchev was planning to send nuclear weapons to Cuba, he says .
 JFK would have been unwilling to do that if the military threat posed by missiles in Cuba had been his main concern, he would have refused to do so .
 Data from the second meeting on the day the missiles were discovered support Sorensen’s interpretation that the reference level was inappropriately located . The reference level has been inappropriately located, according to the data from a second meeting .
 JFK’s warnings to the Soviets against placing missiles in Cuba were based on the assumption that the Soviets had no intention of placing nuclear warheads in Cuba . JFK warned the Soviets not to place nuclear warheads on Cuba .
 "When we said we’re not going to and then they go ahead with it, and then we d o nothing, then I would think that our risks increase. But when we said . We said we . . were not going . to do it, but when they go
 A shift in the reference level to, for example, 50 nuclear missiles on Cuba might have spared the world a brush with disaster .
 JFK appears to be committed to the initial reference level of zero nuclear missiles . JFK, however, appears to have been unalterably committed to a zero nuclear missile policy .
 JFK committed to a reference point of zero nuclear missiles . This did not mean that the U.S. had to remove the missiles coercively at the risk of nuclear war .
 The announcement we didn’t say we’d go in . . . and kill them, we said we'd act . The announcement was the first time the U.S. military had gone in to kill them .
 JFK's commitment to a reference level of zero nuclear missiles can be traced to his September statements to the press, in which he drew the line beyond which the Soviets could not go .
 The nature of these statements, and the conditions under which they were made, were precisely those that should, on theoretical grounds, fix an initial reference level in place . It is not the only way to fix the initial reference levels in place.
 Explicitness in the context of reference level formation refers to the extent that the setting of the initial reference level is an observable process, and to the degree to which actions leading to the setting are subject to multiple interpretations . Explicitness is defined as the degree of the actions leading up to the
 Irrevocability refers to the extent to which behavior leading to the setting of the initial reference point cannot be reversed . Irrevocation is the extent of a person's behavior that can be reversed from the original reference point .
 Actions that are permanent or that can be reversed only at high cost are highly committing . Actions that can't be reversed can be highly committing, say experts . Actions are permanent, that can only be reversed in high cost .
 Volition refers to the extent to which the initial reference level is chosen in the absence of compelling exogenous reasons, such that feelings of personal responsibility for reference level selection are induced . Volition is defined as the level of reference levels chosen by a person with no compelling reasons for it .
 Publicity refers to the extent of actions and behavior leading to the setting of the initial reference level are widely known by a constituency that is important to the decision maker . Publicity is a key part of the process of setting a reference level .
 Explicitness, revocability, volition, and publicity all bind people to their behavior and may contribute to freezing the reference point it its initial location . Explicitness may freeze the point it's initial location.
 The statements were also irrevocable, given the vulnerability of both JFK and his administration to charges of being ‘soft on Communism’ if the line were redrawn . The statements also gave the vulnerability to both JFK's administration and his government .
 ExCom’s selection of, and commitment to, the reference point . Expectations, political pressures, and behavioral commitment operated jointly, the ExCom said .
 The expectation that the Soviets would not deploy any missiles on Cuba established the boundaries of acceptable Soviet behavior, the author says . The expectation was that no missiles would be deployed on Cuba was acceptable .
 Political pressure provided the motivation to state this expectation publicly in terms of a warning against Soviet placement of missiles in Cuba . Political pressure was the motivation for the warning .
 ‘Freeze’ the reference point, in the form of an explicit, public, and voluntary statement, helped to ‘freeze‘the reference point. Finally, behavioral commitment, in . form of . an explicit . public, public and voluntary . statement, in
 Proposition 4: The influence of cognitive factors on the selection of the reference point will be augmented by political pressures and behavioral commitment . Proponents: Political pressures, behavioral commitment will also influence selection of a reference point . Proposition 5: The reference point is a reference to a person who has a
 The application of prospect theory to the group level raises the question of how consensus is achieved on the reference point when differences in reference point among group members exist .
 If the objective is to predict group decisions, it is necessary to consider the nature of the process by which consensus is achieved . The objective of predicting group decisions is to be able to predict the outcome of a debate .
 Some individuals will have greater influence over the reference point a group adopts than will others . Others will have more influence than others . The reference point is a reference point to a group's reference point .
 It is reasonable to expect that the formal group leader will have the strongest influence . Other things being equal, it is reasonable for the group leader to have the most influence .
 This influence is likely to be augmented under conditions of threat or crisis . This influence will be augmented by conditions of crisis or threat, it is said .
 Under such conditions, groups tend to become more unified, consensus seeking, and autocratic in decision making . Groups tend to be more unified and consensus seeking in decision-making .
 In the CMC, many conditions were favorable for the group's acceptance of JFK’s reference point . JFK's reference point is the reference point for the U.S.
 JFK was respected by ExCom members; his personal stake in the decision was heightened by his political vulnerability on Cuba and by Khrushchev’s violation of his September warning against placing missiles in Cuba . Crisis atmosphere led the ExCom to accept without critical analysis JFK's reference point of
 JFK was highly personally committed to the zero nuclear missiles reference level . JFK was keenly aware of this, and others were keen to this, according to the historian .
 "I don’t think we got much time on these missiles," says President Obama . "We can't wait two weeks while we’re getting ready to roll," he says . Obama says .
 'Maybe just have to just take them out, and continue our other preparations if we decide to do that. Maybe just have just taken them out of the stadium,' he said .
 We’re certainly going to du number one; we're going to take out these missiles. We're certainly going, number one,’s number one. ‘I’m going to kill the missiles.’
 The questions will be whether, which, what I would describe as number two, which would be a general air strike, will be the question . The air strike would be the first to take place in a general strike .
 At least we’re going to d o number one, so it seems to me that we don’t have to wait very long. At least at least we're going to be number one .
 The mission of the ExCom was to devise a strategy to remove the missiles from Cuba before they could fire, but without causing war .
 All alternatives considered were coercive; all entailed considerable risk, with the risk rising in proportion to the size of the military response . The risk of a military response to a terrorist attack rises proportionately to the amount of the risk .
 The success of the ExCom was in selecting one of the less extreme means available to achieve the inherently risky objective set by Kennedy . All roads leading to the early removal of the missiles were strewn with hazards .
 Although a blockade was not the riskiest strategy available, it was one of a limited range of risky alternatives that were considered because of their potential to recover the losses suffered . A blockade was considered because it was possible to recover losses suffered.
 Having decided at the outset to remove the missiles precluded acquiescence or diplomacy and dictated a high-risk, coercive strategy . The U.S. has decided to remove missiles from North Korea .
 The options of leaving the missile bases untouched, or relying on diplomatic solutions, were almost entirely ignored during group discussions . As a result of the discussions, the options of remaining bases untouched were almost completely ignored .
 An examination of the transcripts of the first day’s meetings reveals a narrow focus on the routes, mainly military, by which the missiles might be removed . Why the missiles should be removed was rarely discussed .
 The most crucial issue, that of the impact on the U.S. of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, as mentioned was not even raised until well into the second meeting on the first day .
 The need to remove the missiles was an unexamined assumption underlying much of the discussion . The need for removing missiles from the U.S. missile range was an unthoughtful assumption .
 JFK's ability to set the terms of the discussion was clearly an important device for influencing the subsequent behavior of the ExCom . JFK’s ability to . influence the . behavior of . the . ExCom, he says, was important to influencing the . subsequent behavior .
 All ExCom members were well aware of JFK’s recent statements and commitments, which set the context within which the placement of missiles on Cuba was evaluated and evaluated .
 Proposition 5: The reference point in group crisis decision making will reflect that of the leader . Proposition 5 is the reference point for crisis decisions in crisis situations .
 A group whose leader has recently suffered losses should make a riskier decision than that of a group without such a leader . A leader who has suffered losses is at risk to lead a group with such a leadership, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In this paper, we have focused on reference level effects in group crisis decision making . We have relied on the Cuban missile crisis to examine these effects .
 The neutral reference point, which framed the issue of Soviet missiles on Cuba as a choice between losses, had its origins in the public statements made by JFK in September .
 The Kennedy administration warned the Soviets not to place nuclear missiles in Cuba . Those statements reflected the political vulnerability of the Kennedy administration on the Cuban issue .
 At the time, such exaggeration seemed inconsequential, because the Soviets appeared to have no intention of exceeding the limits set for them . At the same time, it seemed that the Soviets were not going to exceed their limits .
 JFK might have drawn the line at the point that more accurately reflected the missiles’ military significance or been more vague in his pronouncements . Had JFK realized otherwise, he might have either drawn the . line more accurately .
 J F K established a zero-missile reference point from which to evaluate the situation in Cuba . N 4 different the ExCom meetings might have been different, ExCom says .
 JFK and his advisers would have been able to contemplate whether to take out missiles . JFK would have planned how to take the missiles out, JFK's advisers say . Instead of planning how to remove missiles, JFK could have contemplated taking them out .
 In this scenario, the options of leaving the missiles in place or attempting to remove them via political or diplomatic channels would have been available .
 JFK’s earlier statements could not be ignored without suffering large certain losses . Political context, defined in part by JFK himself, provided powerful disincentives against any readjustment in the reference level .
 The President and his advisers risked even greater losses to remove missiles that he, his Secretary of Defense, and a majority of the ExCom agreed did little to threaten national security . To avoid these losses, the President and advisers risked further losses .
 This analysis is consistent with a strong status quo bias that is evident even in international conflict . This analysis shows that the U.S. should not be allowed to engage in a new conflict .
 Reference level level effects were apparent in all stages of the process leading to the decision to blockade Cuba . Reference level effects of the blockade are apparent in the process, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The problem was defined in terms of a negative deviation from a neutral point of reference . The goal was to return to the neutral reference point . Only those alternatives with the capacity to accomplish this goal were considered . The options were evaluated from the perspective of the neutral .
 These results are particularly notable, because they characterize a group decision making process . These results were particularly notable because of the group decision process .
 Individual and group levels have different influences on reference level placement that exist at the group level . One salient difference between the individual and group level is the influence on reference levels .
 A crucial influence in this case was a leader who clearly established for the group the reference level to be used . A leader who established a reference level was a key figure in the case .
 Leaders who state their opinions early may establish the reference point for the group, and reduce the likelihood that alternative reference points will be used . Leaders may be able to establish their own reference point to the group .
 The focus of this study is on the decision processes of the ExCom, but it is worth noting that from ExCom’s perspective the outcome of the decision taken was positive .
 A successful decision outcome does not necessarily mean that high quality decision making procedures have been used . A successful outcome, however, does not mean that . high quality decisions have been made .
 Janis argued persuasively that there is an imperfect link between the quality of decision making practices and the outcome of a group decision . Janis argues that there are imperfect links between quality of group decision practices and outcomes of a decision .
 Decision outcomes may be determined by actors or events that are beyond the control of the decision maker . That is because decisions may be made by actors and events beyond the decision-maker's control . Decision outcomes are often determined by an actor or event beyond the person making the decision .
 The resolution of the Cuban missile crisis depended not on the ExCom's decision but on the Kremlin’s response . This certainly applies to the Cuban Missile Crisis, which ended in 1961 .
 Janis described the decision making practices employed by the ExCom during the Cuban missile crisis as exemplary . Janis describes the decision-making practices employed during the missile crisis .
 Janis’s main points were that the ExCom displayed all major dimensions of sound decision making and showed few symptoms of groupthink . Janis: ‘The ExCom showed few signs of groupthinking.’
 Groupthink is indicated by the development of shared illusions and related norms . The groupthink is a form of groupthink where people develop shared illusions .
 These symptoms of groupthink enable groups under stress to maintain esprit de corps, but at the cost of mental efficiency, reality testing, moral judgment, and decision quality . These symptoms are symptoms of the groupthink, but also a decline in mental efficiency .
 The ExCom succeeded at preventing or remedying most groupthink symptoms by using several techniques designed to facilitate openminded inquiry and debate .
 The absence of groupthink notwithstanding, we take issue with Janis’s view that the decision to force the missiles out of Cuba can be accurately characterized as the product of high-quality decision making procedures . Janis says the decision was made by high quality decision-making procedures .
 JFK wanted to remove missiles from Cuba before they became operational, says Janis . Janis' view diverges from that of that of Janis, which is based on JFK's aim to remove the missiles, he says .
 The ExCom's uncritical acceptance of JFK’s reference point to be a significant act that had major implications for the process of group decision making and the decision that was ultimately taken . In contrast, we consider the ExCom .
 The evidence suggests that the ExCom accepted at face value JFK’s reference point. The evidence in this regard suggests that . The evidence is that the . ExCom accepts at face . value JFK's reference point .
 JFK provided a frame for the group’s decision, on which the group unquestioningly relied . The group unquestionably relied on JFK for its decision .
 As a result, options involving diplomacy or leaving the missile bases alone were precluded from consideration .
 This perspective, by including consideration of reference level effects, implies that groupthink can provide only a limited explanation for risky group decision making . This perspective is based on the fact that reference levels effects can be considered .
 Such behavior may be explained more potently by the way group members frame decisions and choose between alternatives . Such behavior can be explained by the group's frame decisions .
 Groupthink provides the mechanisms to explain the convergence of group members’ views on a poor choice, but the theory provides no clue as to the initial positions of the group members at the outset of discussion .
 Prospect theory implies that when a group adopts a reference point that frames its decision as a choice between losses, most group members will prefer the risky option over the sure loss . Prospect theory says most people will prefer risky options over sure losses . But prospect theory implies, however, that when
 Future research should address the shape of the value function for groups as opposed to individuals, study finds . The study was published in the prestigious journal Nature Nature .
 The present findings indicate that groups, like individuals, rely on some neutral reference point from which they evaluate their options in terms of gains or losses .
 Given the same reference level, loss aversion and diminishing sensitivity should be more pronounced in group than in individual attitudes toward risky options .
 A surprising finding in light of a prospect theory based analysis was the group shift toward a more cautious option than was initially favored by group members at the outset of group discussion .
 If our deliberations had been publicized, "the course that we ultimately would have taken would have been quite difTerent and filled with far greater risks," he says .
 Based on the group-polarization literature, one would have expected a risky shift . President and most of his advisers were initially in favor of an air strike on the missile sites .
 The techniques relied on by the ExCom to encourage free-flowing discussion and debate likely helped to preclude group polarization and induce the cautious shift that is observable in the final decision .
 The utility of these techniques was considerable, considering that a decision consistent with the initial predispositions of group members involved a high risk if not the certainty of nuclear war, says author .
 Analysis: Risk-seeking tendencies of ExCom were caused by the way the decision was framed . These techniques moderated, but did not eliminate, the risk-seeking tendency of the ExCom, it says .
 Anticipation on the part of group members of the public expression of the group’s decision may have shifted their individual preferences toward more socially desirable or normative values, resulting in a cautious shift .
 Robert Kennedy was instrumental in the rejection of the proposal for a surprise attack against Cuba . Kennedy's values may have been made salient by Robert Kennedy, who was instrumental to reject the plan .
 In this study, substantial opinion changes were induced in mock jurors toward a not guilty verdict a more socially acceptable position . The jury's opinion was induced by anticipation of publicly stating their preferences .
 Group polarization may also not have occurred because the majority position at the outset of discussion did not dictate the final decision . The final decision may not have been made by a majority of voters .
 The majority process often characterizes decision making for judgmental tasks . Field research on how managers actually make fast, yet high-quality, strategic decisions suggests a more judicious use of advice .
 Top management teams that are capable of such decisions typically employ a two-tier advice process . Top management team that are able to make such decisions often use two tiers of advice to make decisions .
 This process appears to describe decision making during the CMC . The discussion on the first day of meetings focused on direct military action .
 By the afternoon of the second day, the ExCom was discussing whether to launch an air strike or impose a blockade . The ExCom also discussed whether to impose an air strikes or to launch a blockade of Syria .
 These discussions were held in the absence of JFK, who as previously scheduled spent the day campaigning in Connecticut to prevent arousing suspicion .
 By his return that evening, his three most trusted advisers had adopted a position in favour of a blockade . By the evening, he had returned to the UK, and his advisers were in agreement .
 JFK refused to shift his reference point to reflect the reality of missile bases . His advisers, Secretary of Defense Robert MacNamara, Attorney General Robert Kennedy (JFK’s brother and campaign manager) and Presidential Counsel Theodore Sorensen were able to moderate the risk preferences of
 Whether these results are anomalous or reflect something important about reference level effects at the group level is a question that requires further investigation .
 Another unresolved but important issue is how decision making groups cope with differences in the reference point among group members . Another unresolved issue: how decision-making groups cope .
 Under the conditions that prevailed in the CMC, which included the perception of threat and the need to reach consensus under time pressure, the group adopted its leader’s reference point . The CMC adopted the leader's reference point.
 Prospect theory is explicit about the relationship between the neutral reference level and choice . Reference level effects appear to be very important at the group as well as the individual level, study finds .
 Such a theory would greatly enhance the utility and predictive validity of prospect theory . The theory would be used to predict the future of prospect theories .
 One possible source of a theoretical framework from which a theory of framing might be developed is control theory or cybernetics . Cybernetics is a possible theoretical framework for framing theory . Control theory is one of the theories of framing .
 Cybernetic principles concern the functioning of self-regulating systems . Cybernetics is a form of cybernetics that is self-regulation .
 The basic unit of cybernetic control is the negative feedback loop, which acts to eliminate discrepancies between the environment and relevant reference criteria . Cybernetic control can be used to control the environment of a computer .
 Cybernetic principles have been applied to general theories of human behavior . Cybernetics may help move us beyond being able to offer general guidelines for predicting reference level selection, and ultimately decisions .
 The group studied here was composed of seasoned experts, each with a distinct role to play within the group, who were dealing with an issue of great importance .
 Prospect theory can help yield an understanding of group decision processes . This case study of one such group illustrates how prospect theory can be used to understand group decision decisions .
 In this study, we have documented the use of the reference point and its effects on decision making . We have also suggested a number of determinants, some of which are unique to group decision making, such as some of the determinants .
 This analysis suggests the need for more theoretical and empirical work integrating theories of individual and group decision making under uncertainty . Although the generalizability of these findings is an open question, the findings are still open question .
 Such efforts will shed light on the act of making complex choices and suggest means by which high-quality decision making can be achieved . Such efforts are needed to help people make complex decisions, experts say .
 Chupters in the history of the American industrialetiterprise, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1962. Chupter's work was published in 1962 .
 ‘Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 52 , 3-38. Selected examples, 1950-1990’, Organizational Behavior . ‘‘Organization Behavior and . Human Decision . Processes’ is a study of organizational behavior and human decision processes .
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 55 ( 1988j, 9 1 8-926.926 . Sequential voting pattern, timing, and local majorities’, was the study .
 R ‘Status quo bias in decision making’, Jotirnal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1 , 7-59. R ’ Status quo bias’ is the result of a ‘status quo bias,’.