 The realization of a nuclear missile threat within 90 miles of the U.S. escalated into a thirteen-day siege of Cuba . The world was brought to the brink of nuclear war .
 The following documents lead us through the decision making process in Washington and Moscow that accelerated the United States toward nuclear war . The documents show the U.S. decision to go nuclear war accelerated the path to nuclear war.
 In both cases irrational fears, misunderstanding of intent, and the overwhelming protection of self-image play a role . In the case, irrational fears and misunderstanding are often to blame .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union both realized the stakes in Cuba were not worth a nuclear war . Independent cooperation succeeded as the United States and the Soviets realized it was not worth nuclear war.
 It quickly becomes apparent that the discussion of Khrushchev's motives is clouded by our judgement that Soviet actions are always taken unilaterally to further solely Soviet interests . The discussion of the Soviet leader's motives can be clouded up by the judgement that his actions were taken unilaterally .
 The conversation about motives revolves around Berlin and Turkey and using Cuba as leverage in those or other locations . Turkey and Berlin could be used to leverage in the U.S. and Cuba .
 U.S. policy makers were willing to take any risk necessary to remove missiles from Cuba . The U.K. was willing to remove the missiles, but the U.N. had to remove them .
 Just as the Soviets saw Eastern Europe as a non-negotiable strategic area, so did Cuba . Cuba was seen as an important strategic area by the Soviet Union . Cuba is now a key ally in Cuba .
 The Cuban government seemed to be denying that they were going to establish bases of their own with a Soviet base, thus making it Cuban point of view .
 "We have to set in motion a chain of events that will eliminate this base," she says . "Now, um, I do think we have to ... set in . motion" She says she wants to eliminate the base .
 "We have to think very hard about two major, uh, courses of action as alternatives," he says . "I think we, we have a very hard time," he adds .
 The other would be, if we have a few days—from the military point of view, if . we have the whole time, then I would think that, uh, there would be another course of action, President Obama says .
 The Rio Pact has been violated what acts should in, under the terms of the Rio Pact, the president says . The president of the U.S. calls for prompt action from the United States .
 State Department official: "I naturally need to think about this very hard for the next several hours, uh, what I and what my colleagues at the State Department can do about it"
 If they become operational before the air strike, I do not believe we can state we can knock them out before they can be launched; and if they're launched there is almost certain to be chaos in part of the east coast or the area, uh, in a radius of six hundred
 McCone suggested some weeks ago that one thing Mr Khrushchev may have been in mind is that he knows that we have a substantial nuclear superiority . Still, about why the Soviets are doing this, um, Mr McCone said recently, he said, is that we don't really
 "For the first time, I'm beginning really to wonder whether maybe maybe Mr Khrushchev is entirely rational about Berlin," she says .
 What you really talking about are two or three different operations. What you're really talking are two, uh, operations. "What you really talk about are ... operations.
 Secretary McNamara was talking about the airfields and SAM sites and anything else connected with, uh, missiles, he says . He says the second is the broader one, which is on airfields, SAM sites .
 Third is doing both of those things and also launching a blockade, which requires really the, uh, the, um, third and which is a larger step . Third is launching a blockage, which is the same thing as the first .
 The fourth question is the, uh, degree of consultation . And then, as I take it, the fourth question, is the degree of consent, he says .
 "You're dropping bombs all over Cuba if you do the second, uh, air, the airports, knocking out their planes," he says . "I would say that, uh . You're dropping it on all their missiles," he adds .
 The reason that you're doing it is because, uh, they're sending in these kind of missiles, is because of the threat of these missiles . Yeah. And then, then, you know, you're going to announce the heat, you'll announce the reason you're planning to
 CNN's John Sutter says Russia should not send troops back into Syria . He says it's almost incumbent upon the Russians to do so again . Sutter: If you do it again, we're going to do the same thing to Turkey or Iran .
 Those present at the meeting seemed baffled by why Khrushchev would take such a risk when it does very little strategically to change the balance of power of arms . The meeting was held at the end of the 1960s .
 CNN.com's John Sutter: "I think this is an important element here. Not so much" "Not so much," he says .
 McCone: If this is so, then what possible reason have they got for going into Cuba in the manner in which they are with surface-to-air missiles and cruise-type missiles .
 CNN.com: "These are just a few more missiles, uh, targeted on the United States. You're quite right in saying that these, these are just ... targets on the U.S. President Obama."
 JFK: "I will say, my understanding's that let's just say that, uh, they get these in there and then you can't ... get sufficient capacity so we can't, uh . with warheads"
 Bundy: 'We'd have to target them with our missiles and have the same kind of pistol-pointed-at-the-head situation as we have in the Soviet Union'
 JFK: Berlin, Berlin, he's been cautious, I mean, he hasn't been, uh …Ball: Several possibilities, Mr President. Well, there are several, several possible …JFK: … Berlin .
 I'm sure his generals have been telling him for a year and a half that he had, was missing a golden opportunity to add to his strategic capability . I think, I think you, you look at this possibility that this is an attempt to ... add to ... his strategic capabilities .
 A second consideration is that it is simply a trading ploy, that he, he wants this in so that he could, could, he could … . He wants to make sure he could do so much more in the deal .
 The American policy makers in these meetings understood that a few missiles in Cubs would not strategically change the balance of power in the Cold War . The U.S. policy makers understood that .
 Fear plays a role in the decisions that would follow, but fear also plays a part in the decision .
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with the Soviet Ambassador Anatoli Dobrynin on October 26, 1962 . Robert Kennedy was the Attorney General of the Soviet Union .
 Dobrynin met with RFK and then relayed Kennedy's message in a cable back to Moscow . Dobrynins met with Kennedy then relayed the message back to the U.S.
 Kennedy's message hinted at the potential of JFK losing control to the war hawks or circumstances in which case general war would become unavoidable . JFK's message hints at the possibility of losing control of the military to hawks .
 Whether this was a fear tactic or a recognition of the true nature of the situation is unclear . It is unclear whether this was an attempt to scare people away from the situation .
 JFK acknowledged that Cuban security was important to the Soviets and that he was willing to guarantee it as a solution to the present situation . What is clear was that JFK acknowledged .
 Kennedy also laid out a plan for a secret removal of the missiles in Turkey . Kennedy also outlined a plan to remove the missiles from the country .
 Kennedy's proposal recognized the true goals of U.S. and Soviet policy . It finds a path that satisfies both by highlighting the risks if an agreement cannot be found . The proposal recognizes the goals of the United States and Soviet Union .
 The Cuban crisis, R Kennedy began, continues to quickly worsen . We talked alone. We talk alone.
 R Kennedy: "If that is the only obstacle to achieving the regulation I mentioned earlier, then the president doesn't see any unsurmountable difficulties in resolving this issue"
 I noted that it went without saying that the Soviet government would not accept any ultimatums and it was good that the American government realized that . The Soviet government did not accept an ultimatum .
 In this regard, R Kennedy gave me a number of a direct telephone line to the White House . Kennedy noted that he knew about the conversation that television commentator Scali had yesterday with an Embassy adviser on possible ways to regulate the Cuban conflict .
 Khrushchev and Kennedy came to understand that their goals in Cuba were not worth the potential costs . The risk of events spiraling out of control was quite real, says Kennedy .
 Khrushchev identified the shared desires and areas of shared focus that could benefit the world . The letter was sent to JFK in 1964 and signed by the Soviet Union .
 He chided Kennedy for being hypocritical for claiming that Soviet missiles in Cuba were too great of a threat to U.S. security while maintaining missile bases in Turkey . He went on to say that Kennedy was hypocritical for saying that Cuba was too dangerous to the United States .
 Khrushchev promised that if his initial goal of Cuban security was guaranteed, he would be willing to remove the missiles in Cuba provided the U.S. does the same in Turkey . In the end he promised to remove them if the United States did the same thing .
 "This Hurts Me More Than It Hurts You" is the story of a young man's life .
 In history, periods of stagnation are often followed by periods of rapid change . In the past, stagnation was followed by rapid change, says CNN's John Sutter .
 JFK was elected in part by a population that was no longer content with the status quo . JFK's election was part of a movement that was not content with status quo in Washington, DC .
 People wanted progress instead of an intense standoff and mere containment, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "People wanted progress," he says. "They wanted progress"
 Each side better understood each other and realized that misunderstandings and a lack of communication could escalate into a general war . The root cause could not justify a nuclear war to any of the parties involved .
 Kennedy pushed Khrushchev to do more to reduce tension in Cuba while promising to protect Soviet ships from private attacks . In the following letter Kennedy wrote to the Soviet Union .
 It has been some time since I have written you directly, and I think it may be helpful to have some exchange of views in this private channel . I think you may be able to exchange your views in a private channel, I say .
 Cuba crisis created when strategic weapons were introduced into Cuba last year . "We can agree that the situation in that island is not yet satisfactory or reassuring to those who care for the peace of the Caribbean"
 The continued presence of Soviet forces in Cuba can never be regarded with equanimity by the people of this Hemisphere . Further withdrawals of such forces can only be helpful, says President Vladimir Putin .
 Russia says it is necessary to prevent further increase in tension and a repetition of the dangers of last fall . For example, the U.S. should not be allowed to observe Cuba, Russia says .
 Without such peaceful observation in 1962, this Hemisphere would have been confronted with intolerable danger . The people of the Hemisphere could not now accept a situation in which they were without adequate information on the situation .
 We are aware of the tensions unduly created by recent private attacks on your ships in Caribbean waters . It is for this reason that this peaceful observation must continue, and that any interference with it from Cuba would necessarily evoke whatever response was necessary .
 The efforts of this Government to reduce tensions have, as you know, have, aroused much criticism from certain quarters in this country . The efforts have been criticised by certain quarters of this country, Mr Hammond says .
 Neither such criticism nor the opposition of any sector of society will be allowed to determine the polices of this Government. But neither such criticism or opposition will be able to determine our polices .
 I have neither the intention nor the desire to invade Cuba, he says . I consider that it is for the Cuban people themselves to decide their destiny . In particular, I have no intention or desire to invasion Cuba .
 I'm determined to continue with policies which will contribute to peace in the Caribbean . I am determined to . continue with . policies which . will contribute . peace in . the Caribbean.