 It’s now clear that the drama held challenges of diplomatic strategy and political calculation far more complex than military reckoning of what was actually at stake .
 Defense Secretary McNamara asserted that placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba would have no effect on the balance of power with the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy was “obsessed” with appearances, Vidal wrote . Kennedy was a man “compulsively given to emphasizing, often with great charm, the division” between how things looked and how they really were .
 Kennedy’s intense interest in appearances was only natural, for his very attractive political persona very much depended on certain appearances that were at some variance from reality . Kennedy was a very attractive politician, but his image was often at odds with reality . He says Kennedy's interest in appearing was
 The Kennedy whom Americans came to know when he ran for president in 1960 was an avowed liberal, but one who had been a war hero . In contrast with the liberal champion, Adlai Stevenson, he gave the impression that he would be suitably tough as president .
 Pulitzer Prize-winning book Profiles in Courage won Pulitzer Prize . Pulitzer Prize winner was a student of history .
 Movie-star handsome, he had a beautiful, intelligent wife and one child . With another on the way, he was the apotheosis of the happy American family .
 In the decades after Kennedy’s assassination, Americans learned more about who he really was . In the years after his death, Americans learn more about his legacy .
 Far from being healthy and vigorous, he had Addison’s disease, severe back pain, and other ailments . Only powerful drugs allowed him to simulate good health, he said .
 Far from the ideal family man, he was in reality a compulsive womanizer . His tawdry liaisons endangered his presidency .
 Author of Profiles in Courage was not the writer of the book, as Herbert S Parmet showed in Jack . He was the superintending author, but not the author .
 Through various errors of his own making, Kennedy himself helped to bring on the collision . The ramming of his nimble little PT boat by a big Japanese destroyer called forth his acts of genuine heroism .
 The cultivation of illusions, in other words, was part and parcel of Kennedy’s political success . Kennedy's success was part of his success as a politician .
 JFK emerged a triumphant hero, the embodiment of toughness and cool intelligence under pressure . He was struck by the way illusory appearances serve as a leitmotif in the 1962 crisis .
 The run-up to the missile crisis involved some illusions conjured up, perhaps cynically, for political gain . The run up to the . missile crisis involves some illusions, perhaps . cynically .
 During the 1960 campaign, Kennedy had charged that the Eisenhower administration had allowed a “missile gap” to develop that favored the Soviet Union . Kennedy charged—falsely—that the Eisenhower Administration had allowed the gap to develop .
 The U.S. had four times as many intercontinental ballistic missiles as its rival superpower . In fact, there was a vast missile gap, but it favored the United States .
 The Soviets had plenty of medium-range ballistic missiles with a reach of 1,000-plus miles . They were “magically transformed into strategic weapons,” says historian Michael Dobbs .
 The United States remained in an overwhelmingly superior position militarily, more than sufficient to withstand a Soviet first strike and still devastate the Soviet Union . Robert McNamara’s point was that the U.S. would be able to devastate a Soviet strike .
 If the missiles in Cuba would add little to the already existing threat posed by ICBMs based in the Soviet Union, their presence surely would loom large in the minds of Americans . But if the missiles were added to the threat, they would add to the existing threat .
 The appearance, illusory but unavoidable, that the missiles made a significant strategic difference would enhance the Soviet Union’s political position in the world, says Kennedy . Kennedy's point was that the appearance of the missiles would strengthen Fidel Castro's efforts to export communism to other nations in
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had already ordered placement of the missiles . Unbeknownst to him, the missiles had already been placed in place in the Soviet Union . The missiles were placed in a range of Soviet Union missiles .
 The missiles appeared to make a big difference in the election . Yet politically politically there was no escaping the fact that the missiles appear to make big difference .
 Doing nothing in response to Khrushchev’s stealthy maneuver was never a realistic option . Doing nothing was never the realistic option for the U.S. in the world .
 At their June 1961 summit meeting in Vienna, he had given Khrushchev the impression of weakness . Confirmation of suspicion was made by the failed invasion at Cuba’s Bay of Pigs in April .
 Kennedy angered the Soviet leader with his efforts to get rid of the Castro regime . Furthermore, Kennedy had angered him with his determined efforts to remove the regime .
 In his mind, the missiles in Cuba were not meant to be used, but rather were “defensive,” deployed in order to ward off an American invasion . The missiles were deployed to reduce the Soviet missile gap in Cuba .
 Kennedy planned to unveil their presence after U.S. congressional elections in November . Kennedy, he thought, would accept it as a fait accompli, just as the Kremlin had tolerated the presence of U.K. nuclear missiles in Turkey .
 He lacked a plan for what to do if the Americans discovered them first . Compounding the mistake, he lacked an idea of how to deal with the problem .
 When the missiles and sites were detected, Kennedy and his advisers viewed Khrushchev’s secret move as unprovoked aggression, and were especially angry about the deceit involved .
 Stern suggests that Khrushchev would have found the deployment far more difficult to thwart . Ironically, Stern suggests, had Khrushchchev’s advice and openly deployed the missiles “as a legitimate act of bilateral diplomacy,” would have been more difficult .
 In the event, Kennedy exposed the secret ploy and announced the blockade of ships heading for Cuba in a television address to the nation on Monday, October 22 . The blockade was the first of its kind in Cuba .
 Americans felt for the first time that nuclear war was more than just an abstract possibility . After he spoke, Americans felt more than a possibility of nuclear war . Americans felt that they were at risk of war .
 I was a junior at Brown that fall, and I recall the quiet dread evident everywhere I went in Providence, Rhode Island . "The quiet dread" was evident everywhere he went, he says .
 Fidel Castro urged Khrushchev to use his nuclear weapons . Kennedy brothers secretly offered to get rid of U.S. missiles in Turkey in exchange for Soviet withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuba .
 Any one of these incidents could have led to a nuclear exchange between the two superpowers . A nuclear exchange could have taken place between the U.S. and Russia .
 Kennedy and his advisers strained to discern the intentions, and anticipate the responses, of the other side . Kennedy and advisers strained .
 The next morning, Saturday, the Americans learned that most of the MRBM sites on Cuba were now fully operational . The U.S. photo interpreters say most of Cuba's MRBM facilities are now fully functional .
 They had to assume that nuclear warheads for the missiles were available . The North Korean government had to rely heavily on nuclear warheads .
 Khrushchev offered removal of weapons if U.S. withdrew its missiles from Turkey . The letter was reported by the news media . The U.K. withdrew the missiles if the United States withdrew the weapons .
 NATO had put the Jupiter missiles in Turkey to serve as a “nuclear trip wire, linking the security of Turkey and other NATO countries irrevocably to the U.S.” Dobbs says . The Jupiter missiles were put in Turkey as a "nuclear tripwire"
 The missiles had been installed only recently, they were already obsolete . Though the missiles had only recently been installed, they had already been obsolete .
 The Jupiters’ deficiencies were not news to Khrushchev, according to Fursenko and Naftali . Khrushchchev was not happy with the deficiencies of the Soviet Union, they say .
 NATO has little confidence in the missiles’ deterrent value, says KGB source . NATO had little faith in their deterrent value and expected to replace them with Polaris subs, he says .
 In Moscow as in the West, illusory appearances sometimes had their advantages . In Moscow, the Russian capital has a reputation for its lack of transparency .
 Kennedy advisers weighed heavily on Kennedy’s advisers . That same illusion and its political and diplomatic consequences weighed heavily . Kennedy's advisers were aware of that illusion .
 Kennedy’s national security adviser warned that removing the Jupiter missiles now would spark outrage among NATO allies . The Jupiter missiles were militarily useless, but Kennedy's national security .
 Bundy suggested that the U.S. ignore Khrushchev’s letter calling for a no-invasion pledge, and ignore his Saturday proposal . Bundy was the first person to suggest that the United States should ignore the proposal, despite Robert Kennedy's attempt to take credit .
 Though the quarantine had been effective, it could not get rid of the missiles already in Cuba, he said . The quarantine was effective, but the missiles were still in Cuba .
 If the U.S. attacked Cuba, Khrushchev retaliated with an attack on Turkey or Berlin, Kennedy said . NATO allies’ perception of a Cuba-Turkey trade would change dramatically, he said .
 Kennedy followed Bundy’s stratagem, but added a nod to the Cuba-Turkey deal . And so, in his written response to Khrushchev, Kennedy used the tactic .
 As the ExComm meeting broke up, Kennedy invited a select group of eight advisers—including McNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, and Bundy—into the Oval Office to consider what Robert Kennedy, who was to deliver the formal letter, should say to him .
 JFK also wanted his brother to say more to Dobrynin about the Cuba-Turkey trade . JFK wanted to talk more about Cuba and Turkey trade . But JFK's brother wanted to know more about the Cuban trade .
 Rusk suggested that Bobby say that there could be no public deal, but assure Dobrynin privately that the president would withdraw the Jupiters soon after the Cuban crisis was resolved . Rusk said that Bobby would withdraw them after the crisis was over .
 If the Soviets made any reference to this assurance in public in public, it would be null and void . However, if any reference was made in public it would not be made public . The Soviets would not have made such a reference in public .
 Rusk’s suggestion dissolved the conflict between the illusory appearance of betraying a NATO ally and the reality that the missiles in Turkey were hardly worth the risk of nuclear war . Rusk: The missiles are hardly worth risking a nuclear war.
 All present agreed to tell no one about the confidential assurance being offered to Khrushchev . All present also agreed to keep quiet about the offer .
 If Khrushchev rejected Kennedy’s terms, U.N. Secretary-General U. Thant would publicly call for the two superpowers to remove their missiles from Cuba and Turkey . Rusk would arrange it so that if Khrushcheren rejected Kennedy's terms, United
 Khrushchev's acceptance of Kennedy’s offer the next morning, Sunday, October 28, obviated the need for a secret back-up plan . JFK's offer was accepted by the next day, Sunday .
 The Soviet premier decided to accept Kennedy’s offer of a no-invasion pledge in return for removal of the Cuba missiles even before he received word of his private assurance on the Turkish missiles . Robert Kennedy's private assurance was private .
 Behind the scenes, both Khrushchev and Kennedy had been looking for a way out of the war . The two men had been trying to find a way to get around the world .
 That appraisal goes too far in rehabilitating Khrushchev, a henchman of Stalin’s, who was complicit in his murderous crimes . That is too far .
 Khrushchev backed down from his rash scheme . Still, humanity remains in the debt for backing down from the scheme .
 Kennedy emerged from the ordeal with his reputation greatly enhanced—and rightly so . Kennedy's reputation has been greatly enhanced since his arrest .
 The day after the crisis ended, Kennedy feared people would wrongly conclude that in dealing with the Russians, sheer toughness sufficed . Kennedy, ever conscious of appearances, told Schlesinger he feared people might wrongly conclude .
 President Richard Nixon intended to use his enhanced reputation for being tough with the Russians to help him win reelection in 1964 . He wanted to use it politically useful, and not merely to help win reelection .
 Kennedy worried that his ability to attempt such an overture would be damaged if Americans discovered the secret deal he had made on the Turkish missiles . Kennedy was worried that the deal would be damaging if Americans found out about it .
 Rumors surfaced in influential circles that there had been a Cuba-Turkey trade, according to Naftali and Fursenko . So when rumors surfaced, he acted to squelch them, they said, by contriving to blame them on his United Nations ambassador, Adl
 This charge was grossly unfair to Stevenson, Kennedy said . Kennedy, who had read the article before publication, let the charge stand .
 The article caused a stir, embarrassed Stevenson, and—in a fitting coda to this game of shadows—it achieved Kennedy’s purpose . It quashed rumors of a secret trade while preserving the illusory but useful appearance that in the moment of supreme crisis, the president