 Fuller Theological Seminary's celebration of the new school year was held on September 23 at First United Methodist Church on Colorado Boulevard . Fuller Seminary students will celebrate the new year at the church .
 Cassidy, a 1963 graduate, was awarded a Distinguished Alumnus Award at the Fuller service in recognition of his leadership of African Enterprise . Cassidy launched African Enterprise during his student days in 1961 .
 AE is at work in ten nations across Africa practicing ""multilevel evangelism"" in Africa's cities and making inroads into Africa's challenging social problems while preaching the gospel . AE is now working in ten countries across Africa and is working on a mission in Africa .
 Widows, orphans, street children and those who have been Reconciling sexually exploited in countries such as Rwanda, Burundi, Ghana, Kenya and Zimbabwe are given job training and counseling to help them succeed . Widows and orphans, orphans and street children are given jobs training and
 Fuller's Dean of Intercultural Studies reported that in 1965 there were twice as many Muslims as Christians . Logan, who had survived the across Africa, was among the survivors .
 Nazi air raid on 380,000,000 Christians and 320,000 Muslims . Today, he said, the numbers stand at catastrophic Nazi air raids on Christian and Muslim .
 Mike was orphaned as a result of the difference . He is now in the care of an orphaned man in the UK .
 AE has been a pioneer in training African missionaries and only in 2011 did he get to in their home areas through the help of local church bodies . AE's staff stays small while their efforts reach from tragedy, Dresden to bottom across the continent .
 Such stories take us to the Telecommunications in highest levels of reconciliation . the new nation of Souther n Sudan. Christian of the Minister of Christian Christian of Sudan .
 A nthony Kevin ""Tony"" Dungy is a former professional American football player . Thanks a million times for your September 2012 letter .
 Curtis May was head coach of the Tampa Bay Mariah Thompson Buccaneers from 1996 to Inglewood, CA Curtis May, publisher 2001 and Indianapolis Colts head coach from 2002 Dear Curtis, to 2008 Dear Curtis .
 Tony is a devout Christian who openly confesses to his faith in God and prays publicly . Tony is the son of Marilyn & Barry Fall .
 Chandler, AZ mark of his life is his love for and emphasis on family . Another hall of honor is the love for his wife and family .
 He was taught the value of a good education from early childhood . Curtis, the author of a new book, Mending education and good decision making. Curtis .
 Ben Carson Sr. said that Tony Dungy is a true hero because his life is a testimony to the fact if you 'do your best and let God do the rest,' not only will success follow, but also your life will have a positive impact on others .
 Tony Dungy's life is a living testimony of a man's faith in God, according to the Banning, CA 92220 Ste.C. Ste.-C #108 . Dungy is a former NFL coach .
 P eter McGuire was once a ""career terrorist"" for . Protestant paramilitary organization in see them as opportuaries .
 Joe Doherty is a former IRA nities, to react conmember who had spent 20 years in prison for structively."" murder . Doherty had been sentenced to 20 years for structurally."" murder. Doherty was convicted of two counts of murder in 2007 .
 Gleich and his co-workers work with at-risk leagues in their forties . They know that youth convincing the next generation to shun the the standard cliché paramilitary recruiters is key .
 Irish peace accords don't always work at the grassroots, say activists . They are helping the Irish peace accord take hold at grassroots . They're helping the accords take hold of the grassroots .
 Two teachers, Ulus, a Turk, and Nicos, a knows that honest dialogue and encounter is Greek Cypriot, utilize youth's love for soccer as a sometimes necessary to dig through the ""archaefocal point for cultural exchanges and viewing ology of revenge""
 More than 35,000 students have been trained in peace activism at the School for Peace . Only when the the other side as human. structural problems stemming from economics .
 Japanese Yes, the ruffled dove of peace still flies. School texts ignored the realities.
 South Korean youth together go beyond the needs of the present to share humanitarian missions and to study . Unpredictable events are to be expected and conflict resolution. grass-roots, individual initiatives usually outlast official government policies .
 Narasingham was a Tamil who left his home in northern Sri Sturdy Optimism Lanka when a long and bloody civil war broke in 1982 .
 Narasingham began to build houses for Education in Tubingen, Germany . The Institute for Peace reports the civil war in the region .
 The Institute's war widows and orphans, first ten, then 65, then efforts are rooted in hard-edged reality . The Institute of War Widows and Orphans is based in New York .
 A school for the deaf, a center for street for journalists, a school for children and an organic farm . Yet they stress optimism. Then know that war is a much more attractive scoop than a scoop .
 This is ""micropossess substantial experience in peacemaking peacem making" Michael Gleich in ""How to builds from the ground up" says Gleich .
 No culture on earth is without program that ORM and Reconcile have been forms of diplomacy and appeasement... rituals of applauding and promoting in recent years . ORM has been a form of diplomacy in the past few years .
 To benefit from them we must give peace to possible and deeply rooted patterns of our best . We need to give peace and give peace in order to benefit from their success .
 We need awareness, self-knowledge, negativism and conflict can be turned around empathy and rhetorical talent to approach conworldwide. We need empathy, self knowledge, and conflict, to turn around empathy .
 The Soviets' reckless act 90 miles off American political parties forced President John F Kennedy's (1961Cold War,"" or at least send overt aid to the other 1963) hand . Bush was urged by vociferous members of both the U.S. political parties to stand up
 President ruled out both air strikes and invasion . But he remembered how earlier reform feared what the escalation could imply . movements had been crushed in Eastern Europe .
 The President's October 22, 1962, televised address October 23, 1989, called for a blockade of all Soviet ships bound for government . The West German wrote the West German calling for the blockade, then in tense negotiations with Cuba .
 President. wrote the German President. it gave time for Russian leaders to think about their Russian leaders .
 In 1991 he and morning a much sterner note arrived from Moscow . This second letter provoked renewed consternation . In 1991 the Soviet leader Mikhail Mikhail Gorchkopch wrote a second letter . Gorchkovchopch: 'In 1991, he and his family were in
 Radio Moscow trimmed the superannounced the dismantling of the missiles on Saturday night, October 28 . Radio Moscow said the missiles were dismantled .