 1945 July 16 United States explodes the U.S. nuclear bomb . July 16 is the date of the first atomic bomb detonation in the United States .
 Soviet Union detonates its first atomic bomb, Joe 1, at Semipalatinsk in Kazakhstan . Joe 1 was the first atomic weapon to be detonated by Soviet Union .
 First British atomic bomb, Hurricane, was tested at Monte Bello Islands, Australia, with a yield of 25 kilotons February 13 . First French nuclear test occurs at Reganne, Algeria, in the Sahara Desert . Gerboise Bleue was a copy of the Fat Man
 Close the Missile Gap currently far behind United States in terms of number of missiles . Verbal threats no longer effective with overwhelming evidence of United States superiority .
 The United States has missiles pointing at us, lets see how they feel now . Let's see how the U.S. reacts to the threat of missiles .
 Negotiate – United States should offer the Soviet Union a deal . USSR remove missiles in Cuba . United States withdraw her nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy . U.S. should offer a deal to remove missiles from Cuba and remove them .
 U.S. should offer the Soviet Union a deal to remove missiles in Cuba, remove them from Turkey and Italy . United States should offer a deal .
 27 Invasion – Send United States troops to Cuba to overthrow Castro's government . Missiles could then be put out of action and the Soviet Union could no longer use Cuba as a military base . Considerations."", ""width"": ""800""
 Use nuclear weapons against Cuba and/or the Soviet Union . Use nuclear arms against Cuba, Russia and Cuba .
 The 1,113 prisoners captured during the Bay of Pigs invasion were exchanged for $50 million in food, drugs, medicine and cash . Castro exchanged the prisoners for food and medicine, cash and other items .
 The Soviet Union became determined to have a nuclear capability equal to the U.S. The USSR resolved its nuclear ambitions in the 1970s .
 The United States became convinced that the Soviet Union would not go to war over another communist country . The U.S. decided to take action against the Soviet Russia . United States RESOLVE .
 It has been argued that this encouraged the U.S. to help attempts to overthrow socialist and communist governments in Vietnam, Nicaragua and Grenada . The United States was involved in the overthrow of communist governments .
 Were Castro and Khrushchev justified in placing nuclear missiles in Cuba? Are they justified in doing so? Castro, Khruschev and Khruschchev justified?
 If Venezuela began receiving nuclear warheads and missile shipments, what would you recommend as an effective response? What do you think? Share your thoughts with CNN iReport .
 Monroe Doctrine – The United States wishing to prevent any foreign power becoming becoming. The U.S. and Latin America 1823 Monroe Doctrine . Monroe Doctrine was created to protect the United States from becoming a foreign power .
 PowerPoint by Mr Hataway Created February 26, 2003 . Revised March 16, 2011 .
 Khrushchev makes veiled references to a plot (How would the U.S. feel. How would the United States feel. The United States would feel. Khrushchevitch makes veiled reference to a possible plot . Khrushchchev makes references to the plot to get the