 During Oct.-28 1962, Washington and Moscow sparred on the edge of thermonuclear war . The lessons remain of fundamental importance. The lessons are important for future generations .
 They include difficulty of securing accurate intelligence, and the unpredictability of events, they say .
 On Oct. 1962, U.S. reconnaissance photos revealed the Soviet Union placing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, despite contrary assurances . On Oct., 1962, United States reconnaissance photos showed the Soviets placing offensive missiles in the country .
 National security adviser McGeorge Bundy informed President John F Kennedy . After thorough review, national security adviser informed President Kennedy .
 Earlier, the White House curtailed Cuba reconnaissance flights, resuming only because McCone insisted . Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev’s motivations included the United States missile buildup and secret efforts to kill Fidel Castro .
 Photographic evidence of the missiles arrived just before they would become operational . But there were already indicators that something of this nature was underway .
 At the start of the crisis, there was strong sentiment, especially among the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for a conventional air attack followed by invasion of Cuba . JFK imaginatively decided instead on a naval quarantine as the first step .
 His televised speech on Oct. 31 demanded removal of the missiles and laid out initial moves . His televised address was the first to demand removal of missiles from the region .
 Until Khrushchev agreed to withdrawal of missiles, Armageddon loomed . The withdrawal of the missiles loomed until the end of the war with Russia in October .
 Years after the crisis, surviving policymakers from Cuba, the Soviet Union and the United States initiated a series of meetings . The meetings have revealed important new information about the Cuban crisis .
 Soviet commanders in Cuba already had shorter-range nuclear-armed missiles . They had authority to use them in the event of an American invasion in Cuba .
 Soviet naval officer Vasili Arkhipov refused to concur with two other senior officers who favored launching a nuclear torpedo . One Soviet sub nearly launched against the harassing U.S. Navy ships .
 Bundy’s history of the nuclear age, “Danger and Survival,” published a quarter century after the crisis, revealed JFK accepted, while publicly rejecting, a Soviet proposal for a Cuba-Turkey missile trade . Bundy: Almost single-handedly, he defused the
 When tensions mounted, the president shrewdly suggested breaks . The initial pressure for military attack dissipated, but the initial pressure dissipated . When tensions mount, President Obama suggested breaks.
 JFK deftly delayed intense pressures for war, while keeping discussion going . Kennedy deftly avoided intense pressure for war . Kennedy: "I'm not going to go to war"
 A direct communications “hotline” between the Kremlin and the Pentagon greatly improved communication . The Kremlin-U.S. relations between Russia and the United States has been strained in recent years .
 Further lessons of the crisis include the importance of disciplined open-minded intelligence work and communicating with opponents . Further lessons should be learned from the crisis, say experts .
 U.S. troops are in the Mideast close to forces from Russia, Iran, Israel, Syria, Syria and armed insurgent groups . Then and now, United States presidential leadership is essential, says CNN's Tom Charity .
 Americans are preoccupied domestically, and largely ignore foreign policy . Yet, Americans remain preoccupied with domestic issues, and ignore foreign policies .
 Vasili Arkhipov was posthumously honored by the Future of Life Institute in Boston, Massachusetts . He was killed by a bomb blast in 2011 .
 Utah Today: When your adventure partner keeps demanding gummy bears Utah Today . Start your day with the top stories you missed while you were sleeping . Utah Today is Utah Today.