 Less explicit acknowledgment has been given to the successful detection and identification of the missiles in Cuba that permitted the American leadership to take the initiative in moving to obtain their removal .
 The role of U.S. intelligence in the crisis is far from the only important issues with respect to the role of United States intelligence in Syria . Yet these are far more important issues than the other .
 An erroneous estimate was made shortly before the discovery of the missiles has been known for many years . Far too little attention has been given to the underlying reasons for that failure, says author .
 Intelligence did identify the missiles in sufficient time to allow U.S. action to compel their withdrawal . Also, there has been criticism of delays in reconnaissance flights that might have made possible earlier discovery .
 There remain, however, other questions with respect to performance, including shortcomings in identification of other significant Soviet military elements sent to Cuba .
 These shortcomings were not known for many years, indeed not until more complete disclosures of the actual Soviet deployments had been made by Russian sources, and partial access to Soviet archives .
 A second and even more important purpose is to clarify why errors or shortcomings occurred in U.S. intelligence collection, analysis, and estimation assessments . The U.N. should clarify why mistakes occurred in intelligence collection and analysis .
 A third purpose is to consider the impact on the crisis if more full and accurate intelligence had been available . United States INTELLIGENCE 19: U.S. intelligence had not been accurate .
 More information would have made the crisis more difficult to resolve, if indeed not intractable . The usual assumption is, and probably should be, that more and better intelligence provides the basis for better policy .
 It may be useful to see if one can generalize any lessons from U.S. experience in the crisis on the relationship between intelligence and policy .
 The organization and process of intelligence in the U.S. government at the time was described . It may be useful at the outset to describe briefly the organization .
 The 'intelligence community', as it is called, comprised several independent agencies apart from the Central Intelligence Agency . The director of which is also the Director of Central Intelligence with a loose coordinating role .
 The largest elements by far are several military organizations under the Department of Defense . The largest element of the military is the U.S. military .
 The Defense Intelligence Agency had only been created about a year before the crisis . The agency was only created a year ago .
 If any USIB members dissented from the final NIE as approved by USIB and issued by the DCI, they could include a footnote of dissent in the Estimate .
 Such dissents were not uncommon, but there were none in any of the SNIEs relating to the Cuban missile crisis . There were no such dissents in the SNIES relating to that crisis .
 Various technical committees of the USIB members dealing with such subjects as overhead reconnaissance, and nuclear and missile programs in 20 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS the USSR . the USSR, and other intelligence organizations such as CIA's National Photographic Intelligence Center
 Intelligence collection included espionage and other forms of human intelligence . No CIA agents in Cuba or the Soviet Union were able to provide firm evidence of the Soviet missile deployment .
 Some information was received from other Western intelligence organizations . Some of the information has been received from the U.S.
 The United States military intelligence agencies tracked the Soviet arms shipping to Cuba . The U.S. military intelligence agency tracked the shipments to Cuba.
 Aerial reconnaissance around and over Cuba by CIA until October 1962 was the most important direct means of monitoring the military buildup in Cuba, including the discovery and the monitoring of the construction of missile bases . U.S. Air Force and United States Navy aircraft were also involved .
 Satellite photographic reconnaissance was not directed against Cuba in 1962 . It was directed by satellite photographic reconnaissance in Cuba .
 Intelligence organizations of the armed forces including the staff of the Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic were given overall responsibility not only for operation of quarantine, but also for US military buildup for contingent intervention in Cuba .
 A Special National Intelligence Estimate on ""The Military Buildup in Cuba" was issued on 19 September 1962 . The estimate was issued by the CIA .
 Director of Central Intelligence John A McCone was not in Washington when the SNIE was issued . Acting Director, Lieutenant General Marshall S Carter, and other chiefs of the intelligence community approved the estimate without any dissent .
 The task of course was to estimate what in fact the Soviet Union would do, and the estimate was wrong . Nonetheless, it is clear that in this case the American estimators had a better grasp of what would serve Soviet interests .
 It is difficult to say what would have been the correct estimate for the U.S. intelligence community to have made in September 1962 .
 There was insufficient evidence to justify a conclusion that Soviet missiles would be placed in Cuba, the author says .
 In the absence of clear evidence of deployment, the estimate had to rest on an assessment of Soviet intentions . Past record tended to support the conclusion that the Soviet leaders would not deploy strategic nuclear missiles in Cuba .
 SNIE probably should have concluded that Soviet leaders probably would not place nuclear missiles in Cuba . In retrospect, the SNIE had concluded that the Soviet leaders would probably not place such a missile in Cuba.
 At the same time, however, it should have given more weight and attention to the possibility that they would do so . The U.S. should give more weight to the fact that they might do so, however .
 President Kennedy's public statements of 4 and 13 September stated, correctly, that the U.S. had no evidence of the deployment of strategic missiles in Cuba . Kennedy's statements were correct .
 His statements of policy were made before the SNIE was written, but were consonant with the general consensus reflected in the estimate that the Soviet leaders probably would not take that step .
 The statements were intended in part to reassure the American public, but also to warn the Soviet leaders . The U.S. government issued the statements intended to reassure Americans and warn the Soviets .
 The president might have been less categorical if he had believed the chances of such deployment were greater . But he would still have wanted to warn the Soviet leaders .
 A more open-ended and cautionary SNIE would have made no essential difference, says SNIE . The SNIE is a cautionary measure that would have led to an improvement in the situation .
 A firm statement of the United States position should have preceded the Soviet decision . The U.S. should have issued a warning to the Soviet leaders, the author says .
 An intelligence alert to the possibility would have to have been made in the spring of 1962, before the decision was made in Moscow in May and June .
 In retrospect, that should have been done, it would have forced the Soviet leaders to weigh more carefully . It might have led them to refrain from including strategic mediumand intermediate-range nuclear missiles in the military contingent they were contemplating dispatching to Cuba .
 In the early spring of 1962, there not only was no evidence of possible Soviet deployment of missiles to Cuba, there could not have been, inasmuch as no one had even posed the matter in Moscow . No one had ever posed the issue in Moscow, and no one even posed
 The potential military and political value to the Soviet Union of placing such weapons in Cuba could have been given attention . The Soviet Union could have given attention to the potential military value of the weapons .
 In March-April 1962 the likelihood of such a Soviet action was seen as very low . The likelihood of any Soviet action in 1962 was thought to be very unlikely . In 1962, the chances of such an action were seen as low .
 Castro in March had moved to purge key old Moscow-line communist leaders from his regime . Some in the U.S. intelligence community saw this as causing a significant rift in Cuban-Soviet relations .
 The evidence before July 1962 tended to support an estimate that a major Soviet military buildup in Cuba was not likely . The evidence suggests that the Soviet buildup was unlikely .
 Most criticisms of U.S. intelligence have centered on the disinclination (with individual exceptions, notably DCI McCone) to recognize a greater likelihood of Soviet deployment of missiles when it became apparent from July into October that a major buildup of other arms was underway .
 McCone tied his own hunch to the appearance after late August of a network of surface-to-air anti-aircraft missile complexes . McCone says there was no necessary relationship .
 Castro sought such air defense missiles as early as September 1961, says Castro . Decision in Moscow to send them was made in April 1962, more than a month before the idea of sending nuclear-armed medium range missiles was considered and decided upon .
 The buildup of weapons to Cuba that began in July 1962 was detected in a timely way and reported . President Kennedy's public warnings of 4 and 13 September led to public warnings . The buildup began July 1962 and led to the Kennedy's warning of the attacks .
 There are reports from agents on the island and especially from refugees interviewed after leaving Cuba of suspicious military, including possible missile, activities in Cuba .
 A few reports from Opa-Locka received in Washington that, in retrospect, probably were valid sightings of the medium-range missiles . Only in late September and early October were a United States INTELLIGENCE 23 few reports .
 Other bits of intelligence were noted that could not alone be credited but, along with suspicions by McCone and others, did lead to continuing efforts in aerial reconnaissance .
 Some ambiguous or equivocal intelligence indications in September-October were noted but did not command as much attention as, in hindsight, they should have . The U.S. intelligence community is aware of these indications .
 After the missiles were discovered, it was recognized that these particular ships had undoubtedly brought in the missiles in early to mid-September . The missiles were found in September .
 The most significant report was one received from a recently arrived refugee in Cuba in mid-September, processed at Opa-Locka . The report was received from one of the recently arrived refugees in Cuba .
 The refugee had personally seen a convoy of SS-4 missiles near Havana on 12 September . He accurately described and readily identified the missiles among missile photographs he was shown .
 In retrospect, these were evidently SS-4 missiles unloaded from the Omsk, the first Soviet ship carrying the missiles to arrive in Cuba, on 9 September . The missiles were taken from a ship that arrived in Cuba in September .
 The screening center sent its report immediately, and it was received by key analysts on 21 September, with general distribution on 27 September . The screening report was sent to key analysts, with the general distribution of the report .
 DIA analysts evaluated it as 'potentially significant', although not in itself sufficient to reach a firm conclusion . DIA said it was 'potential significant' but not enough to make a firm decision on whether to take action .
 CIA analysts then took seriously the possibility of SS-4 missiles in Cuba . Both CIA and DIA analysts then considered the possibility . Both analysts later took seriously .
 Unconfirmed reports of SA-2 surface-toair missile sites in Western Cuba . Reports directly contributed to targeting area around San Cristobal in Pinar del Rio province . Coupled with suspicions in DIA as to the pattern of . surface toair missile . sites .
 On 3 October the San Cristobal area was given top priority for attention . The San Cristabal area was taken top priority to attention .
 The interagency Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance agreed to fly U-2 reconnaissance over that area as soon as weather permitted . The U.2 reconnaissance mission will take place in the area .
 On 14 October a U-2 photographed the first MRBM sites under construction at San Cristobal . The U.S. Air Force has flown over to the site .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk was greatly concerned after 10 September about the consequences if a U-2 were shot down over Cuba . Rusk requested peripheral flights with slant photography .
 The weather was very bad during most of September and the first half of October, causing many planned flights to be canceled or postponed . The second reason was that the weather was bad .
 Even those flights that were flown in this period were largely unproductive, owing to bad weather . Bad weather also hampered flights in the last few days .
 There was a transfer of responsibility for such flights from the CIA to the U.S. Air Force . That transfer did not cause any delay in flights .
 At best, however, the missile sites would only have been discovered a few weeks earlier . Coverage in September in most cases would have shown nothing yet identifiable as missile site construction .
 A week or two earlier in October (when weather caused delay) would not have changed the situation faced by the President and his advisers . Discovery a week or a couple of weeks earlier would not change the situation, CNN says .
 The real shortcoming in the intelligence estimative process was not owing to flaws in intelligence collection, or analysis, but in assessments of Soviet intentions and motivations for placing missiles in Cuba . The Soviet Union's motivations were behind the decision to place missiles in the country .
 Judgments by historians as well as surviving Russian participants in the events vary on the relative weight of these considerations in the Soviet decision .
 President Kennedy and his advisers placed greatest weight on Khrushchev's desire to enhance the Soviet position in the strategic balance and strengthen the Soviet global political position . President Kennedy's advisers, including Director of Central Intelligence McCone, and the National Intelligence Estimates placed greatest .
 Intelligence analysts initially gave attention to the factor of U.S. INTELLIGENCE 25 deterring an American attack on Cuba . This consideration was almost entirely absent from the coordinated National Intelligence Estimates and from the discussions by policy makers and senior advisers .
 In the actual discussions in the ExComm, McCone emphasized the latter objective . In available records, he never mentioned the former objective .
 Most discussion in the ExComm centered on the theme that Khrushchev was probably seeking to bolster his stance both militarily and politically . The ExComm was the subject of much discussion on the topic .
 For the President and most of his advisers the central concern was a renewed Soviet push to eject the West from Berlin, and they believed this was Khrushchev's principal motivation .
 U.S. must stand firm and, one way or another, get the Soviet missiles out of Cuba . The consensus from the outset was that the United States would stand firm .
 Two Special National Intelligence Estimates were prepared after discovery of the missile deployment, on 19 and 20 October . They were prepared to aid policy makers in gauging probable Soviet reactions to the alternative American actions .
 Estimates also provided the first occasions for the intelligence community to assess the Soviet motivations in placing the missiles in Cuba .
 The second estimate also stated more strongly than had the first that the likelihood of a further continuing missile buildup if the United States acquiesced . The U.S. would not have to comply with the second estimate .
 In the first ExComm meetings, on 16 October, several participants referred, but almost in passing, to the inadequacy of Soviet intercontinental missile forces .
 SNIEs recognized the Soviet purpose of enhancing their strategic forces in the intercontinental balance, but did not note that the balance was heavily tilted in favor of the United States . SNIE: The Soviet leaders might have a defensive motivation .
 The defense of Cuba was noted at the outset by CIA analysts as a primary Soviet objective, but did not appear at all in the formal interagency or CIA intelligence assessments that went to the ExComm and the President .
 Only a CIA briefing note for use with foreign heads of government, drafted on 21 October, noted that one reason that the Soviet leaders 'believed decisive action necessary' was that 'there seemed to be mounting pressure in the United States for intervention' in Cuba .
 Soviet leaders saw 'opportunity to 1.2 billion' in the Soviet Union, memo says . Soviet leaders wanted '1.3 billion' of Soviet Union territory .
 Demonstrate that the U.S. can no longer prevent advance of Soviet offensive power even in its own hemisphere; 2. Demonstrate that the United States can . no longer . prevent advance . of Soviet . offensive power . Demonstrate . that the . United States . can no
 Significantly expand Soviet capabilities for initial attack on U.S. targets; 3. Significantly . expand Soviet capability for initial . attack on United States targets; . Significantly. expand Soviet . capabilities for first attack on . United States .
 In the earliest meetings, members of the ExComm gave great weight to the question of when the missiles would become operational .
 Both McNamara and Rusk argued at the very first meeting on 16 October that it was important that an air strike, if one was decided upon, should be made before the missiles could become operational .
 SNIE later that same day stated that two regiments, 16 launchers, 'must be considered operational now' By that time, although the ExComm was still considering an early air strike, they no longer considered it necessary to give so much weight to the operational status of the Soviet missiles
 CIA says there is no sign of a crash effort to attain the earliest possible capability . CIA was able to report that while work was continuing apace on the construction of the missile launch sites, there was no sign .
 CIA concluded that 'the Soviet objective in Cuba is to attain full operational capability at all sites as soon as possible, rather than to prepare each site for an emergency launch capability' All 24 MRBM launchers believed to be operational by 27 October .
 U.S. intelligence was not able to identify presence of nuclear warheads in Cuba at any time during the crisis .
 The question was raised in the ExComm on several occasions, but no information was acquired that could positively answer it . Although the question was . raised in . several times, no . information was obtained that could . positively answer .
 There was a general consensus, shared in the intelligence community, and by policy makers, that the availability of nuclear warheads in Cuba must be assumed .
 At the onset of the crisis, McNamara had raised the question of whether the nuclear warheads for the missiles were there, and emphasized the importance of locating the warheads . McNamara raised the issue on 16 October .
 McGeorge Bundy wondered briefly whether the Soviet leaders were prepared to bluff over the warheads . Bundy even wondered briefly if the Soviets were willing to bluff . Bundy: "I'm not sure what I think about the nuclear weapons"
 Secretary of State George Ball raised the question as to whether the whole deployment might be a deception to provoke the United States into some action, but that speculation was quickly rejected . General Taylor and Deputy 28 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS .
 In general, as noted above, it was taken as a deliberate assumption that the nuclear warheads were there .
 During the first week of secret deliberations on what to do about the Soviet missiles in Cuba, from 16 to 23 October, United States intelligence provided very good support to policy makers .
 The deployment of medium-range missiles in Cuba had been detected and identified in a timely way, officials say . The deployment was detected and detected in a time-critical way, they say .
 The nature, location, scale and operational status of the missile deployment were accurately determined despite some Soviet camouflage and deception . The nature of the deployment was accurately determined by the Soviet deception .
 Although nuclear warhead presence and storage was not confirmed, absence of this information was not critical because it was assumed that the nuclear warheads for the missiles were there . It was assumed there were no nuclear warheads in the area .
 Intelligence had failed to break the very tight Soviet and Cuban security as to their plans to deploy the missiles . Intelligence had not been able to break any of their plans .
 A substantial number of Soviet military personnel had accompanied these arms deliveries, estimated in early October at 4,000-4,500 men . Numbers consistent with training instructors, not full operational manning of these weapons .
 There were also two tactical air force missile regiments armed with 16 launchers and 80 cruise missiles for support of the ground forces . It has also come as a surprise to learn that there are also two air force missiles .
 Intelligence error on the number of Soviet military personnel was not significant in military terms, but it did reflect a more serious shortcoming . The error reflects a serious shortage of military personnel in the Soviet Union .
 Until 1988, it was not realized that in addition to the missile deployment, the Soviet leaders had dispatched a large expeditionary force to Cuba . The force included Soviet air force, air defense, coastal defense, and ground force elements totaling some 42,000 men .
 This would not have constituted a serious error in military terms even if U.S. forces had invaded, it could in itself have created a political crisis . Although this would not be an error, it would have created political crisis if it happened .
 President Kennedy had not only warned against Soviet introduction of strategic offensive forces, but also against 'any organized combat force in Cuba from any Soviet bloc country' and the Soviet contingent .
 If in November 1962 the nature of the Soviet expeditionary force had been known, President Kennedy would have had to insist upon its complete removal . President Kennedy was certainly not aware of the existence of the force .
 In addition to the tactical and strategic missile nuclear weapons in Cuba, four F-class diesel attack submarines were sent to Cuban waters in October .
 Each submarine was loaded with one nuclear-armed torpedo for possible use against U.S. aircraft carriers or other major ships . What was not known to US intelligence was that each submarine also had one nuclear torpedo .
 These submarines departed for Soviet waters in late November as the crisis wound down .
 Intelligence analysis concentrated on determining what was taking place in Cuba, above all with respect to the missile deployment . Intelligence analysis focused on what was happening in Cuba .
 As earlier noted, even the question as to why the Soviet leaders had decided contrary to our best estimate to install the missiles in Cuba was given little attention .
 The estimate that in the case of U.S. military action against Cuba the Soviet leaders would not retaliate by attacking the United States was undoubtedly correct, given the overwhelming United States strategic superiority . Although never 'tested', the estimate that the Soviets would not 'retaliatory' against the
 The prediction of Soviet reaction to a blockade was tested in the crisis . The prediction was based on the prediction of a blockade .
 Estimate keyed to the pending decision soon made by the president correctly concluded that the Soviet reaction would 'concentrate on political exploitation' However, the estimators apparently exaggerated the international political pressures on the United States to desist from continuing a blockade .
 The estimate suggested that the Soviet leaders 'could heighten these pressures by threatening retaliation on Berlin or actually undertaking major harassments on the access routes' This, of course, did not happen .
 Khrushchev 'raised his voice and said they could do without that sort of advice' There was no Soviet counter pressure in Berlin or elsewhere, says ambassador .
 The predicted difference was counterintuitive and clearly seems to have been mistaken . The predicted change was, however, counterintuitive .
 The military contingency plan for invasion of Cuba called for seven days of air attack before the first landing of US troops, and the campaign against the Cuban Army was expected to take about ten days . Evidently the estimators were not aware that the military .
 As the estimate noted, the Soviet Union could have stood aside and claimed not to have had missiles or even any military presence in Cuba if there had been an air strike, but not if there was a US invasion and occupation . The estimate noted that the Soviet U.S. could have
 The error with respect to the invasion plans was not the fault of the intelligence estimators, but of a process that failed to bring to their attention critical military planning considerations, the author says . The error was the result of a flawed process, he says .
 This was a result of the unusually closely-held compartmentation of the first week of the crisis, as well as time pressures . The crisis has been unusually closely compartmentalised, with time pressures and a lack of transparency .
 The second week was dominated by the question of the Soviet response to the U.S. demand for removal of the missiles . The United States and Soviet diplomatic and military moves were also discussed .
 The United States intelligence community continued to monitor closely developments in Cuba and around the world . The ExComm presented to ExComm special daily reports on the situation in and relating to Cuba .
 No further formal national intelligence estimates were prepared on possible Soviet actions or responses relating to the closely held communications between Kennedy and Khrushchev during the crisis . No further intelligence estimates of possible Soviet responses were prepared .
 Ambassador Thompson's advice was given to the President by his trusted adviser on Soviet affairs, Ambassador Thompson . Most important was the advice given to President by Ambassador Thompson, President Nixon's trusted adviser .
 The President and other members of the ExComm relied above all on their own assessments . The President's assessment was based on his own assessment of the situation in the country .
 The intelligence community, nonetheless, provided such information and judgments as it could . "The intelligence community," says the CIA, "provided such information"
 There was no reliable direct intelligence on the deliberations of the Soviet leaders . Intelligence estimators tended correctly not to support worst-case prognoses .
 Most analysts believed Khrushchev remained in command, and that he would back down . Most intelligence analysts believed, correctly, both that Khrushiev remained in control .
 The most significant formal estimate was a memorandum from the Board of National Estimates to Director McCone on 27 October, owing to time constraints not coordinated as a national estimate .
 The Board again estimated that Soviet reaction to a U.S. air strike would stop short of military action anywhere beyond Cuba itself .
 The Soviet reaction would probably be directed toward political pressures against U.S. bases surrounding the Soviet Union, but would not extend to military action against them . The estimators believed the reaction would be aimed at political pressure against the United States .
 Not all policy makers were so certain of that judgment, and of course it was never tested . "Of course course it never tested," says the author of the book .
 In retrospect on the basis of present evidence it appears sound . Nonetheless, in retrospect, the case appears sound. Nonetheless, it appears to be sound.
 Intelligence did not recognize the extent of Soviet military alert, in part because it did not include some elements of comparable U.S. alerts, such as airborne alert .
 There was no direct evidence on Soviet command and control procedures in Cuba . Intelligence on Soviet weaponry in Cuba was good .
 The intelligence community correctly estimated Soviet control over the medium-range missiles and the antiaircraft missiles . But it did not know the Soviet rules of engagement and degree of effective Moscow control .
 Intelligence estimates correctly believed Khrushchev and the leadership in Moscow would retain authority over any use of the nuclear missiles in Cuba, even in the event of a United States air attack on them .
 The ExComm members were prudently less sure that in the event of a United States attack no surviving missiles would be fired by local commanders .
 There was no intelligence on cohesion or division among Soviet leaders in Moscow . Nor was there intelligence information on cohesion of Soviet leaders .
 United States intelligence did not have information as to how much Soviet intelligence knew about United States plans and intentions . Efforts to mask the initial limited buildup of United States military forces from 16 to 22 October were successful in not tipping the American hand .
 Later, it was correctly assumed that Soviet intelligence would have been aware of the massive buildup after 22 October .
 U.S. intelligence had not evaluated what Soviet intelligence and Soviet political leadership would have known, and would have assumed and believed, about United States intentions with respect to Cuba .
 No attention was given to how the Soviets would have regarded the extensive American political and economic isolation of Cuba . The Soviet decision to deploy conventional and tactical nuclear armed expeditionary force for deterrence of an American attack on Cuba was made in 1962 .
 Shortcomings in earlier U.S. intelligence estimates of Soviet motivation for deployment of missiles in Cuba contributed to a failure by intelligence and policy makers during the crisis .
 American decisionmakers did not recognize the possible key role of an assurance against US invasion of Cuba . Believing that the main Soviet purpose was to bolster an offensive Soviet policy on Berlin and other issues .
 Intelligence played an important part in reassurance as to the withdrawal of missiles, bombers and nuclear weapons . Intelligence played a key role in the settlement phase from 28 October to 20 November . The settlement phase took place in 28 October .
 Intelligence could not positively determine that there were no additional missiles that had not been seen or declared . Intelligence, as a unilateral means of verification, could not . determine that . there were . no additional . missiles that were not seen, declared .
 Retroactive analysis shows missiles and bombers declared, counted, and observed in withdrawal were probably all that had been brought in . Any additional number would have had to be small, the U.S. says .
 The question of verifying the withdrawal of nuclear warheads was much more difficult . The question is much more complex than verifying withdrawal of nukes .
 No nuclear warheads had been positively identified in Cuba, and the U.S. did not know whether any were there . There was a serious problem in even posing demands for cooperative verification of withdrawal .
 If the United States acknowledged that it did not know, it might tempt a Soviet decision to leave some in Cuba . If the U.S. acknowledged it knew, it could tempt a decision to keep some in the country .
 The United States specified in its listing of 'offensive weapons' that must be withdrawn, in addition to missiles and bombers, 'any nuclear warheads for missiles, nuclear bombs for aircraft, and any type nuclear weapon' There was, however, no issue over the matter; the United States did
 Khrushchev himself gave such an assurance in his letter of 20 November to President Kennedy . President Kennedy gave such a letter of support in November 1963 .
 The United States had intelligence indications that the Soviet ship Aleksandrovsk, which departed Havana on 5 November, carried nuclear warheads . The U.S. had some intelligence indications it was carrying nuclear warheads. The ship left Havana on November 5 .
 The U.S. did not again raise the question of nuclear warhead removal . Khrushchev and Kuznetsov's official assurances were not confirmed .
 The tactical nuclear warheads were withdrawn separately and later . The tactical warheads were, however, withdrawn separately .
 General Anatoly Gribkov and the officer in Cuba charged with custody of the nuclear warheads, General Nikolai Beloborodov, have confirmed that the tactical nuclear warheads were not withdrawn until early December . The Russian general says the tactical warheads were withdrawn until December .
 U.S. intelligence was unaware of presence of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba . Castro pressed to keep tactical weapons under his own, or if necessary Soviet, control .
 The issue arose in the difficult discussions between Castro and Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas I Mikoyan immediately after the crisis .
 Moscow confirmed that tactical nuclear weapons must all be returned to the Soviet Union . Mikoyan insisted, and Moscow confirmed, that the weapons must be returned .
 This dispute delayed Mikoyan's departure from Havana . Castro had no recourse but to give in to the Soviet decision . Castro was forced to accept the decision . The Cuban president was killed in 1953 .
 Khrushchev's own assurances in his letter of 20 November to President Kennedy, echoed by Ambassador Dobrynin, were premature . Kuznetsov's assurances that all nuclear weapons had been removed 'from [the territory of] Cuba' appear to have been misleading, and Khrush
 There is no reason now, however, to doubt that all nuclear warheads were withdrawn by December 1962 . There was no reason to doubt this at the time .
 In addition to intelligence materials generated during the crisis and now declassified, several post-crisis assessments of the intelligence performance are valuable sources for current review . The report is based on intelligence materials from the crisis .
 The PFIAB report examined the performance of the United States intelligence system prior to 22 October 1962 . The report focused almost exclusively on why the US intelligence community had failed to obtain more full and timely intelligence on the Soviet military buildup .
 It also criticized the failure to mount more active aerial reconnaissance in September-October . The U.S. military says it has not mounted more active reconnaissance in the past month .
 The report took to task the incorrect SNIE of 19 September, both for a mindset that believed that Soviet leaders would not take the risks in deploying nuclear strike forces in Cuba, and for failing to highlight the cautionary statement that did acknowledge the possibility .
 Report in summary form (based on an annex that has not been declassified and marshaled 35 examples) argued that various 'indicators' could have been seen to have pointed toward the missile deployment .
 DCI McCone responded to the PFIAB Report on 28 February 1963, briefly rebutting their criticisms . The report was published in February 1963 .
 It is evident why the PFIAB Report would zero in on the mistaken estimate of 19 September, and why it would marshal intelligence indicators that could have been given greater weight in drawing attention .
 PFIAB did not apply a broader framework for evaluation of the overall performance of intelligence . The report was published by the U.S. Department of Defense .
 A number of other post-crisis reports on the activities of the Department of Defense and many of its components were prepared . None sought to evaluate the performance of intelligence, but none sought to do so .
 The question of intelligence and policy performance was also raised by many Congressional critics of the administration and in the press . The dominant public reaction was relief as the crisis faded and belief that the administration had attained a victory in compelling the removal of the missiles .
 Administration spokesmen, and Secretary McNamara, gave extensive intelligence background briefings designed to squelch critics who were arguing that the Soviets might have secretly left strategic weapons .
 Secretary Rusk and Director McCone testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in executive session in January 1963 .
 The presentations were intended to reassure members of the Senate and accented the comprehensiveness of intelligence . These presentations and the ensuing discussions were, of course, intended to .
 A National Intelligence Estimate on Soviet military policy and capabilities, NIE 11-4-63, prepared in early 1963, did address the question of Soviet motivation .
 The decision was inspired by a need to bolster their strategic situation after the United States had punctured the inflated missile gap, but also by the aim of 'improving the strategic position of the USSR vis-a-vis the US' in order to 'create new opportunities for Soviet foreign
 The outcome of the crisis, of course, had both 'highlighted and heightened the dilemma of the Soviet leaders', said the Soviet leader .
 Also available are two important retrospective analyses of the Soviet calculations, decisions and actions in deciding to place the missiles in Cuba, and then in managing the crisis .
 Both were 'all-source, code word' documents prepared in CIA, one by the Office of Research and Reports, the other by the Research Staff . Both documents were prepared a little over a year after the crisis .
 Neither study was designed as a post-mortem on the National Intelligence Estimates or other performance of the Intelligence community . Both addressed the Soviet motivations, decisions and actions leading up to and during the crisis .
 Both retrospective intelligence studies focused in the first instance on the motivations for the Soviet decision to deploy nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba .
 The enhanced Soviet standing would have led to a new initiative against the allied position in Berlin, studies suggest . Both studies also suggested that the enhanced standing would probably have led .
 They also suggested potential use of the base in Cuba to bargain over US overseas bases or in disarmament talks .
 A successful Soviet establishment of missile bases in Cuba was also seen as challenging U.S. credibility around the world . In addition to enhancing the Soviet military and political weight in the global balance of power, a successful .
 Both studies attributed such belief to the Soviet leaders who, they concluded, had 'probably judged that the Soviet bargaining position in any international crisis affecting vital U.S. interests would be sharply improved'
 The perceived Soviet need to redress the unfavorable strategic military imbalance was given somewhat more attention than it had been during the crisis . However, the main weight continued to be given to anticipated Soviet political gains .
 The defensive imperative for redressing the Soviet 'missile gap' continued to be underplayed . The 'Missile Gap' was underplayed by the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 The second major Soviet motivation for placing missiles in Cuba was to deter a feared U.S. attack against Cuba . The intelligence analysts remained unaware of the Soviet expeditionary force, which was still not recognized .
 In the ORR study, this consideration received only a single mention, lumped together with other subsidiary gains sought .
 On the basis of information now available, that consideration would appear only to have had an indirect background role, if any, in the Soviet decision to place missiles in Cuba . The Soviet decision was made in the wake of the Cuban missile crisis .
 The review of the intelligence evidence led to a similar conclusion as the only one consonant with Soviet awareness of the US reconnaissance flights over Cuba .
 Study: Soviet leaders did not expect to trade missiles in Cuba for U.S. missiles in Turkey . Study also noted potential of a Soviet missile base in Cuba as a lever in general negotiations on overseas bases .
 The Soviet decision on placing the missiles in Cuba occurred in April to June (actually, May and June) The intelligence on shipments and buildup of arms from July to October was reviewed . The shipments of missiles in September were retroactively identified even during the crisis .
 Both studies correctly believed that Khrushchev was the main author of the missile venture, and the main voice in deciding on the withdrawal of the missiles . The missiles were withdrawn from the Soviet Union .
 40 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS still estimated that a total of about 22,000 Soviet military personnel had been there only about half of the 42,000 actually present .
 On the whole, however, with these two major exceptions, the intelligence on the Soviet forces was good, the author says .
 The SA-2 air defense missile system was correctly seen as not having been intended to provide a screen to preclude U.S. aerial reconnaissance of the missile buildup, which took place concurrently .
 Analysts assumed that each missile launcher was to have a second reload missile . We now know the ratio was three missiles for every two launchers . The ratio of missiles for each launcher is now three missiles .
 U.S. intelligence during the crisis had counted 33 SS-4 missiles for the 24 launchers, and assumed there might be up to 48 . As earlier noted, United States intelligence .
 The United States confirmed the presence and withdrawal of the 42 missiles . Before withdrawal, the Soviet side disclosed there were 42, the U.S. confirmed there was 42 .
 1964 study noted U.S. inability to confirm presence of nuclear warheads in Cuba in 1962 . Study estimated that nuclear warheads if present were probably not stored in permanent nuclear warhead storage facilities being built near the launch sites .
 Even during the crisis CIA judged that any nuclear weapons in Cuba were 'probably in an unlocated facility between the entry port of Mariel and the sites'73 These were good estimates; it is now known that the central nuclear warhead storage facility was located at Bejucal .
 The 1964 study reconstructed the evidence identifying Aleksandrovsk as the ship that carried out the missile nuclear warheads, but did not identify Indigirka as having brought most of them to Cuba . Arkhangelsk was also identified as taking out tactical nuclear warheads .
 By early 1963, intelligence analysts in reviewing satellite photography of the Soviet Union and other intelligence had discovered that Aleksandrovsk had sailed to Cuba from Severomorsk in early October . Even in retrospective searches of available evidence they did not discover that a few weeks earlier Indigir
 The study correctly notes that those 11-2 8s remaining in service in the Soviet Union in 1962 were mainly in naval coastal defense air units . Curiously, although the study correctly noted that those . those remaining in . service in . the Soviet . Union in . 1962 was mainly in
 One squadron of the Il-28s was configured for delivery of tactical nuclear bombs against an invasion force . Of course, the fact that one squadron was configured was not then known . The fact that . one squadron of . the Il .28s were configured for . delivery of . tactical
 The 1964 study noted that during the crisis most of the cruise missiles had been moved to an inland location at Campo Florido, but assumed that was for training . That location was not suitable for firing for the presumed coastal defense purpose .
 If the fact that they had been supported with substantial tactical nuclear capabilities had been loiown, this would of course have made such a conclusion much clearer .
 The failure even in retrospect to understand the role of these forces reflects the underlying failure to recognize the Soviet and Cuban objective of deterrence of an American attack or defense against it .
 The failure of U.S. intelligence to recognize in 1962-63 the broader deterrent role of the Soviet conventional forces in Cuba had a negative effect on efforts to get the Soviet Union to remove the Soviet troops from Cuba .
 42 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS . Efforts to persuade Soviet leadership to remove Soviet troops were not made a requirement for ending crisis .
 American negotiator John J McCloy made the first real pitch to Vasily Kuznetsov on 18 November, noting that the United States had identified 'fully manned Soviet combat teams' in Cuba . McCloy said these units 'bore no relation to the defense of Cuba as such'
 This argument may have been intended in part to provide a rationale as to why the troop units should be withdrawn, but it also reflected the prevailing American view of their role .
 In his public statement on 20 November ending quarantine, Kennedy stated that 'we are informed' the Soviet troop units in Cuba were 'associated with the protection of offensive weapon systems and will also be withdrawn in due course' However, Khrushchev had promised only to withdraw Soviet personnel 'serv
 The U.S. stretched that to refer to 'the stated intention of the USSR to withdraw all military units and personnel in Cuba for the servicing or guarding' of the offensive systems . The United States unilaterally stretched that out .
 By February 1963, the Soviet Union had agreed to withdraw 'several thousand Soviet military personnel having to do with guarding the kinds of weapons which were removed from Cuba' However, no commitment was made to withdraw all Soviet combat troops .
 The American assumption that the troops had in fact been sent to Cuba to guard the missiles made it easier to assume that all such troops had been withdrawn, and the United States did observe the withdrawal of large numbers of the Soviet troops .
 On 26 August 1963, Ambassador Dobrynin finally told President Kennedy that Khrushchev had said that all Soviet combat units had been withdrawn from Cuba . On that date, President Kennedy was informed that the Soviet withdrawal was complete .
 Khrushchev misstatement was not true, says Dobrynin . Dobrynins was a misunderstanding of what Khruschev had said, or intentional deceptive Soviet misstatement .
 Castro had asked that at least one 'brigade' (one of the four reinforced regiments) be left in Cuba as a token of Soviet support and tripwire deterrent, and the Soviets agreed . The Soviets agreed to leave one of the 'brigsades' as a '
 U.S. intelligence was not aware of this Soviet agreement to leave one brigade in Cuba . United States intelligence did not know about the agreement .
 In April 1963, an internal CIA memo predicted that the Soviets would 'maintain some sort of a military presence' in Cuba as a 'tripwire deterrent against a U.S. invasion'88 This prediction was borne out, although it did not have any effect on American policy consideration
 This lapse was perhaps understandable as intelligence priorities had shifted over a long period of time, but nonetheless this intelligence failure, compounded by inept political handling, resulted in a diplomatic debacle .
 Neither of the intelligence studies in 1964 was able to throw much light on Soviet decision-making during the crisis .
 The RS study did, however, note one important fact that has since been confirmed .
 'The Cubans are known to have expected an attack on or soon after the night of 26 October', it said . 'It seems likely that Khrushchev's sense of urgency was heightened by frantic messages from Havana,' the report said .
 These early efforts retrospectively to evaluate the performance of US intelligence were useful but were necessarily limited to what was known in 1962-64 . The Soviet decisions leading to and during the missile crisis were useful, but limited to the time of the crisis .
 Since 1987 American historians have been working to assimilate new information from declassified U.S. records . New information has been brought in from former Soviet officials and more recently from ex-Soviet officials .
 Former U.S. and Soviet officials who participated in deliberations have exchanged views on it with one another and historians . Also, former United States, Soviet officials have exchanged their views with historians and former officials .
 The conference did not address the performance of U.S. intelligence in 1962 in the light of new disclosures about the actual subject of intelligence, namely, Soviet objectives, decisions, actions, and reactions . The conference continued to focus on reminiscences and newly available data on what U
 The former gives us the United States intelligence evaluations; the latter provides part of the basis for measuring their validity and effectiveness . The former provides us with intelligence evaluations .
 The basic historical developments have been known, but many important aspects have only recently been revealed . Many important aspects of the story have only been revealed recently, say experts .
 Not all relevant information has yet been disclosed and some may never be . By the same token, not all of the relevant information is yet to be disclosed . Some of the information may never have been disclosed .
 With respect to the performance of U.S. intelligence, although a remarkably broad range of data has now been declassified, some has not been released . Some of the data has been released, but some of it is not yet released .
 Most deletions in 'sanitized' documents related to 'sources and methods', zealously protected by the intelligence community . Most of the deletions relate to sources and methods .
 Information on Soviet arms shipping obtained from a wide variety of sources has generally been available because it was in part obtained and almost entirely confirmed by Photint and Humint .
 Most of this information would not affect the kind of questions addressed in this analysis, but some could . Most of the information would never affect the questions addressed by this analysis .
 Information on the C3 of Soviet forces in Cuba and ranks and service affiliation of senior commanders could have provided data heightening awareness of the existence of a major Soviet expeditionary force in Cuba .
 In some cases, security deletions now made in declassification of intelligence analyses presented to policy makers at the time preclude judgments as to whether certain information was made available .
 The shortcomings in intelligence evaluation identified in this study were not known in 1962 and simply deleted from materials now made available . But it is quite clear that the shortcomings in the study were simply deleted, the study says .
 In addition to the material, they provide additional material that helps to evaluate various categories of sources . In addition, they help evaluate various sources of information .
 Technical intelligence means were second most useful category, followed by 'collateral' sources . Aerial photography was 'our best means of establishing hard intelligence', says McCone .
 As noted, the PFIAB evaluation sharply criticized the adequacy of clandestine intelligence .
 PFIAB also criticized the intelligence estimates for not giving more attention to indicators of possible missile deployment before the discovery of the missiles . The report failed to pose the question of more deeply analyzing Soviet motivations for such a decision .
 Overall, 'on balance, and judged by the result, a basically creditable job' had been done by intelligence . Today, there was a failure of estimative empathy, of viewing the situation as the Soviet leaders did .
 Soviet considerations of redressing the unfavorable strategic global balance for defensive and offensive purposes were paramount . It is now evident that deterrence of a United States attack on Cuba was also a consideration of major if not equal importance .
 The failure to see the situation through Soviet eyes blinded the U.S. intelligence community as a whole to that significant factor . The United States intelligence community should have seen the situation differently .
 The United States could have delivered strong private warnings that might have led Soviet leaders not to proceed with a nuclear missile deployment . At the least, even if United States policy precluded any assurances to alleviate that concern .
 In the early 1960s, the Soviet leaders saw a serious if not desperate need to shore up their growing missile gap in Cuba . The U.S. would have been more inclined to recognize the possibility of a Soviet decision to place missiles in the United States .
 Soviet leaders had always shown great caution in their attempts to pressure the West . They believed that the Soviet leaders would not assume such risks to advance their position .
 The risks in an overseas missile deployment on the territory of an ally would have appeared much less and perhaps worth assuming . But if the estimators had recognized that the Soviet leaders saw great risks in doing nothing to counter the United States increase in its superiority, the risks would have been much less
 Soviet leaders (in reality, Khrushchev) had been guilty of a major failure in intelligence assessment of the likely U.S. reaction . Finally, the Soviet leaders were guilty of failing to anticipate the likely reaction .
 There was reciprocal projection by both the Soviet and United States leaders in misestimating the other side and what it would perceive and would do . Even more, there was a dialectical interaction between these misevaluations .
 The reason that the U.S. estimators erred in their assessment was only in part owing to failure to assess Soviet motivations . The United States erred its assessment of Soviet motivations, the author says .
 Soviet leadership misevaluated the United States reaction to a Soviet missile deployment . It was also in error because the U.S. reaction to the deployment was misedvaluated .
 If Khrushchev and his colleagues had realized that Kennedy would do what he did, they would never have made their decision to deploy the missiles . If they had known they would not have deployed the missiles, they wouldn't have made the decision .
 Russian records of conversations between Mikoyan and Castro in November 1962 . The conversations were recorded in the days leading up to the Cuban assassination of Fidel Castro .
 Mikoyan told Castro that the Soviet leaders believed that the Americans had learned of the transport of 'Soviet troops and strategic missiles' to Cuba by mid-September .
 They believed Kennedy had intentionally been holding back because of the election campaign, Mikoyan says . They believed, however, that he had intentionally held back . They thought he was inclined to acquiesce in the deployment .
 This assertion that the Soviet leaders in late September-October 1962 believed that Kennedy was aware of the missiles in Cuba has not been confirmed . It is not evident why Mikoyan would have made up such a story for Castro for Castro .
 At the time of the crisis, apparently only one U.S. intelligence paper suggested that the Soviet leaders probably believed that the United States leaders were aware of the missiles by mid-October .
 Most contemporary and subsequent analyses have assumed that the Soviet leaders believed their secret was safe until 22 October when President Kennedy spoke publicly and the crisis began to unfold . Most contemporary analysis has assumed that they believed that the secret had been safe .
 The Soviet leaders might have been less confident after mid-September that the US leaders would acquiesce, but not that they believed the United States leaders knew about the missiles in Cuba . A few American critics of the Kennedy administration's handling of the crisis have also darkly suggested that Kennedy was
 It is not clear whether the Soviet leaders believed that Kennedy was aware of the missiles in Cuba in late September and early October . Most speculations were critical of Kennedy for weakness, but at least one has argued that he was waiting for the optimum timing to justify a U.S. attack
 It is difficult to believe it could have been held with any confidence among Soviet leaders . Perhaps there was speculation on that possibility among the Soviet leaders, but it was not a confidence .
 There remain anomalies that may, or may not, be related to such a Soviet misperception . There do remain anomalies .
 The missile sites under construction were not appropriately camouflaged against aerial observation . Soviet and Cuban awareness of U.S. aerial reconnaissance air flights .
 It could be explained by standard operational practices or failures in planning and implementation, as probably as by calculated lack of concern . Yet that could explain a failure in planning or implementation, it could also be explained .
 Gromyko's satisfaction and optimism after meeting with President Kennedy on 18 October could have been the result of seeming confirmation that Kennedy was not disposed to make an issue of the deployments, or that he remained unaware .
 Khrushchev in several statements in September and October railed against a possible U.S. blockade . He was not then anticipating such action as a response to discovery of the missiles .
 A blockade was then being advocated by prominent Republican political figures as a move to unseat Castro . Those statements were prompted by the fact that a blockade was being publicly advocated .
 A continuing though reduced 'significant' Soviet military presence was expected . A continuing but reduced military presence is expected to continue .
 'at some point the Soviets might attempt to increase their military strength in Cuba by introducing other weapons previously labeled 'offensive' by the US . As to other weaponry, it was estimated that it was possible they might try to introduce other weapons .
 Director of Central Intelligence John McCone had less well-founded suspicions and fears after the crisis . All in all, the estimate was sound .
 Even during the crisis, McCone had occasionally voiced unjustified alarmist views . McCone's views were not always justified .
 The intelligence community had erroneously estimated on 19 September that the Soviet leaders probably would not station nuclear-armed medium or intermediate-range missiles in Cuba . The decision was well understood at the time .
 Soviet arms buildup in Cuba had begun in mid-July . Efforts were made to monitor closely, and to search for possible missile deployment .
 During the crisis intelligence did a generally good job of monitoring and reporting the changing status of missile sites in Cuba, other military activities on the island .
 Virtually no information on Soviet political deliberations was obtainable, but such indications as were available were reported and analyzed .
 In retrospect, several shortcomings have become known from more recently available information that were not at the time . "Several shortcomings" have been revealed from more recent available information, says author .
 The first of these was recognized, although underestimation of the defensive element of that motivation contributed to the erroneous estimate that the missile deployment would probably not be made . The U.S. INTELLIGENCE 51 probably not made .
 The aim of advancing Moscow's geostrategic position, while clearly present, would probably not have sufficed to justify the decision . Moscow's aim was to advance Moscow's position, but would not have been enough to justify it .
 The estimators correctly understood that as an opportunistic move to enhance Soviet power positions the risks were probably too great . They did not, however, consider concern that without such a move the Soviet position might incur even greater risks .
 The second purpose of the deployment, deterrence of an expected U.S. attack on Cuba, while appreciated by some intelligence analysts, was neglected to the point of virtual omission from consideration in formal intelligence assessments and policy deliberations .
 The second, and most threatening, component of the crisis was fully recognized and featured as the central element of the entire crisis . The second and third component was the most threatening component, the second, of course .
 What was not appreciated in the intelligence analysis was the first element, at least in part because of overlooking the local deterrent role of the military deployments . The analysis was also overlooked in the analysis .
 If the Soviet leaders had not included the nuclear missile forces, there would still have been a challenge to the U.S. The Soviet leaders would have been even more difficult to meet, historian says .
 The Group of Soviet Forces in Cuba, minus the strategic missiles, would still have been a substantial combat force . The force would have included air force, ground force and naval components for air defense, coastal defense and ground antiinvasion .
 Three of these regiments were first detected in low-level air reconnaissance on 17 October . The fourth was detected not until 25 October . Three of the regiments first detected by air reconnaissance in October .
 Coastal defense forces comprised one brigade of missile-armed PT boats (three squadrons of 12 Komar boats armed with 24 launchers for 52 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS short-range missiles) One regiment of coastal defense missiles (4 batteries with
 Even without the tactical nuclear weapons, the 35,000-strong Soviet conventional combat forces in Cuba would certainly have been a challenge . President Kennedy's warnings against the introduction of any communist bloc 'combat forces' into Cuba .
 The range of the Il-28s and the ground-launched cruise missiles with nuclear weapons would have constituted at least some potential threat to Florida . Moreover, the range of these missiles would have been a potential threat .
 The original Soviet deployment plan included a squadron of 6 surface ships, with 2 cruisers, 2 guided-missile destroyers, and 2 conventionally armed destroyers . A squadron of 11 submarines, 7 nuclear-armed missile-launching and 4 torpedo attack attack were also included .
 In late September, the plans for this naval deployment were dropped, because it was considered unnecessarily provocative . The plans were dropped because they were considered unnecessary provocative .
 Based on what has been declassified, the intelligence community cannot be faulted, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The intelligence community is not faulted .
 It is possible still classified Sigint included data on Soviet command personnel and units that should have alerted intelligence analysts to the structure and nature of the large Soviet Group of Forces .
 If so, security of intelligence sources at the time may have impeded intelligence analysis, even though most such analysis was based on all-source data . Almost all such analysis at the . time were based on data from all sources .
 National Intelligence Estimate of 19 September 1962, that deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba was not U.S. INTELLIGENCE 53 likely likely, notwithstanding that it was in error, was the proper estimate to make based on all available evidence .
 I believe the same judgment should be made on the intelligence failure to estimate the presence of tactical nuclear weapons . I believe that the failure to predict the existence of tactical nukes should be considered a failure .
 The possibility of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba was recognized . The possibility was recognized in Cuba .
 Humint in the form of unverified refugee and agent reports (moreover) was not sufficient . More than a mass of other invalid reports were not enough .
 It would have been nice to have had a better clandestine collection network, says PFIAB .
 Humint, and analytical hypotheses in Washington, along with recognition of the need for full aerial photography, did lead to targeting the San Cristobal area and to timely discovery of missile base construction .
 Basic intelligence on Soviet military systems collected and analyzed (mostly from reconnaissance photography and Sigint) underlay the correct identification of missile deployment .
 If U.S. intelligence had not discovered the missiles bsfore their complete installation and unveiling by Khrushchev, it would have been much more difficult, and perhaps not possible, to secure their withdrawal . The missiles were discovered by United States intelligence .
 An interdiction blockade would not have been possible, and international pressures for mutual accommodation might have led to greater US concessions elsewhere or to reluctant acquiescence in the existing Soviet deployment .
 Full intelligence information could have made resolution of the crisis much more difficult . Paradoxically, as I suggested earlier, full intelligence information would have made the crisis more difficult, he says .
 If the presence of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba had been known in the last week of October, that fact would have made an invasion potentially much more costly, it would not necessarily have deterred it . The presence of nuclear weapons would have prevented an invasion of Cuba from happening .
 54 INTELLIGENCE AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS would have been great and would almost certainly have remained non-negotiable, given Castro's adamant stance . At the least, pressure for on-site inspection of Cuba to ensure the removal of all nuclear
 There would also have been strong pressures on President Kennedy to demand withdrawal of all Soviet forces from Cuba . Khrushchev would probably have eventually acceded to that demand, but negotiation would have been more difficult .
 The issue of assurance against continued presence of any nuclear weapons in Cuba might, on the other hand, have led the U.S. to press more seriously a limited nuclear-free zone in Latin America .
 This idea was, in fact, considered in the State Department and the ExComm and pursued for a time as a supplementary measure for assuring no reintroduction of Soviet nuclear weapons . The idea was considered, but it was pursued as a supplement to assuring there would not be a reintrodu
 The issue of assurance against the continued presence of nuclear weapons in Cuba might have led the U.S. to military action, but it would almost certainly not have been possible to put it aside as was done on the basis of the agreement .
 American intelligence assessments assumed a high degree of centralized control from the top leadership over all Soviet military forces . U.S. intelligence assessments generally assumed a very high level of central control .
 When a Soviet air defense missile unexpectedly shot down a U-2 aircraft over Cuba on 27 October, U.S. intelligence analysts were unsure whether this marked a changed line from Moscow or a breach in Soviet military discipline .
 Policy makers prudently allowed for the possibility that even if Moscow instructions prohibited the initiative of Soviet forces in Cuba to fire the nuclear missiles there . In case of an American air strike or invasion any surviving Soviet missiles might be fired either with or without authorization from Moscow .
 Both the general assumption of tight Moscow control, and the recognition that it nonetheless might fail, were properly taken into account . Both the assumption and the acceptance that it might fail were properly considered .
 CIA played a lead role, but by no means a lone role, in backing up the ExComm. CIA . CIA said it played a key role in the success of the CIA's mission .
 DIA and the intelligence organizations of the army, navy and air force provided back up to the military planners and commands in Washington and Norfolk . DIA: DIA, DNI and intelligence organizations provided back-up to military planners .
 There also was good communication and cooperation between the intelligence community and the policy makers, officials say .
 Senior intelligence estimators and analysts have said that they received only limited feedback from the ExComm through DCI McCone . DDI Ray Cline attended many of these meetings, and was also in touch with McGeorge Bundy .
 There was, of course, full understanding of the common task, and determination by both the intelligence community and policy makers to meet the common challenge .
 In sum, judged on the basis of what could reasonably have been expected of the contribution of U.S intelligence in the Cuban missile crisis, performance was generally good, in some respects outstanding, albeit with a few shortcomings .
 The difficulty of judging performance without reasonably full access to real data rarely available at the time, and often never . More useful than assigning any 'grade' to performance, however, is reflection on potentialities and natural limitations of intelligence .
 This case illustrates the challenge to historians, and to intelligence historians, to review historical episodes when data do later become available . The case illustrates challenges to historians and intelligence historians .
 More complete information at the time may sometimes make political and diplomatic decisions and conflict resolution more difficult but, to the historian, not less interesting . It also suggests that more complete information may make political decisions more difficult and more interesting .
 The last previous estimate, NIE 85-2-62, on The Situation and Prospects in Cuba, issued on 1 Aug.62, had not discussed the possibility of Soviet missiles in Cuba . It considered it unlikely that any Soviet Bloc combat forces would be stationed in Cuba at
 There was no evidence in the initial Soviet arms shipments in July or in other intelligence that would have provided the basis for a different estimate . This estimate was wrong; the decision to do so had been made, but the decision was made, he says .
 Castro saw his purge of the old-line Moscow Moscow Communists as a preliminary clearing of the decks to allow closer collaboration with the Soviet Union . Domingo Amuchastegui reports that Castro saw the purge as his preliminary clearing the decks .
 "There was no evidence at the time to support such a counterintuitive evaluation," says CNN.com.com .
 For more detailed discussion, see the editors' introductory essay, in this volume . The editors' first volume of this volume will be published in November 2013 .
 The most detailed available report on the CIA agent and refugee reporting is now a declassified article by a CIA clandestine service officer who argued after the crisis that insufficient attention had been given to their reports . The report was now declassified and published by the CIA in 2007 .
 A rebuttal was prepared by two senior CIA analysts who had participated in the main retrospective intelligence analyses of the crisis . The rebuttal is a rebuttal by two former CIA analysts . They say the CIA had been wronged by the Obama administration .
 The most authoritative summary of the delays in U-2 coverage is in a report prepared in CIA for Director McCone and circulated to USIB members in Feb.63.63 .
 McCone gave as his judgment that any earlier aerial photography would not have provided clear evidence to justify decisions on action . In a discussion of the subject with President Kennedy, McCone .
 It is now known from Soviet archives and accounts of participants that no additional missile buildup beyond the 40 launchers was then planned . No additional missile buildings were planned .
 Soviet leaders in 1963 or later might have decided to increase the number of missiles and launchers . If deployment had proceeded without any agreed limit, Soviet leaders might have increased the number .
 By 18 Oct., three SS-4 MRBM launch sites and the first two SS-5 (2200 run) IRBM launch Sites had been identified in later photography . The first two IRBM IRBM launches were also identified by later photos .
 From 16 Oct. on it had been clear that Soviet medium range missiles were being deployed in Cuba . The missiles were capable of striking deep in the U.S. as far as Washington DC .
 Aviation Week and Space Technology, 12 Nov.62,21 gave rise to a school of revisionist analysis that questioned whether the Kennedy administration had honestly presented the picture of the missile threat .
 McCone's prepared notes for meeting included a judgment that the missiles would be nuclear armed . McCone: "I believe the missiles are nuclear armed" McCone says he believes the missiles will be armed .
 U.S. agent provided detailed information on readiness and operating procedures of the SS-4 missile system . Of particular value was the information provided by the United States agent, GRU Col. Col. Vladimir Putin .
 Penkovsky was not in a position to inform about the planned missile deployment in Cuba . This information complemented earlier U-2 and satellite photography that had made US analysts familiar with the pattern of SS-4 and SS-5 site preparation and construction in the Soviet Union .
 Most of them were counted before the crisis broke out and all were counted during the crisis . Most of the counts were counted in the days leading up to the crisis.
 Most of the new weaponry was identified soon after arrival in Cuba, and some while still en route, by a technique that CIA analysts had unofficially dubbed 'cratology' Analysis of the characteristics of various crates for transporting particular weapons .
 This permitted identification and counting MiG21s, Il-28s, and helicopters arriving in Cuba before they were reassembled . This allowed identification of aircraft arriving at Cuba before being assembled .
 Two types of cruise missile crates were seen, but this did not lead analysts to recognize that there were both coastal defense and tactical air support cruise missile units in Cuba . Analysts say the crates could be used to launch cruise missile missiles .
 Goodell noted there were two types of cruise missile crates, but did not draw from that fact that there had been two cruise missile systems in Cuba . Goodell noted that there was also two cruise missiles in Cuba, but didn't draw that fact .
 The identification of the coastal defense cruise missile system in Cuba (initially identified at Banes) was not easy . The identification was difficult to identify .
 First seen in U-2 photography taken on 29 Aug., it was not reported to policy makers until 7 Sept., and even then, analysts were unsure whether it was an 'offensive' system capable of striking targets .
 President Kennedy was annoyed that it could not be identified as the source of the Cuban missile crisis . Kennedy was quite annoyed that the CIA could not identify the source behind the crisis .
 Intensive analysis finally led to a confident report to him that the system was for coastal defense and of limited operational range . The report was published on 13 Sept. 2013 .
 In 1991, Brugioni was unaware that another, tactical support cruise missile system with nuclear capability had been in Cuba .
 The CIA Task Force W in Florida concluded by September that there were probably 45,000-50,000 Soviet military personnel in Cuba . The task force worked with agents and escapees and emigres .
 The clandestine collectors could not prove their view, which was based on many contacts and reports . It was discounted by the analysts and estimators in Washington and not reflected in the official estimates .
 'The 'feel' of the clandestine intelligence collectors we now know had been fairly accurate . In this instance, however, the 'feel of the collectors' was quite accurate .
 Gribkov has on occasion erred, but with the exception of the naval mines these figures are confirmed by other Soviet sources with access to the archives .
 He so stated to a conference on the Cuban missile crisis in Moscow in Moscow on 28 Sept.94, and repeated details in an interview with me following the conference . He said that he repeated the details in a later interview .
 At the 1994 Moscow conference noted above, Gribkov agreed with Beloborodov that probably the naval mines had been sent to Cuba . The mines were probably sent to the island nation .
 F-Class diesel submarines were authorized to fire their nuclear torpedoes if they were fired upon or bombed and the submarine hull penetrated by attacking fire . Commander of one of the submarines said that their orders were very obscure, but included .
 If Fired Upon, Use the Nuclear Weapon', Komsomol 'skayapravda, 27 June 1995,3.3. If fired upon, use the nuclear weapon' 'Use the nuclear Weapon'
 The language differed in some respects from the estimate the day before . The language of the estimate differed from the previous day .
 U.S. Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin in Washington also had suggested, in a cable on 23 Oct., possible blockade pressure on the land routes to West Berlin . This suggestion was simply ignored in Moscow .
 The Soviet armed forces had been placed on an announced 'alert' status as early as 12 Sept. According to the official news agency TASS, the situation had been under control .
 On 23 Oct., in response to President Kennedy's speech, Defense Minister Rodion Malinovsky for the Soviet Armed Forces and Commander-in-Chief Marshal Andrei Grechko announced alerts .
 CIA repeatedly reported that it had not detected signs of any high alert of the Soviet armed forces . From that time throughout the crisis, although noting some signs of higher alert than usual, CIA noted that it did not detect any signs of high alert . CIA: "There were no signs of
 After a limited alert announced by TASS on 12 Sept.62, before the crisis, Marshal Malinovsky reported to the Central Committee that the armed forces were 'fulfilling the orders of the USSR government on placing the Armed Forces on the highest combat readiness'
 Viktor V Mukhin, chief of the Historical Archive Section of the General Staff, told me in 1992 that the armed forces as a whole were on 'increased' alert . The Strategic Rocket Forces were on highest alert, he said . Viktor Mukhin: 'The armed forces were on
 Two former Soviet strategic missile forces veterans on duty during the crisis have said the missile forces were only on 'increased' alert . One of them states that at one point in mid-crisis they were raised to the 'highest' level for about six hours .
 At least on the basis of U.S. intelligence materials declassified to date, there is no indication that the United States was aware of any special alert measures taken by Soviet strategic missile forces during the crisis .
 Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali wrote an essay for this volume . The essay was published by Aleksandandandrea-Fursenko in Moscow . The book was published in Moscow, Russia, in 2010 .
 Dobrynin has clarified that this statement includes the period leading up to the crisis . In conversation with me, Dobrynins said this statement was part of a conversation with CNN's John Sutter .
 The KGB Station Chief in Washington, Aleksandr Feklisov has acknowledged that the first indication his Station obtained was not until midday on 21 Oct., the day before President Kennedy's speech . TASS learned that American press representatives were gathering at the White House because of a reported meeting
 The Soviet military attache also picked up information on increased military alert in the southeastern United States .
 Only then, from 21 Oct. on, did Soviet intelligence scurry around to try to pick up information . Only then was the Soviet Union trying to find out what was going on .
 Feklisov confirmed to me in 1992 that except for intelligence on United States military preparations during the crisis, they obtained no real information on U.S. deliberations or decisions before or during crisis .
 Feklisov was removed as chief of the KGB Station in Washington soon after the crisis . He was removed from the post in Washington after the incident . He is now the head of a KGB station in Washington .
 The first successful, if still primitive, Soviet reconnaissance satellites, Kosmos 10 and 11, were launched on 17 and 20 Oct., overflying the United States . Kosmos satellites were launched over the U.S. in October 1961 .
 In the ExComm and other deliberations, only the President himself raised the possibility of giving an assurance against invasion on the morning of 26 Oct., as indeed he had in his conversation with Foreign Minister Gromyko .
 Khrushchev's message was received later that day . He and his advisers had no idea that might be the key to resolving the crisis . Khrushchen's message and a report on Soviet Embassy counselor and KGB chief Aleksandr Fomin's conversation with John Scali of ABC Television
 U.S. intelligence had in fact identified only 33 SS-4 missiles in Cuba prior to the Soviet declaration .
 The Soviet intention was to supply each launcher with a reload second missile, for a total of 48 missiles . It was assumed, particularly because there were more missiles than launchers , that the Soviet intention .
 What was not known was whether all deliveries had been delivered before the blockade .
 The United States was prepared to be told there were some number between 33 and 48 medium-range missiles . The U.S. was therefore prepared to tell the U.K. there were between 33 to 48 missiles .
 This was given to Soviet negotiators on 8 Nov.62; warheads had also been mentioned on 2 Nov. 1962 . This was also given to the Soviet negotiating team .
 President Kennedy mentioned this reference by Khrushchev in a message to the United States negotiators on 5 Nov. 1962 . Kennedy mentioned the reference in a letter to the U.S. negotiators on Nov. 5 .
 The reference to detection of radioactive emanations from Aleksandrovsk was deleted in declassification from91, but is given in a cross-reference on97 . The reference was deleted from the declassified document .
 Missile nuclear nose-cone transport vans were seen aboard and being unloaded from Aleksandrovsk after she had landed in Guba Okol'naya in the Northern Fleet area of the United States in the Soviet Union .
 A CIA study in 1964 laid out in some detail the analysis underlying the correct conclusion . Aleksandrovsk had probably brought nuclear weapons to Cuba, and later withdrawn them .
 The call of Aleksandrovsk at a second Cuban port before departing for the Soviet Union might have been to pick up additional nuclear warheads, implying that some nuclear warheads had also been brought in by another ship .
 U.S. intelligence had not identified the departure of Indigirka from Guba Okol'naya, Severomorsk, in Sept., in Sept. 2014 . Analysts believed Aleksandrovsk was the only ship to have departed from that port .
 Accounts of the missile crisis erroneously identified Poltava as a likely carrier of nuclear weapons turned back by the quarantine . Accounts of missile crisis written since 1987, including this author, erroneously identify Poltva as likely carrier .
 Poltava was en route to Cuba in mid-Oct. with a cargo of SS-5 intermediate-range missiles, but not nuclear warheads . The Soviet Union had delivered one load of missiles in Sept. 2013 . Poltavia had delivered a load of SS4 missiles in
 The 36 SS-4 MRBM warheads were loaded on Aleksandrovsk, which had kept the 24 SS-5 IRBM warheads in its hold throughout the crisis . Pliyev, the Soviet commander in Cuba, loaded the warheads and returned them to the Soviet Union .
 Gribkov's statements on the tactical nuclear warheads were made on the same occasion, 4 April 1994, citing a Malinovsky order to Pliyev of 20 Nov.62.62 . The statements were made in the same time as the statements made in 1994 .
 Gribkov appears to be in error in identifying the ship that withdrew the tactical nuclear warheads as Okhotsk . Beloborodov is more likely to be correct that it was Arkhangel'sk, departing Cuba on 1 Dec. and arriving in the Soviet Union on 25
 Fursenko and Naftali, 'One Hell of a Gamble' 315, erroneously cite 25 Dec. as the date of departure from Havana, Cuba .
 The two regiments of tactical cruise missiles were never identified, nor of course were the tactical nuclear warheads for those . This statement was correct based on what was known at the time, but was in error in error .
 Estimates on Soviet Strategic Forces, 1950-1983 152; from paras.-2118, of NIE 11-4-63. 152 .
 The nuclear warheads apparently passed through Mariel Naval Air Station . The ORR analysis identified it as a probable nuclear warhead processing facility . Mariel was a likely processing facility for nuclear warheads .
 Castro confirmed this to me at the 1992 Havana Conference on the Cuban missile crisis . Castro confirmed it to me in 1992 at a conference in Havana .
 One reason for such confidence is that the major studies were 'all-source' documents, and even though one cannot know what has been deleted owing to sensitive 'sources and methods'
 For further discussion, see the essay by Beth Fischer, later in this volume . The essay will be published in the next volume of the book .