 Critics accuse Kennedy of making mistakes, including creating the conditions for the crisis in his mismanagement of the Bay of Pigs . Kennedy's overall performance during the crisis was helpful, according to his critics .
 At that date, the Soviet Union's nuclear missiles in Cuba were just 90 miles from U.S. territory . The American government saw them as a clear threat . At that time, the United States was just 90 minutes from Cuba .
 President Kennedy demanded that the Soviet missiles be removed immediately from Cuba . President Kennedy confronted Soviet leaders and demanded that they remove the missiles . The missiles were removed immediately .
 He met with Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, on October 18th, who argued that the weapons were for defensive purposes only .
 The president met with his military aides, his advisors and his brother Robert in the upcoming days to discuss military options . The president is expected to meet with his brother and military aides in the coming days .
 Kennedy gave a televised address to the American people on October 22, 1962, at 7m. Kennedy gave the nation's first televised address in 1962 . The address was broadcast at 7:30pm ET .
 Eventually, however, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev backed down, and Soviet missiles were removed from Cuba . Eventually, though, the missiles were eventually removed .
 The end result of Kennedy's handling of the crisis was positive, as the world avoided nuclear warfare . Many critics argued that he mishandled the crisis .
 Others suggest that he showed solid leadership and managed to diffuse a potentially devastating situation . Others say he showed good leadership and diffuse the situation .
 Supporters of Kennedy argue that the young American president diffused a direct and serious threat to American cities during the crisis . Supporters argue that Kennedy effectively diffused the threat to U.S. cities .
 Kennedy's supporters suggest that his actions were important in showing that the U.S. was willing to defy Soviet actions . Kennedy supporters say his actions showed that the United States had shown willingness to defy the Soviet Union .
 Supporters cite Kennedy's restraint in ruling out an air strike or military invasion as proof of his handling of the crisis well . Supporters also cite his restraint as proof that Kennedy handled the situation well . Kennedy also ruled out a military strike or a military invasion .
 Kennedy stood up to the Soviets without resorting to drastic military measures . Kennedy may have preserved the delicate Cold War balance between the U.S. and the Soviets .
 Kennedy chose to respond to a more conciliatory Russian communication, rather than a more antagonistic communication . Kennedy said he chose to speak out to the Russians rather than the Russians .
 Kennedy's critics argued that his reaction to the Soviet buildup of nuclear weapons was fundamentally flawed . In contrast, Kennedy's reaction to Russia's nuclear weapons buildup was flawed .
 This over-escalation, they argue, brought the world unnecessarily close to nuclear war . They argue, they say, has brought the nuclear war unnecessarily close .
 Critics suggest Kennedy's actions were motivated by political gain . Critics also suggest that Kennedy was motivated by politics .
 Kennedy might have been trying to gain domestic support with his hard line stance on nuclear missiles . Mid-term elections were due in November of the year of the crisis .
 Kennedy supporters gloss over the fact that he gave up strategic points in order to have missiles removed . Kennedy's critics also note that his supporters often gloss over some crucial strategic points .