 Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz was a Cuban communist revolutionary and politician . He governed the Republic of Cuba as Prime Minister from 1959 to 1976 and then as President from 1976 to 2008 . He was also the Cuban President of the Cuban government from 1976 until 2008 .
 Under his administration, Cuba became a one-party communist state . Industry and business were nationalized and state socialist reforms were implemented .
 After participating in rebellions against right-wing governments in the Dominican Republic and Colombia, he planned the overthrow of Cuban President Fulgencio Batista, launching a failed attack on the Moncada Barracks in 1953 .
 After Batista's overthrow in 1959, Castro assumed military and political power as Cuba's Prime Minister . Castro assumed political and military power in Cuba's first government .
 The United States came to oppose Castro's government and unsuccessfully attempted to remove him by assassination, economic blockade and counter-revolution . The U.S. tried to remove Castro by assassination and economic blockade, including the Bay of Pigs Invasion of 1961 .
 Policies introducing central economic planning and expanding healthcare and education were accompanied by state control of the press and the suppression of internal dissent .
 Castro supported anti-imperialist revolutionary groups in Chile, Nicaragua and Grenada . Castro also sent troops to aid allies in the Yom Kippur .
 Castro's leadership of the Non-Aligned Movement from 1979 to 1983 increased Cuba’s profile on the world stage . These actions, coupled with Castro's medical internationalism, increased Cuba's profile .
 Following the Soviet Union’s dissolution in 1991, Castro led Cuba through the economic downturn of the "" Special Period " Castro embraced environmentalist and anti-globalization ideas . Castro led the Cuban government during the 'Special Period'
 In 2006, Castro transferred his responsibilities to Vice President Raul Castro, who was elected to the presidency by the National Assembly in 2008 . Castro transferred responsibilities to vice president in 2006 .
 Castro was the longest-serving non-royal head of state in the 20th and 21st centuries . Castro polarized world opinion with his long-serving tenure in Cuba .
 Critics view him as a dictator whose administration oversaw human-rights abuses, the exodus of a large number of Cubans and the impoverishment of the country's economy . Critics say he oversaw human rights abuses .
 Castro was decorated with various international awards and significantly influenced individuals and groups across the world . Castro was awarded numerous international awards for his work . Castro is one of the most influential personalities in the world and influenced individuals across the globe .
 Castro became critical of the corruption and violence of President Ramon Grau ’s government . He delivered a public speech on the subject in November 1946 that received coverage on the front page of several newspapers . Castro was critical of Grau's government .
 A charismatic figure, Chibas advocated social justice, honest government and political freedom . His party exposed corruption and demanded reform, while he exposed corruption .
 UZl Student violence escalated after Grau employed gang leaders as police officers, and Castro received a death threat urging him to leave the university . Though Chibas came third in the 1948 general election, Castro remained committed to working on his behalf .
 He refused to carry a gun and surround himself with armed friends . However, he refused to do so and began carrying a gun .
 The military force consisted of around 1,200 troops, mostly Cubans and exiled Dominicans . They intended to sail from Cuba in July 1947 . The Cuban military force was mainly Cubans, Dominicans, and Cubans .
 Grau's government stopped the invasion under U.S. pressure . Castro and many of his comrades evaded arrest, although many evaded capture .
 Castro took a leading role in student protests against the killing of a high school pupil by government bodyguards . Castro returned to Havana to lead student protests after the killing .
 His public speeches took on a distinctly leftist slant by condemning social and economic inequality in Cuba . At this point, he became a prominent figure in Cuban politics .
 In contrast, his former public criticisms had centered on condemning corruption and U.S. imperialism .
 The assassination of popular leftist leader Jorge Eliecer Gaitan Ayala led to widespread rioting and clashes between the governing Conservatives backed by the army and leftist Liberals . Castro joined the Liberal cause by stealing guns from a police station .
 Castro was a prominent figure in protests against government attempts to raise bus fares . He returned to Cuba after his return to the island country .
 That year, he married Mirta Diaz Balart , a student from a wealthy family connected to Fulgencio Batista[281] through whom he was exposed to the lifestyle of the Cuban elite .
 I was like a blindfolded man in a forest, who doesn’t even know where north or south is. ‘I was like  a blindfolding man in the forest,’ he said. “I was just a man who didn’
 He came to interpret Cuba's problems as an integral part of capitalist society, or the ""dictatorship of the bourgeoisie"", rather than the failings of corrupt politicians . He adopted the Marxist view that meaningful political change could only be brought about by proletariat revolution .
 Visiting Havana's poorest neighborhoods, he became active in the student anti-racist campaign . Visiting the poorest neighborhoods of Havana, he was active in Havana's anti-black campaign .
 The group's purpose was to oppose the influence of the violent gangs within the university . Despite his promises, Prio had failed to control the situation, instead offering many of their senior members jobs in government ministries .
 Castro volunteered to deliver a speech for the Movement on November 13, exposing the government's secret deals with the gangs and identifying key members . Castro will deliver the speech to expose the deals and identify key members of the Movement .
 Castro co-founded a legal partnership that primarily catered for poor Cubans . The partnership proved a financial failure, but it proved to be a success .
 Castro's furniture was repossessed and electricity was cut off, distressing his wife . Caring little for money or material goods, Castro failed to pay his bills . His furniture, electricity and electricity were also cut off . Castro's wife reported him to the authorities .
 He took part in a high-school protest in Cienfuegos in November 1950, fighting with police in protest at the Education Ministry's ban on student associations . He was arrested and charged for violent conduct, the magistrate dismissed the charges .
 Seeing himself as Chibas’ heir, Castro wanted to run for Congress in the June 1952 elections . Senior Ortodoxo members feared his radical reputation and refused to nominate him .
 He was nominated as a candidate for the House of Representatives by party members in Havana's poorest districts . Party members nominated him for the U.S. House in the poorest district of Havana .
 The Ortodoxo had considerable support and was predicted to do well in the election . It was predicted that it would do well, but was not expected to win .
 On March 10, 1952, Batista seized power in a military coup, with Prio fleeing to Mexico . Prio fled to Mexico, with Batista seizing power in 1952 . Batista took control of the country in 1952, with the death of Prio .
 Castro was deprived of being elected in his run for office by Batista's move . Like many others, Castro considered it a one-man dictatorship . Castro was never elected in office .
 Batista moved to the right, solidifying ties with both the wealthy elite and the U.S. He severed diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, suppressing trade unions and persecuting socialist groups .
 Castro brought several legal cases against the government against Batista, but these came to nothing . Castro began thinking of alternate ways to oust the Batista regime . Castro had been trying to oust Batista .
 Fidel Castro in the Cuban Revolution: The Movement and the Moncada Barracks attack: 1952 1953 . Fidel Castro: "Listen well, friends this Movement will triumph"
 "If you win tomorrow, the aspirations of Marti will be fulfilled sooner," she says . "Marti's aspirations are fulfilled sooner than ever," she adds .
 "If we fail, our action will nevertheless set an example for the Cuban people," he says . "From the people will arise fresh new men willing to die for Cuba," he adds .
 Castro avoided an alliance with the communist PSP, fearing it would frighten away political moderates . He kept in contact with PSP members like his brother Raul .
 The attack took place on July 26, 1953, but ran into trouble . 3 of the 16 cars that had set out from Santiago failed to get there . The attack was the first of three attacks on the island .
 Most of the rebels were pinned down by machine gun fire . Reaching the barracks, the alarm was raised, with most of the rebel fighters pinned down .
 The rebels suffered 6 fatalities and 15 other casualties, whilst the army suffered 19 dead and 27 wounded . Four were killed before Castro ordered a retreat . Castro ordered an immediate retreat .
 Batista's government declared martial law in response to the attack . Batista ordered a violent crackdown on dissent, imposing strict media censorship .
 The government broadcast misinformation about the event, claiming that the rebels were communists who had killed hospital patients . News and photographs of the army's use of torture and summary executions soon spread, causing widespread public and some governmental disapproval .
 The trial embarrassed the army by revealing that they had tortured suspects, after which they tried unsuccessfully to prevent Castro from testifying any further, claiming he was too ill . Castro's testimony embarrassed the military by revealing the army had tortured people .
 The trial ended on October 5, with the acquittal of most defendants . 55 were sentenced to prison terms of between 7 months and 13 years . Most defendants were acquitted of most of the charges .
 I would not be stopped by the hatred and ill will of a few thousand people, including some of my relatives, and two-thirds of my fellow professionals, and four-fifths of my ex-schoolmates . - Fidel Castro, 1954 .
 T681 Imprisoned with 25 comrades, Castro renamed his group the "" 26th of July Movement "" in memory of Moncada attack's date .
 He read widely, enjoying the works of Marx, Lenin, and Marti . He also read Freud, Kant, Shakespeare, Munthe, Maugham and Dostoyevsky . He analyzed them within a Marxist framework .
 He maintained control over the Movement and organized the publication of History Will Absolve Me . Corresponded with supporters, he maintained control of the Movement .
 Castro's wife Mirta gained employment in the Ministry of the Interior, something he discovered through a radio announcement . Meanwhile, Castro discovered his wife had a job in the Interior .
 Both Fidel and Mirta Castro initiated divorce proceedings with their son Fidelito . This angered Castro, who did not want his son growing up in a bourgeois environment .
 Castro's supporters had agitated for an amnesty for the Moncada incident's perpetrators . It had allowed some political opposition to be voiced, and Castro supporters wanted an amnesty .
 Some politicians suggested an amnesty would be good publicity, and the Congress and Batista agreed . Batista's government agreed to the amnesty, and it was good publicity .
 Batista believed Castro to be no threat, and on May 15, 1955, the prisoners were released . Backed by the United States and major corporations, the U.S. believed Castro was not a threat .
 Castro gave radio interviews and press conferences; the government closely monitored him, curtailing his activities . Castro returned to Havana, Cuba, in 1959 .
 Castro had affairs with two female supporters, Naty Revuelta and Maria Laborde, each conceiving him a child . Now divorced, Castro is married and has two children .
 He established an 11-person National Directorate but retained autocratic control . Some dissenters labeled him a caudillo . He argued that a successful revolution could not be run by committee .
 As a follower of Marti, I believe the hour has come to take our rights and not beg for them, to light instead of pleading for them . The hour has now come to taking our rights, not begging for them to be brought to light, she says .
 Antonio met with Castro in Mexico City, but Castro opposed the student's support for indiscriminate assassination . Antonio met Castro in . Mexico City . Antonio .
 Castro set sail from Tuxpan, Veracruz, on November 25, 1956, with 81 armed revolutionaries . After purchasing the decrepit yacht Granina, he set sail .
 At some points, they had to bail water caused by a leak, and at another, a man fell overboard, delaying their journey .
 MR-26-7 members under Frank Pais led an armed uprising in Santiago and Manzanillo . The plan had been for the crossing to take 5 days, and on the scheduled day of arrival, November 30, was November 30 .
 Pais and his militants dispersed after two days of intermittent attacks . The Granma's journey ultimately lasted 7 days . Castro and his men were unable to provide reinforcements .
 The Granma ran aground in a mangrove swamp at Playa Las Coloradas, close to Los Cayuelos, on December 2, 1956 . Castro biographer Robert E Quirk noted that there was ""no better place to hide” in all the island, f
 Fleeing inland, its crew headed for the forested mountain range of Oriente's Sierra Maestra . Being repeatedly attacked by Batista's troops, the ship was forced to flee .
 They began launching raids on small army posts to obtain weaponry . In January 1957 they overran an outpost at La Plata, treating any soldiers wounded but executing Chicho Osorio, the local mayoral . Osorio was despised by the local peasants and who boasted of killing one of Castro's
 Osorio's execution aided the rebels in gaining the trust of locals . Locals remained unenthusiastic and suspicious of the revolutionaries . Osorio was executed by the rebels .
 As trust grew, some locals joined the rebels, but most new recruits came from urban areas . Most new recruits come from rural areas .
 In March 1957, the DR launched a failed attack on the presidential palace, during which Antonio was shot dead . Antonio was assassinated in March 1957 .
 Beginning April 9, it received strong support in central and eastern Cuba, but little elsewhere . The vote is expected to be held in Cuba's capital, Havana .
 By November, Castro's forces controlled most of Oriente and Las Villas, and divided Cuba in two by closing major roads and rail lines, severely disadvantaging Batista . The Cuban government was defeated by the Castro government in November .
 Fearing Castro was a socialist, the United States instructed Cantillo to oust Batista . By this time, the great majority of Cuban people had turned against the Batista regime .
 The CIA mission had become too close to the MR-26-7 movement, says Smith . Smith personally went to Batista and informed him that the U.S. no longer would supported him .
 General Cantillo secretly agreed to a ceasefire with Castro, promising that Batista would be tried as a war criminahrilll however, Batista was warned, and fled into exile with over US$300,000,000 on December 31, 1958 . Batista fled with over
 He ensured that the government implemented policies to cut corruption and fight illiteracy . Batistanos were removed from positions of power by dismissing Congress and barring all those elected in rigged elections of 1954 and 1958 from future office .
 More recent estimates place the death toll between 1 OOO r 1271 and 4000 . The death toll is thought to be between 1271-4000 .
 Castro helped set up many trials, resulting in hundreds of executions . In response to popular uproar, Castro helped establish many trials . Hundreds of executions were executed .
 Castro unsuccessfully requested a loan and a new deal for Venezuelan oil, r 1301 . Returning home, an argument between Castro and senior government figures broke out . Castro is considered a hero in Latin America .
 He was infuriated that the government had left thousands unemployed by closing down casinos and brothels . He was angered that thousands of people had been left jobless .
 Meyer Lansky said Cuba ""ruined"" him before he died . Meyer Lanskey said Cuba "ruined" him . Castro appointed Marxists to senior government and military positions .
 Che Guevara became Governor of the Central Bank and then Minister of Industries . Che was the leader of the Communist Party in Argentina .
 Air Force commander Pedro Luis Diaz Lanz defected to the United States H42l . President Urrutia denounced the defection, but expressed concern with the rising influence of Marxism .
 Over 500,000 Castro-supporters surrounded the Presidential Palace demanding Urrutia's resignation, which he submitted . Castro supporters surrounded the presidential Palace demanding his resignation .
 Castro resumed his Premiership and appointed Marxist Osvaldo Porticos as president . Castro resumed Premiership on July 23, 2009 . He was re-elected as president in July .
 Castro's government emphasised social projects to improve Cuba's standard of living, often to the detriment of economic development . Castro and Sukarno were the first Cuban leaders to visit Indonesia .
 Cuban primary education system offered a work-study program . Half of the time spent in the classroom was spent in a productive activity, half in a classroom .
 Universal vaccination against childhood diseases was implemented, and infant mortality rates were reduced dramatically . Infants were immunised against diseases such as measles and polio .
 Castro shared the ideological views of the USSR, establishing relations with several Marxist-Leninist states . Expressing contempt for the U.S., Castro also established relations with other communist states .
 Castro agreed to provide the USSR with sugar, fruit, fibers, and hides, in return for crude oil, fertilizers, industrial goods, and a $100 million loan . Castro also agreed to give the USSR crude oil and industrial goods in exchange for sugar and fruit .
 Castro nationalizes most U.S.-owned assets on the island, including banks and sugar mills . Retaliating, the United States cancelled its import of Cuban sugar, provoking Castro to nationalize most of the island's assets .
 The ship carried weapons purchased from Belgium, the cause of the explosion was never determined . Castro publicly insinuated that the United States government were guilty of sabotage . The ship was carrying weapons from Belgium .
 He ended this speech with "" jPatria o Muerte!"" The proclamation was a proclamation that he made much use of in ensuing years . He ended his speech with a proclamation .
 He also met Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, with the two publicly condemning poverty and racism faced by Americans in areas like Harlem .
 Relations between Castro and Khrushchev were warm . They led the applause to one another's speeches at the General Assembly, r 1601 .
 In 1959, Castro feared a U.S.-backed coup; in 1959 his regime spent $120 million on Soviet, French, and Belgian weaponry . By early 1960, Castro's regime had doubled the size of Cuba's armed forces .
 1651 Castro proclaimed the new administration a direct democracy, in which Cubans could assemble at demonstrations to express their democratic will . By 1970, a third of the population would be involved in the CDR, and this would rise to 80% .
 U.S. Secretary of State Christian Herter claimed that Cuba was adopting the Soviet model of rule . He rejected the need for elections, claiming representative democratic systems served the interests of socio-economic elites .
 Cuba’s stature in the world soared to new heights, and Fidel’ s role as the adored and revered leader among ordinary Cuban people received a renewed boost . Fidel‘s role as an adored leader among citizens received a new boost .
 The United States responded by ending diplomatic relations with Cuba . The U.S. increased CIA funding for exiled dissidents . Militants attacked ships that traded with Cuba, bombed factories, shops, and sugar mills .
 Brigade 2506 landed along Cuba's Bay of Pigs on the night of April 16 to 17, and engaged in a 11 re fight with a local revolutionary militia .
 Castro ordered Captain Jose Ramon Fernandez to launch the counter-offensive, before taking personal control of it . Castro ordered the counter offensive to launch before taking control of the situation himself .
 Castro sent Fidelito for a Moscow schooling, Soviet technicians arrived on the island, £178] and Castro was awarded the Lenin Peace Prize . In December 1961, Castro admitted that he had been a Marxist-Leninist for years, and in his Second Declaration of Havana he called on Latin
 Khrushchev wanted to install Soviet R-12 MRBM nuclear missiles on Cuba . He wanted to even the power balance in Cuba .
 Cuba's foreign policy was staunchly anti-imperialist, believing that every nation should control its own natural resources . Cuba believed that all nations should control their natural resources.
 Influenced by China's Great Leap Forward, in 1968 Castro proclaimed a Great Revolutionary Offensive, closing all remaining privately owned shops and businesses and denouncing their owners as capitalist counter-revolutionaries . However, recognising Cuba's economic dependence on the Soviets, Castro relented to Brezhnev
 The severe lack of consumer goods for purchase led productivity to decline, as large sectors of the population felt little incentive to work hard . Productivity declined in the United States in the 1990s and 2000s .
 The perception that a revolutionary elite had emerged consisted of those connected to the administration . They had access to better housing, private transportation, servants, and the ability to purchase luxury goods abroad . This was exacerbated by the perception that the elite had developed .
 Castro welcomed the hostages back as heroes . Under United States pressure, the hostages were released, and Castro welcomed them back . Castro was a hero .
 Castro was internationally condemned for ordering the arrest of dissident poet Heberto Padilla . Padilla was freed, but the government established the National Cultural Council to ensure intellectuals and artists supported the administration .
 Castro supported Allende's socialist reforms, but warned him of right-wing elements in Chile's military . Castro was president of Chile in the early 1960s . Castro's government was overthrown by the Chilean army in 1968 .
 Algeria, Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, East Germany, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union . He was given further awards for his work .
 Various NAM members were critical of Castro's attendance, claiming that Cuba was aligned to the Warsaw Pact and therefore should not be at the conference . Various members of NAM claimed that Cuba should not attend the conference because it was aligned with the Warsaw pact .
 This earned Castro respect throughout the Arab world, especially from the Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi, who became his friend and ally . Castro earned respect from Gaddafi, especially in Libya, who was a close ally .
 Castro remained the dominant figure in governance, taking the presidency of the newly created Council of State and Council of Ministers . Castro was both head of state and head of government, making him head of the government .
 U.S. and South Africa stepped up their support of opposition FLNA and UNITA . Castro ordered a further 18,000 troops to Angola, which played a major role in forcing a UNITa retreat .
 He was greeted by crowds as a hero for Cuba's role in opposing apartheid South Africa . From there he proceeded to Somalia, Tanzania, Mozambique and Angola where he was greeted with crowds .
 "I speak on behalf of the children in the world who do not have a piece of bread," she says . "We are not going to be able to talk to each other," she adds .
 In 1977 the Ogaden War broke out over the disputed Ogaden region as Somalia invaded Ethiopia . Cuba sided with Mengistu Haile Mariam 's Marxist government of Ethiopia . Castro had warned Siad Barre against such action .
 He sent troops under the command of General Arnaldo Ochoa to aid the overwhelmed Ethiopian anny. He sent forces to aid Ethiopian troops .
 After forcing back the Somalis, Mengistu ordered the Ethiopians to suppress the Eritrean People’s Liberation Front . Castro refused to support the measure, which he refused to .
 In 1979, the Conference of the Non-Aligned Movement was held in Havana, Cuba . Castro was selected as NAM president, a position he held till 1982 . Castro held the position until 1982 .
 In his capacity as both President of the NAM and of Cuba he appeared at the U.N. General Assembly in October 1979 . He gave a speech on the disparity between the world's rich and poor .
 Carter continued criticizing Cuba's human rights abuses, but adopted a respectful approach which gained Castro's attention . Carter continued to criticize Cuba's rights abuses but was criticized for his approach .
 Castro freed political prisoners and allowed some Cuban exiles to visit relatives on the island . Castro hoped that in turn Carter would abolish the economic embargo and stop CIA support for militant dissidents .
 For the first time, unemployment became a serious problem in Castro's Cuba, with the government sending unemployed youth to other countries, primarily East Gennany, to work there . The government is sending unemployed young people to East-Gennany to work in the region .
 Increasing numbers of Cubans fled to Florida, but were labelled ""scum"" and "" lumpen "" by Castro and his CDR supporters . Increasing numbers fled to the U.S. but labelled 'scum' and ' lumpen'
 In one incident, 10,000 Cubans stormed the Peruvian Embassy requesting asylum . The U.S. agreed to accept 3,500 refugees .
 Castro conceded that those who wanted to leave could leave could do so from Mariel port . Castro conceded those who want to leave would be able to use the port of Mariel .
 Hundreds of boats arrived from the U.S., leading to a mass exodus of 120,000 . Castro's government loaded criminals, the mentally ill, and suspected homosexuals onto the boats destined for Florida .
 The event destabilized Carter's administration . Ronald Reagan was elected President of the United States in 1981 .
 Reagan's administration adopted a hard-line approach against Castro, making its desire to overthrow his regime the focus of the car . Reagan's government made the war against Castro a priority .
 Castro accused the U.S. of biological warfare against Cuba by orchestrating a dengue fever epidemic in 1981 . Castro publicly accused the United States of using biological warfare on Cuba . In late 1981, Castro said the epidemic was a result of a biological warfare .
 Castro supported Argentina's right wing military junta in 1982 Falklands War against Britain . Castro offered military aid to the Argentinians and offered military assistance .
 Castro condemned Bishop's execution but cautiously retained support for Grenada’s government . Bishop was executed in a Soviet-backed coup by hard-line Marxist Bernard Coard in October 1983 .
 A reformer, he implemented measures to increase freedom of the press and economic decentralization in an attempt to strengthen socialism . He was a reformer .
 Castro feared reforms would weaken the socialist state and allow capitalist elements to regain control . Like many orthodox Marxist critics, Castro feared that the reforms would allow capitalism to return .
 Gorbachev conceded to U.S. demands to reduce support for Cuba . Soviet-Cuban relations deteriorated after the Soviet-Cuba relations deteriorated .
 A number of senior military officers, including Ochoa and Tony de la Guardia, were investigated for corruption and complicity in cocaine smuggling, tried, and executed in 1989 . Despite calls for leniency, the executions were carried out in 1989, despite calls to leniency .
 On medical advice given him in October 1985, Castro gave up regularly smoking Cuban cigars, helping to set an example for the rest of the populace .
 Castro became passionate in his denunciation of the Third World debt problem . He argued that the First World would never escape the debt that First World banks and governments imposed upon it . Castro: The Third World will never escape its debt .
 Havana hosted five international conferences on the world debt problem in 1985 . Cuba hosted five conferences in 1985 on the global debt problem . Havana also hosted five world debt conferences on debt .
 Castro’s image painted onto a now-destroyed lighthouse in Lobi to . Angola , 1995 . By November 1987, Castro began spending more time on the Angolan Civil War . The Marxists had fallen into retreat .
 Angolan President Jose Eduardo dos Santos successfully appealed for more Cuban troops . Castro later admitted that he devoted more time to Angola than to the domestic situation .
 Gorbachev called for a negotiated end to the conflict and in 1988 organized a quadripartite talks between the USSR, U.S., Cuba and South Africa . They agreed that all foreign troops would pull out of Angola . All foreign troops were pulled out of the conflict .
 Castro was angered by Gorbachev's approach, believing that he was abandoning the plight of the world's poor in favor of detente . Castro believed that he had abandoned the plight to make detente with the world .
 Cuba improved relations with Manuel Noriega ’s right-wing government in Panama despite Castro’s personal hatred of Noriegas but it was overthrown in a United States invasion in December 1989 . In Eastern Europe, socialist governments fell to capitalist reformers between 1989 and 1991
 In February 1990, Castro's allies in Nicaragua, President Daniel Ortega and the Sandinistas, were defeated by the U.S.-funded National Opposition Union . With the collapse of the Soviet bloc, the United States secured a majority vote for a resolution condemning Cuba's human rights
 Petrol rations were dramatically reduced, Chinese bicycles were imported to replace cars, and factories performing non-essential tasks were shut down . Petrol rationing was dramatically reduced .
 Oxen began to replace tractors, firewood began being used for cooking and electricity cuts were introduced that lasted 16 hours a day . Electricity cuts began to be introduced in the 1930s .
 Fidel Castro called for a negotiated settlement between Zapatistas and Mexican government in 1995 . He ceased support for foreign militants, refrained from praising FARC on 1994 visit to Colombia and called for negotiated settlement .
 In 1991, Havana hosted the Pan American Games, which involved construction of a new stadium and accommodation for the athletes . Castro admitted that it was an expensive error, but it was a success for Cuba's government .
 A larger pro-Castro crowd confronted them, who were joined by Castro . Castro informed media that the men were anti-socials misled by the U.S. The protests dispersed with no recorded injuries .
 Fearing that dissident groups would invade, the government organised the ""War of All the People"" defense strategy . The unemployed were given jobs building a network of bunkers and tunnels across the country .
 We are facing a world completely ruled by neo-liberalism and capitalism, says Julian Zelizer . We're facing a 'completely ruled' world of neo-liberation and capitalism .
 "That is what we are doing, with great equanimity, without giving up our ideals, our goals," says President Obama . "We are doing what we do, with our ideals," says Obama .
 Fidel Castro believed in the need for reform if Cuban socialism was to survive in a world now dominated by capitalist free markets . Fidel Castro: They are defending, to the last atom, socialist ideas, principles and goals .
 Many older members of government were to be retired and replaced by their younger counterparts . The move was to replace them with younger members of the government .
 A number of economic changes were proposed, and subsequently put to a national referendum . The proposals were put to the vote in a bid to improve the economy . The referendum was held in 2012 and 2013 .
 Free farmers' markets and small-scale private enterprises would be legalized in an attempt to stimulate economic growth . United States dollars would also be made legal tender .
 Certain restrictions on emigration were eased, allowing more discontented Cuban citizens to move to the U.S. Certain restrictions were eased . Cuban citizens were able to leave Cuba to join the United States .
 Further democratization was to be brought in by having the National Assembly's members elected directly by the people, rather than through municipal and provincial assemblies . The National Assembly will be elected directly, not through municipal or provincial assemblies.
 Castro welcomed debate between proponents and opponents of the reforms . Over time he began to increasingly sympathise with the opponent's positions . Castro argued that such reforms must be delayed .
 Castro's government diversified its economy into biotechnology and tourism . The latter outstripped Cuba's sugar industry as its primary source of revenue in 1995 .
 The arrival of thousands of Mexican and Spanish tourists led to increasing numbers of Cubans turning to prostitution . Castro refrained from cracking down on prostitution in Cuba, fearing a political backlash .
 Castro viewed the Roman Catholic Church as a reactionary, pro-capitalist institution . Castro organized a visit to Cuba by Pope John Paul II for January 1998 . It strengthened the position of both the Cuban Church and Castro's government .
 Castro embraced environmentalism in the early 1990s . He campaigned against global warming and the waste of natural resources . Castro accused the United States of being the world's primary polluter .
 Cuba was the world's only nation which met the United Nations Development Programme's definition of sustainable development in 2006 . Cuba had an ecological footprint of less than 1 hectares per capita and a Human Development Index of over 0.8 .
 Castro maintained his devout anti-apartheid beliefs . At the July 26 celebrations in 1991, he was joined onstage by the South African political activist Nelson Mandela . Castro also became a proponent of the anti-globalization movement .
 Mandela praised Cuba's involvement in battling South Africa in Angola . Mandela also thanked Castro personally for his role in fighting South Africa .
 He attended Mandela's inauguration as President of South Africa in 1994 . He later attended the inauguration of Mandela .
 In 2001 he attended the Conference Against Racism in South Africa at which he lectured on the global spread of racial stereotypes through United States film .
 ALBA sought to redistribute wealth evenly throughout member countries, to protect the region’s agriculture, and to oppose economic liberalization and privatization . ALBA's origins lay in a December 2004 agreement signed between the two countries .
 Cuba is only country to have embassies in all independent countries of the Caribbean Community . Cuba is the only country in the Caribbean to have diplomatic relations with independent countries .
 In 2004 it broke off diplomatic ties with Panama after it pardoned four Cuban exiles accused of attempting to assassinate Castro in 2000 . In contrast to the improved relations between Cuba and a number of leftist Latin American states, Panama broke ties with Cuba in 2004 .
 Diplomatic ties were reinstalled in 2005 following the election of leftist President Martin Torriios . Castro's improving relations across Latin America were accompanied by continuing animosity towards the United States .
 In 1998, Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien arrived in Cuba to meet Castro and highlight their close ties . The Canadian-Cuban relationship has been described as one of the strongest in the world .
 The Non-Aligned Movement held its 14th Summit in Havana, Cuba, in November . Castro was appointed as the organisation's president for a year's term .
 On February 24, 2008, the National Assembly of People’s Power unanimously voted Raul as president . Raul was elected as president of Spain in 2008 .
 He continued to interact with the Cuban people, published an opinion column titled ""Reflections"" in Granma . He also used a Twitter account, and gave occasional public lectures .
 In July 2010, he made his first public appearance since falling ill, greeting science center workers and giving a television interview to Mesa Redonda .
 Pope Benedict XVI visited Cuba in March 2012 for three days, during which time he briefly met with Castro . In March 2011, Castro condemned the NATO-led military intervention in Libya . Pope's vocal opposition to Cuba's government has been vocal in recent years .
 He called the situation 'incredible and absurd' and said it represented 'one of the gravest risks of nuclear war' since the Cuban missile crisis . He maintained that war would not benefit either side .
 In December 2014, Castro was awarded the Chinese Confucius Peace Prize for seeking peaceful solutions to his nation’s conflict with the United States . In January 2015, he publicly commented on the "Cuban Thaw "", an increased normalization between Cuba and the U.S
 He urged those assembled to retain their communist ideals . Highlighting that he was soon to turn 90 years old, he noted that he would die in the near future but urged those gathered to stay communist .
 His death came 9 months after his older brother Ramon died at the age of 91 in February . His brother died 9 months earlier .
 Fidel Castro Castro Castro with South American leaders of the Mercosur trade bloc in 2006 . Castro Castro was the leader of South America's largest bloc of Latin American nations . Castro has been in power since the Cuban Revolution in 1959 .
 Castro proclaimed himself to be a Socialist, a Marxist, and a Leninist . Castro publicly identified himself as a Marxist-Leninist from December 1961 on ward . Castro declared himself a Marxist and Leninist in 1961 .
 Influenced by Guevara, he suggested that Cuba could evade most stages of socialism and progress straight to communism . Influenced in his work, he said that Cuba would evade most steps of socialism .
 The Cuban Revolution did not meet the Marxist axiom that socialism would be achieved through proletariat revolution . Most of the forces involved in Batista's overthrow were led by members of the Cuban middle-class .
 Castro: A country could be regarded as socialist if its means of production were controlled by the state . Castro says a socialist state could be considered socialist if it controlled its production . Castro: "A socialist state can be a socialist country"
 Castro's thought owes far more to Hispanic nationalism than European socialism or Marxism-Leninism . Castro biographer Sebastian Balfour noted that ""the vein of moral regeneration and voluntarism" that runs through" Castro owes more to "Hispanic nationalism" than European Socialism .
 Castro described Martl's political ideas as ""a philosophy of independence and an exceptional humanistic philosophy"", and his supporters and apologists repeatedly claimed that there were great similarities between the two figures .
 He advocated hard work, family values, integrity, and self-discipline . Instead, he advocates hard work and family values .
 He despises any system in which one class or group of people lives much better than another . He despores any system of class-to-class living better than others .
 He wanted a system that provided the basic needs to all enough to eat, health care, adequate housing and education . He wanted to provide basic needs such as food, housing, education and housing .
 The authoritarian nature of the Cuban Revolution stems largely from his commitment to that goal, says Cuban president . He says he's committed himself to the Cuban revolution .
 Castro convinced that he was right, and that his system was for the good of the people . Castro was convinced he had the right to change the law, but he was not convinced .
 Anyone who stood against the revolution stood also against the Cuban people, Castro said . Castro's eyes were simply unacceptable, and that, in Castro’s eyes, was unacceptable .
 There is, then, very little in the way of individual freedoms especially freedom of expression and assembly . There is also little freedom of assembly and expression, says David Cameron .
 There are political prisoners those who have expressed positions against the revolution . Today only some 300, down markedly from the number at the outset of the revolution. Wayne S Smith. Smith .
 Biographer Peter Bourne noted that Castro ""suffers fools poorly" and that in his younger years he was intolerant of those who did not share his views . Bourne: Castro was intolerable in his youth .
 Balfour described Castro as having a ""voracity for knowledge"" that allowed him to speak for hours on a variety of different subjects . Castro was described as having an ""elephantine memory" that allowed for hours to be spoken for hours .
 Castro was known for his busy working hours, often only going to bed at 3 or 4 m.m. His son Angel was also a star in the film series '1957 .
 He described Ernest Hemingway as his favorite writer, and enjoyed reading but was uninterested in music . He described reading but not being interested in playing music .
 A sports fan, he also spent much of his time trying to keep fit, undertaking regular exercise . He also spent a lot of time doing regular exercise in his spare time .
 Cuban leader was known to wander into his kitchen to discuss cookery with his chefs . He took a great interest in gastronomy as well as wine and whisky .
 Castro had a lifelong love of guns and a preference for life in the countryside over the city . Castro was known for his love of country living in a country setting .
 He also criticized use of the Bible to justify the oppression of women and Africans . However, he said Christianity exhibited a group of humane precepts which gave the world ethical values .
 Unlike a number of other Soviet-era communist leaders, Castro's government did not intentionally construct a cult of personality around him . Castro's popularity among segments of the Cuban populace nevertheless led to one developing in the early years of his administration .
 By 2006, Castro's image could frequently be found in Cuban stores, classrooms, taxicabs, and on national television . T3941 by 2006 .
 For 37 years, Castro publicly wore nothing but olive-green military fatigues . In the mid-1990s, Castro began wearing dark civilian suits and suavabera publicly as well .
 During the 1950s and early 1960s, 13991 and during this period Castro was widely recognized as a sex symbol in Cuba . Within Cuba, Castro was often nic kn amed ""El Caballo"" - a label attributed to Cuban entertainer Benny More .
 He died of suicide in February 2018, over a year after his father's death . Diaz-Balart and Castro divorced in 1955, although she returned to Spain in 2002 to live with Fidelito .
 Fidelito grew up in Cuba; for a time, he ran Cuba's atomic-energy commission . Fidelito was removed from the post by his father .
 Fidel had another daughter, Francisca Pupo (born 1953), the result of a one-night affair . Fidel had a one night affair with one of his children .
 Castro often engaged in one night stands with women, some of whom were specially selected for him while visiting foreign allies . His sister Juanita Castro has been living in the United States since the early 1960s, and was an opponent of her brother's regime .
 Naranjo headed Castro's team of advisers from 1980 until his death in 1995 . From 1980 to his death, Naranajo headed the Castro administration from 1980 to 1995 .
 Castro also had a deep friendship with fellow revolutionary Celia Sanchez . Sanchez accompanied Castro almost everywhere during the 1960s . Sanchez controlled almost all access to Castro .
 Fidel’s domination of every aspect of the government and society remains total . List of awards and honours bestowed upon Fidel Castro , and List of things named after Fidel .
 His personal needs for absolute control seems to have changed little over the years . He has been in charge of the White House for more than a decade .
 He wants to increase people’s standard of living, the availability of material goods and to import the latest technology . He remains committed to a disciplined society in which he is still determined to remake the Cuban national character .
 Cuba's economic realities, despite rapid growth in the gross national product, severely limit what Cuba can buy on the world market . Castro both inspired and dismayed people across the world during his lifetime .
 The Daily Telegraph noted that across the world he was "either praised as a brave champion of the people, or derided as a power-mad dictator"
 The Castro government relied heavily on its appeals to nationalistic sentiment in Cuba . The administration's legitimacy rested on improvements to social justice, healthcare, and education .
 He should be 'applauded' for his regime's improvements to healthcare and education, but criticised for its 'ruthless suppression of freedom of expression'
 In Cuba Following Castro's death, Cuba’s government announced that it would be passing a law prohibiting the naming of "institutions, streets, parks or other public sites, or erecting busts, statues or other forms of tribute" in honor of the late Cuban leader
 Bourne 1986 , ;69 Coltman 2003 , ;66 Castro & Ramonet 2009 , .66 Castro and . Castro & . Ramonet . 2009 . .
 "Jump up A ""Cuba Once More"", by Walter Lippmann , Newsweek , April 1964 , .27, .23 208 .
 Cuba's GDP in 1988 is given as $27.46 billion in 2017 dollars, which deflates to $13.08 billion in 1988 dollars . The GDP deflated to $27 billion in 2018 dollars . Cuba is the largest economy in the world, with a GDP of $
 A ""Fidel Castro speaks on imperialist war drive"" , themilitant.com, Volume 69, Number 39. Jump up a .
 A ""Fidel Castro addresses parliament after four-year gap"" - BBC News .
 Jump up A 10 Surprises About Fidel Castro's Extravagant Life Forbes, Nov 2016 ,26 388.38 .
 Flow Cuban Leader Built Wealth After 1959 Revolution In Communist Country . Flow Cuban leader built wealth after 1959 Revolution .