 Marvin Kalb is a Moderator . He introduces the program and also serves as a kind of Moderator.
 Tibet, the CIA, and the Sino-Indian War, were the subject of the S.I. War . Tibet and the U.S. have been at odds with each other for decades .
 Bruce Drexler was CBS' Moscow Correspondent in 1962 . He was the CBS Moscow correspondent . He says he was "totally absorbed in another crisis that was taking place"
 The 1962 Sino-Indian War took place in China in 1962 . The two nations fought in China and the West in the 1960s and 1960s .
 At that time in 1962, I did have one ear cocked to news about the Sino-Indian War, because my brother who is right here with us today, Bernard Kalb, was a Journalist for CBS covering that war .
 "Thank you for bringing your brother as well, and thank all of you for coming," she said . "I'm happy to have your brother join me and I'm very happy to be able to see him in person."
 On October 16, 1962, McGeorge Bundy, John F Kennedy's National Security Aide, opened his top-secret folder in the West Wing . Bundy was JFK's national security aide . Bundy's top secret file was opened in the morning of October 16 .
 National Security Advisor gets a top secret folder put together by the White House Situation Room of the most important cables, and events that have gone on overnight . Bundy had two very, very important cables in that folder .
 The State Department warned that the border conflict between India and China was heating up . It increasingly looked likely that China and India would find themselves in a full-scale border war sometime in that month .
 The State Department also told the President that should that come to pass, the Chinese would almost certainly prevail because they are better equipped, they were better led, and had more experience recently in fighting .
 If they did prevail, India would probably turn to the U.S. for assistance, requiring a major presidential decision . It would be a major decision, not just about assistance to India, but also about how that would balance with America's very close relationship with Pakistan .
 U2 imagery taken 24 hours earlier had found intermediate-range ballistic missiles being introduced by the Soviet Union into Communist Cuba . The second memorabilia in McGeorge Bundy's overnight folder was from the Central Intelligence Agency .
 It appeared to be an issue in which the survival of mankind was at stake, and in fact it was an issue . It was a matter in fact, and it was in fact a matter of life at stake . The survival of the world is at stake in this issue .
 We thought back in 1962 many Americans, many Russians, many Europeans thought the world was on the brink of Armageddon . We thought . Many people around the world thought the . world was . on the verge of Armageddon, we thought . Back in 1962, many Americans thought . of the world
 CIA estimated that there were 5 to 8,000 Soviet soldiers in Cuba . In fact, it was closer than we thought, at the time for example .
 The CIA thought there were only intermediate-range ballistic missiles . But at the time, the CIA believed there was only intermediate range ballistic missile missiles .
 The Soviets brought with them with them tactical missiles capable of firing nuclear weapons at relatively short ranges . They had surrounded Guantanamo Bay with a battery of these, and the Battery Commander had preauthorization to start firing . The first bombs dropped by the U.S. on the island were dropped
 The State Department turned out to be remarkably present in this case . But that shouldn't dismiss for our eyes the other crisis, the State Department was writing about and warning about .
 China did invade India, and it quickly got the upper hand . Within days of the invasion of India Prime Minister Nehru had to do one of the most difficult things in his entire life .
 He had to turn to the Americans, and even worse, to the British for assistance, for help . He was forced to rely on the Americans for help, and the British .
 At the end of October, 1962, the United States and the Royall Air Force began an airlift of urgent supplies to India .
 Eight Boeing 707s landed every day dropping off 20 tons of equipment for the Indian Army . American C-130s flew them to the battlefield to try to stop the Chinese invasion .
 They weren’t just members of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization; they were members of Central Treaty Organization . They were also members of S.A. Treaty Organization and Central Treaty Organisation .
 Field Marshal Ayub Khan complained to the American Ambassador, and wrote to Kennedy . He said Pakistan deserves some kind of compensation for staying neutral in the war . Kennedy: We wouldn't sell arms to India without consulting with them first .
 President Kennedy and Prime Minister Nehru faced a nightmare scenario of both being forced to open a second front which was, in the end, the nightmare scenario . In effect, signaling that if it didn’t get what it wanted, and it was pretty clear what it . wanted,
 When they started their second offensive, the Indians overwhelmed the Indians completely . And when they started to start again, they overwhelmed them completely .
 It appeared for a brief period of time, in mid-November 1962, that the Chinese would not only take over the border area, but will in fact take over all of Eastern India . The whole part of the country to what is now the east of Bangladesh is now Bangladesh .
 On the 19 of November, 1962, Nehru wrote two letters to President Kennedy, in the second of those two letters he said, catastrophe was imminent . There were even fears in India, and the CIA had the same fears, that the Chinese would open another front .
 We have to have more comprehensive assistance if the Chinese are to be prevented from taking over the whole of Eastern India . The Chinese have already taken over the entire Eastern India, says the PM .
 Nehru's request was that the Indian Air Force would bomb into Tibet at the supply lines of the Chinese, and the U.S. would defend Indian airspace . Nehru requested that the American Air Force defend India airspace .
 The U.S. is dealing with the world's largest democracy, to the United States, with assistance to fight Russia . Russia is the largest democracy in the world, and the U.K. is the most populous country .
 Talk about multi-tasking, this is multitasking at it's probably highest art form . Talk about multitasking .
 36 hours after Nehru's letter was received in the White House, the Chinese unilaterally stopped . The Chinese unilaterally pulled out of the U.S. without warning .
 Why they stopped, whether that had always been their intention to stop, are questions we don’t know . We don't know why they stopped .
 We have access to a lot of American records, and a good deal of Indian records, but we don’t have access . We also don't know what Chinese records are, but they’ve got access to many of the world’s biggest records .
 We do know that he had done two immediate things in response to Nehru's letter . We also know what he did when he received the letter .
 American aircraft carrier, the Battle Group, dispatched to the Bay of Bengal, as a visible show of U.S. support . Second, he dispatched Averell Harriman, who is one of the wisest, gray-haired statesman in American history .
 FDR sent FDR to London during the Blitz and then sent to Moscow during the Battle of Moscow . FDR had sent him to London in the Blitz, then to Moscow in Moscow in 1944 .
 A year after the crisis would come to a head in November 1962, the U.S. Air Force, the Royal Air Force and pilots from the Royal Canadian Air Force carried out a large exercise in India which was exactly what Nehru had requested the year before .
 We'll never know the answer to the question, what would Kennedy have done, had the Chinese not stopped . Kennedy would not have stopped the Chinese in the 1960s .
 A year later, we carried out exactly the -in an exercise the . operation Nehru wanted, it gives you a lot of indication that we probably would have gone to war in 1962 with China .
 One of the key lessons, I think, is that the President learned in Cuba, and applied it almost immediately to India, that government by committee is not a good idea . The President learned the lessons in Cuba and applied them to India .
 He also learned to be very careful listening to the experts, listening to experts you hand-selected for the job . He listened to his Ambassador in New Delhi, John Kenneth Galbraith .
 It's also terribly relevant in another way, because if you put it, oversimplified, and it is oversimplifyified, but I think it's essentially true, the geopolitics of Asia were set in 1962 . It's a reminder that Asia's geopolitics was set in
 China is now clearly Pakistan's number one ally in the world investing, this year, $46 billion in Pakistan . This year, China is investing $46billion in Pakistan. We are now 50-some years later .
 U.S., India, entente, access, relationship, whatever you want to call it, that balances to China and Pakistan . But in an ironic kind of way, 50 years later, we are not back to where Kennedy and Nehru were back in 1960s .
 The essential issue at the heart of the 1962 war, the border between India and China is not settled today, it is the longest disputed border in the world . What we've also done in the last 50 years is seeing this conflict turn into an arms race that is gone nuclear, an
 China has a lot of other reasons to develop nuclear weapons and other weapons . One of those reasons is India, and for India, China is its number one threat, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 "Most of which has been kind of lost over the last 50 years for understandable reasons, and a story that’s very important, very relevant to Asian-American politics today, 53 years later . So it's a fascinating piece of history, most of it has been lost over
 That’s a wonderful review, not only of the book, but carrying it from 1962 to 2015 . That's a wonderful book review .
 I would like, with all of your permission, which I'll take anyway, to ask you a couple of questions, and then we'll go to the audience for their questions . The audience will then be asked if they want to ask for a question .
 "I'm trying to put myself in the position of a President who goes before the American people and the world, 7:00m.m. I'm not going to be afraid of the world," he says .
 "Ladies and gentlemen, we are on the edge of something hugely dangerous. Monday night, October 22, 1962, and says, ""Ladies, ladies, gentlemen, we are on an edge of . something hugely dangerous. That night, the President of the United
 The President set up a special committee, the ExCom, and he taped their deliberations, and they didn’t know he taped the deliberations, the White House says . The ExCom is a committee that was set up by the President and taped deliberations . We didn't know they
 Dean Rusk, Bundy and McNamara, were in the loop also on the Sino-Indian Conflict, but they weren't meeting day in and day out . We don't have that same abundance of material about how he interacted with his experts in Washington .
 Famous Harvard Professor, wrote some of the most famous books about the American economy in history . Famous Harvard professor was a Harvard professor .
 He realized that Washington was going to be consumed with Cuba, he was therefore getting very little helpful advice, but also very little unhelpful interference in what he did . He basically ran it, while sending back to Kennedy, eyes-only letters for Kennedy on what he was up to
 "He felt that he had authority from the President to do what he thought was the right thing to do," he says . "He kept Rusk and Bundy and the others in the loop, but he had a direct channel to the President," he adds .
 By the middle of this crisis, he was an advisor to the Prime Minister, and the PM was looking to him for advice on what to do next . In addition to that he had built by this point in time a very close relationship with Nehru .
 Nehru was given -Galbraith was giving advice on all of these things . Nehru received advice from Galbraith on how to get ahead of the world .
 The last thing I want to say about Galbraith is he wrote a diary, he kept a diary of what was going on, and from a historians perspective a diary written while the crisis is going on is of course the ultimate good source . This is not a memoir in which you
 The diary, and documents that have been declassified, provide us with a very good basis for understanding who was in the loop, Kennedy's centrality to the loop . John Kenneth Galbraith's critical role in all of this, and what was really going on in the White House
 President has two letters, one of them explaining the dire situation in India, and in effect, in effect asking the President to get into a war with China to protect India . So, who -so if we get to November 19 now, and th November 20 .
 CNN.com: "I would imagine a decision like that would be so enormous because it could lead to a war. Now, I would imagine ... it could ... lead to war," he says .
 China at that time, in the height of the Cold War, was a Communist monolith, was certainly not regarded with any kind of sympathy . China at the time was seen as an 'Communist monolith'
 The record stops with the Chinese unilateral announcement takes us . That’s what the record we have, and it stops with China, the U.S.
 When he got the letter he convened a meeting of the th National Security Council principals . Bundy, Rusk, McNamara and the Director of Central Intelligence, McCone, were all there . There was pretty much a consensus that we should support India, but also a consensus .
 President Obama picked Averell Harriman, who he had a lot of faith in, to succeed him . "That’s why I think he picked him," he says . "He had enormous faith in Harrimans, too," he adds .
 I don't think we have people like Averell Harriman around anymore, who are that distinguished, but there is anyone like it, I'd say it's either Brent Scowcroft or Bob Gates . Brent is like Brent, Bob Gates, Brent is someone who is that
 President Barack Obama sent him out urgently to assess the situation and then give the President the bottom line on what he needed to do . President Obama has been criticized for his handling of the situation .
 U.S.-Indian military cooperation led to this military exercise in 1963 . President Richard Nixon spent time in India during the summer of that year .
 Another thing it led to was an effort to try to negotiate a Cashmere solution . Another thing led to a bid to negotiate Cashmere .
 When the war was over, when the ceasefire went into effect, there was strong pressure in Washington, and even stronger pressure in London, to try to address the Cashmere one way or another, that of course in the end failed to work .
 China is still coming on, it's advancing into Eastern India, and at some point the President would have had to do two things. Now the interesting question is, what if we fast-forward a week, China is ... advancing into eastern India, says President Obama .
 He would have had to go to the Congress with some kind of request, he says . And secondly, he would have needed to go with the Congress, he adds .
 President Obama would have been reluctant to get the Congress in the loop any earlier than he had to . He had brought in some of the distinguished Members of the Senate and the House, and they were all rabid hawks, telling him that this was all his fault .
 "I don't want to nail you on this one, but I would like to get it clearly in my own mind," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com correspondent .
 President Obama had a strong relationship with India that went back to the 1950s, he says . He believes that India was a democracy and that we needed to help India succeed .
 His belief that this was an aggressive act by the Chinese, and his belief that the U.S. had to show resolve, I think he would have, he says . "I think he'd have," he adds .
 He sent a carrier, the Battle Group, a year later he sent a whole exercise . He also sent a year's exercise .
 The Russians and Chinese were coordinating, that I think we can say without question, the U.S. State Department says . Russia and China were coordinating in the wake of the crisis in Ukraine .
 Khrushchev and Mao were as much competing with each other as they were trying to confront Kennedy . The two leaders were competing to confront each other .
 Both were trying to look more like the leader of Communist Bloc than the other . And both tried to look at each other in a different way .
 Well into the Vietnam War, the American Government was obsessed with the idea of monolith, the author says . He says .
 The other thing I want to highlight, and you alluded to it, is that in 1962 we thought the Soviet Union was our evil foe. In 1962, in 1962, we thought it was our enemy, and that's not the case today .
 We thought Communist China was a country of insane fanatics, who were, you know, prepared to do all kinds of things to take over the globe. We thought it was . But now, it's a very different country, and it's the country of China .
 The Russians are always the kind of clever international agent, and the Chinese are this kind of faceless enemy that’s inscrutable to all of us . They were -if you remember back to movies in the 1960s, that the Russians are . Remember back to the 1960
 We now know that our perceptions of China were most misguided back in the 1960s, but I don’t think that would have - you know, if he had gone to Congress of the United States in 1962, and said, Communist China is on the march, and we have
 "We do have a good bit of documentary evidence, from the U.S. and from the Indians, but not from the Chinese at all," Bruce Schneier says .
 Several experts on Chinese foreign policy have recently been looking at this Chinese decision-making process . I think they’ve helped us to understand it a lot more. There is, and I should say, I'm not a China scholar, I’m working on it, but
 China had just come together after a century of being in a state of civil war and foreign occupation in fighting the Japanese, and before that fighting European imperialism . And just to put in the Chinese perspective for a minute, China had .
 The Tibetan people, and the Tibetan leadership, led by the Dalai Lama, resisted this, first in a nonviolent way, and then in an increasingly violent way . The Dalai Lama is the leader of the Tibetan people in Tibet .
 From the Chinese perspective, of course, this was all a threat to the territorial integrity in unity of the New China . From China's perspective, the Chinese .
 When the Dalai Lama famously left Tibet and went into exile in India, a CIA team, not Americans, but American-trained individuals had gone into Tibet and helped exfiltrate him .
 Allen Dulles was able to report to President Eisenhower that the CIA had helped get the Dalai Lama out of Communist China and into India . One of many of many Dulles' success stories to report was the morning he got out of the Communist China .
 Colorado had the closest geology and geography to Tibet, as you could find in the United States. We supported them by, for instance by training them, small numbers, in Colorado .
 The Pakistani Intelligence Services, at the direction of Ayub Khan, let the United States fly missions to drop equipment and personnel into Tibet out of East Pakistan . The Pakistani intelligence services let the U.S. drop equipment into Tibet .
 Indian airspace is a very short distance across Indian airspace, Nepalese airspace and you are in Chinese airspace . You could see that it's a very small distance across India airspace, and Nepal airspace and China airspace .
 A lot of these people were caught the minute they landed, and interrogated/tortured by the Chinese . The Indian Government was probably aware of some of what was going on, the Pakistani Government was fully aware of what .
 Tibetans who were being caught, never spent any real time in East Pakistan, so they had no idea where the airbase was, and they were - the way the CIA operates in something like this, you don’t people anything they don't need to know . I think
 CIA operation fueled conspiracy theories in Mao's inner circle, which was prone to paranoia for good reason . CIA operation, which had begun in the Eisenhower Administration, probably fueled the conspiracy theories . Mao had been prone to paranoid paranoia, but paranoia was a factor in his paranoia .
 "He lived in a very, very dangerous situation with many, many opponents including the United States, including the Russians, including most of his Cabinet," he says .
 He saw all of this as an attempt by India and the U.S. to take Tibet back from China, he said . He said he reacted as he did .
 Mao Tse-tung had an archived system in which his ideas were, you know, put down in any vigor for the sake of history . The exact play for all these things we done know because we don’t have any archives, I, actually myself .
 If they were put down with any sense of vigor they were probably adjusted whenever he changed his mind, and all the archives were adjusted to go along with whatever he came up with then . The archives were likely adjusted when he changed their mind, he says .
 Galbraith was completely against it . Kennedy would have thought Kennedy would be saying, you know, there's some really air-brained ideas coming from those guys out in Langley, Langley .
 He thought it was feckless and dangerous, but Kennedy decided to keep going with it . Kennedy: "I thought it would be a mistake, but I did it. It was a mistake," he said .
 "It was sexy, it was dramatic, and even after the Bay of Pigs, as I said, he continued to move forward. It was sexy and dramatic," he said .
 President Obama has been in the spotlight since the Vietnam War . He has been criticized for his actions in Vietnam . Obama says he has "tried to do that in Vietnam"
 I'm going to turn to the audience, but I do have one-and-a-half questions to ask about the book itself . I'm not sure how much of the book is going to be, but the audience can ask about it .
 Nobody gets beheaded in this book; nobody drives airplanes into the World Trade Center, but more than that . Nobody gets killed in this novel . Nobody drives planes into the world Trade Center; nobody gets killed .
 CNN's John Sutter says the two crises are coincidentities . He says he became interested in this about three years ago, when he was writing a broader book about U.S. relationships with South Asia .
 The glamour of the Kennedy, Camelot White House, became intoxicating. And once I focused on the coincidence of these two crises, I began to say, well there is a story here, then I have to admit it, then . Then I have the . idea of the
 "Because it was just so much more interesting than any of the White Houses' I actually worked in," she said . "Because of the fact that it was so interesting," she added .
 The Kennedys had a very special mystique about them. So much more style, so much more class, and it's not to denigrate anybody, but to recognize that they had a unique mystique . "It's not a denigrating anybody, it's just to
 There are more books about John F Kennedy than there are about any President except Abraham Lincoln or FDR . Kennedy served only 1,000 days, but he has been very studied President .
 "We haven't talked about this, but we did allude to it in the slides. And the last thing I'll say there, we haven't discussed this," he says .
 Kennedy, the First Lady, played a very, very role in his interaction with South Asia, over the course of 1,000 days .
 She wasn’t necessarily th and advisor on the night of 19 , although who knows what they said to each other at the end of the day . She wasn't necessarily necessarily the same person as her advisor .
 She was very much involved in America's engagement with India and Pakistan . She was involved in the U.S. engagement with both countries .
 Please do ask a question, if you go into a speech I'll have to cut you off, and I'm really a sweetheart so don’t let me do that . Please do not ask a . question, please do ask for a question .
 CNN.com: "I see this hand right here, the gentleman right here in the middle of the middle" CNN's John Sutter: "But I see it right here. But I see this man right here . He sees this hand, and I see that hand, in
 The territorial dispute over these -Can you put the map up for one more second. Can you put it up for a second. The map is a map of Antarctica .
 The Eastern part, the yellow is Indian territory claimed by China, and the Western part, which is the yellow part, is area occupied by Chinese forces but claimed by India . The Western part of the area is occupied by China but is claimed by Indian forces .
 The obvious solution to this problem, and it's been obvious for 55 years, if not longer, is the trade, except the status quo . The trade is the solution to the problem, but it's not the only solution .
 In the 1950s the Chinese hinted at this over and over again, to Nehru, Nehru . Nehru said in 1950s and '60s, the Chinese hinted at this . And in the 50s, he said, 'The Chinese hinted to this over the 1950
 "It's very hard for a democracy to accept that kind of a trade, and especially a young democracy," says President Obama . "I'm very proud of my country, but I'm very sad about what I've done," says Obama .
 You weren’t actually trading away an unhappy population, but Nehru couldn't do it . Nehru’s trade deal would have led to an unhappy India, but he couldn't . He said: “You’re not trading away unhappy people, but you
 The Chinese became more and more clear of that they were going to do something in the '60s . The Chinese, over the course of the early '60's, became increasingly clear that they would do something, he says . The U.S. government in the 1960s was
 Nehru became more and more entrenched that he wasn't going to give in, and he began pushing the Indian Army forward into positions which were tactically unsound . Nehru pushed the Indian army forward in positions which he was going to keep in .
 Nehru was the father of country, he was the most revered person in the state, and none of his generals were going to come up to him and say, Mr Prime Minister, you are really getting us in a whole lot of trouble . But, Nehru ... was the best
 "He had surrounded himself with the court of people who told him he was always right, and he ended up paying the price terribly in October and November," he said .
 He was already an old man, but this crisis really was devastating for him, says CNN's John Sutter . "He was already old man," says Sutter, "but this was devastating"
 The very fact that he had to go to the imperialists, especially London, it must have just been so humiliating to a man who had spent years and years of his life in prison fighting British imperialism, but he did .
 The 1950 example of where American forces moved, despite Chinese warnings, is the 1950 example .
 Douglas MacArthur believed that if he was not God he certainly talked to God every day . Douglas MacArthur was a U.S. military commander who believed he was God .
 His Intelligence Chief was a big fan of Franco, who told MacArthur whatever MacArthur wanted to be told . And his Intelligence Chief, a very unusual man, styled himself like oppression officer .
 The Indian Ambassador in Beijing was summoned in the middle of the night to go see Zhou Enlai, who said, if the Americans keep coming we are going to intervene . The Indian ambassador was summoned to go to meet with the Chinese Prime Minister .
 His warning was brought back to the United States, and Truman and his advisors, especially MacArthur said, we are not going to listen to this Indian diplomat, he has, you know, obviously been turned, he's probably a pinko, if not a fellow traveler, and all of
 Bruce, Bruce, I'm going to ask you, because there are a lot of hands up, if you could, shorten up your answers just a bit . Bruce: "Bruce's job is to be a big success in the world, and he's a big winner." Bruce:
 As Marvin indicated, I was with the Indian army at that time, in 1962 . I was one of the reporters who was evacuated the night of, th I guess, October 19 , evacuated by the Indian Air Force from Tajpur to New Delhi, only to wake the next morning to
 At the time of the war, there were reports of friction along that border between China and India scraps of incidence . But at the time, there was no evidence of friction .
 India had reasons too to enjoy the possibility of benefits if the Indians had poked the Chinese a little too much and -and you alluded to it -Marvin, is telling me to keep quiet, but you got the question .
 There is a vibrant debate among historians about who was to blame for the China-India War . Historians are debating who was responsible for the war .
 The 1962 version for most of the world was India is a good guy; China is a bad guy, as simple as that. You know, the 1962 version of this . It was India's 1962 version .
 Historical work argued that China was provoked, that it had tried to signal reasonableness, and that the Indian forward policy of moving troops forward had provoked the war . Later, the historical work argues that India was provoked by China .
 There is now a -you know, there's always new revisionist wave, there is a revisionist . But the Chinese also has a broader mind broader interpretation which was to somehow humiliate India, and Nehru in particular, in order to advance their geo-strategic desire to
 There was no doubt as to who our side was, and who the other side was. And there's no question that in the Kennedy White House and in the Galbraith's embassy in New Delhi, while they understood the complexity of the underlying dispute .
 American's had very stereotyped imagery about Communist China in the 1960s about the country . And that’s particularly true because of the kind of black and white, very stereotypeed imagery that American's .
 We didn't make any significant effort at trying to look at the world through Chinese eyes. We didn’t try any - we didn't try any . We made no significant effort to try any significant efforts to try to look through the world .
 "It's a pleasure to see you on something other than related to terrorism," he said . "I'm glad to see that you're not fighting terrorism. It's been a pleasure," he added .
 The U.S. doesn't have very long memories, but the actors in the region do . The United States doesn’t have a long memory, but it has a long-term impact on the region, says author .
 "One wants to be humble to a certain degree here. It's a good question, and I think one wants to ... be humble," he says . "It's a very difficult thing to do," he adds .
 The events I write about are 50 years ago; the world has changed a lot in those 50 years . The world has since changed a little bit in 50 years, the author says . The events were 50 years old, but the world's changed a bit, he says .
 "One really needs to think about these politics, seeing at least a triangle of quadrilateral," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The U.S.-India access, I would argue is still maturing, it's not as closed in entente, but it's moving in that direction . It's not a closed-in entente but it is moving in the direction of the United States .
 David Ignatius: If you want to find an arms control solution to the Pakistani nuclear arsenal, you had better think about all of these players . Americans, Pakistanis and Indians, Americans and Pakistanis, he says . Ignatious: How you are going to build a consensus
 "If you aren’t playing the chess game, recognizing all of those dimensions, I think you are likely to fail" "We've had trouble over the years, I've seen this on the inside," he says .
 "It would have to be bigger than Falk, I think, these days, and interact, and recognize that a kind of half-baked CIA program to support Tibetan rebels would be a problem . In getting our South Asia team, and our East Asia team . and our Europe team
 Whatever the wisdom of it as a covert operation, it's going to have ripple effects that you really ought to think about well in advance . "You should think about the ripple effects of this covert operation," he says .
 I can't help ruminating about any parallels between the situation you described and the situation in Ukraine now with the Russians invading, however covertly . I can’t help ruminate about the parallels with the situation .
 It appears that Kennedy had much more freedom of movement, although he didn't have to exercise it necessarily . Kennedy had a lot of freedom, but he didn’t have to .
 Obama is accused of being a weak leader, but there's a lot more media attention to things . Obama is a strong leader, Obama's critics say, but the media attention is too much to blame .
 CNN's John Sutter says Congress is "potentially in all of this" Sutter: "That goes back to what you were talking about, the role of Congress, potentially in this"
 If you remember in 1962, congressional oversight of the intelligence community was a complete joke . "Congressional oversight of intelligence in the U.S. was a total joke," says Sen. Mike McCarthy .
 Allen Dulles went up to The Hill, talked to two or three Senators and a couple of Congressmen, and probably over a large quantity of Bourbon, he says . Dulles said, great, you are doing a great job. Dulles told them war stories .
 There was no -you can be critical of the current accountability process but there is a process . There was also no criticism of the accountability process . The process is being carried out in a process.
 There is no record that I found that he ever went to the Congress on this issue . As I said, you know, he had begun and airlift of supplies, and there was no record .
 It was definitely different in New Delhi but I think in Washington it would have been very hard to get political space to talk about this, particularly in the early days of the crisis, when Americans thought, the end of time was facing them .
 "I think Kennedy was a very, very smart politician, and he didn’t see any particular reason to complicate his life. And I'm not saying that Kennedy deliberately took advantage of this, but I think he was a smart politician."
 In 1962 people thought of Kennedy as the guy who Nikita Khrushchev had kicked all over, around the world . In 1962, Kennedy was thought of as a guy who Khrushvic had kicked around the globe . Kennedy's assassination was the result of the Kennedy assassination .
 The Kennedy Administration, for at least the first six months of 1961, had a horrendous start . Kennedy Administration had a disastrous start .
 Kennedy is such a fascinating figure to study, as there is a learning curve here . Another reason why I think Kennedy is . is that he is a fascinating person to study . There is a 'learning curve' to learn from Kennedy's work, says author .
 This President learns from his mistakes, and one of the mistakes that, early on, he said he would never repeat, is he wouldn’t listen to ""the experts"" because he found out that experts, at the end of the day, often had their own agenda .
 The gentleman right there, and then begin to begin to - we have one, two, three -a cluster of - a cluster of . Oh, my, goodness; many questions, shorter answers. We have one of many questions to answer .
 Ayub Khan was the President of Pakistan during 1962, Sino-Indian War . He started a covert, and insurgency inside to occupy Cashmere, for the deliberation of Cashmere .
 The only time the First President's House has ever been used for a State Dinner was the only time it was ever used for the State Dinner .
 Ayub Khan recognized, what everyone else recognized, which was that Kennedy wanted a better relationship with India, and he feared, understandably that this was going to come at his expense .
 Kennedy and Galbraith admitted at the time that the airlift was not consistent with the promises that they had left with Ayub Khan that no arms would go to India without consultation with Pakistan .
 During the war the President was very clear with Ayub Khan that an opening of a second front against India by Pakistan would be regarded as a hostile act to the United States, just like China, he says .
 "I think there were other reasons for him to stay neutral as well, but I think that helped. I think there was other reasons that he stayed neutral," he said .
 When the war ended, there was a strong opinion in Washington and London that now is the time to try to resolve the Cashmere issue through negotiations . Now is now the time for negotiations .
 Nehru is not politically capable of doing a Cashmere deal when he has just been humiliated by the Chinese . Galbraith was one of the dissidents, who said this is the wrong time, Nehru .
 Through 1963, there was a faint hope that perhaps a negotiations process would go somewhere . But through 1963, it was hoped that perhaps the negotiations process was going somewhere .
 Ayub Khan may have to take unilateral means in collaboration with the Chinese, he says . Kennedy leaves the scene in 1963, Khan comes to the conclusion he's .
 I think there's pretty good evidence that the 1965 War was cooked with the Chinese - but I think the Chinese had seen the menu, and had a pretty good idea of what was coming . The Chinese had been watching the menu .
 Three questions will be asked: Bruce, Bruce, Kerry and Bruce . What I'm going to do with three questions in a row: What I'll do with the gentleman there, then Bruce and Kerry. What will I do? What will you do with a question? What do you
 Allen Whiting was the Senior Analyst in INR and the time, and his book, China Crosses the Yalu, was a very significant volume, you can remember that I'm sure, Bruce. I've been talking to Tom Hughes, he was INR Director .
 Ambassador Galbraith went from just being the U.S. Ambassador to almost becoming an advisor to Nehru . He says he was almost a advisor to the Indian leader .
 I'm going to speculate then, that I'd like to see if you care to comment on if you want to comment . I'm not sure what I would like to say, but I'll ask you to comment.
 As I listened to the story unfolding, and then as you got to the point about how much fun the writing of this book was, I thought it would be fun . Well, so am I. Well, I am I .
 I had been thinking all the way through listening to your story and the management of these enormously difficult issues at the same time . I've been thinking about that -and this is a question -I've been listening all the . way through . listening to the story .
 Putin's entry into Syria is a question mark about what Iran will do, and whether there is an opportunity to link hands and arms to deliver some kind of reasonable set of circumstances in Syria, CNN's John Sutter says .
 You’ve got three questions there, then we'll get three more, here, here. You've got three more questions, here .
 Allen Whiting also wrote another book which is more particularly towards this crisis . Allen Whited also wrote a book about the crisis in the U.S.
 He undoubtedly was one of the people that helped cook that State Department letter, and you're right. He undoubtedly helped cook the letter, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Kennedy was willing to reach down or help people reach down in the bureaucracy . Kennedy listened to Galbraith more than anyone else, says CNN's John Sutter . "I think the real expert he listened to was Galbraiths," he says .
 Galbraith's relationship with his punitive boss, Dean Rusk, was terrible . And just as a footnote, his relationship with Rusk was terrible.
 Galbraith actually wrote a series of short stories while he was Ambassador . He published them under a pseudonym that ridiculed the State Department .
 Only a person who the President was protecting could get away with this kind of behavior . "I mean they are cutting, obviously only a person . who the president was protecting can get away," says CNN's John Sutter .
 I don’t think though that Galbraith had a role in the writing of the letters, because when you read his diary, his diary is full of his diary . I don't think though though that .
 The second letter when his diary came out it was classified top secretary, and would be classified for another 50 years . And he's very careful in his diary, because the second letter was classified .
 12 squadrons of U.S. Fighter Combat Aircraft, I think struck Galbraith's . He alludes to it, but there's a sense of kind of shock on his part that he knew Nehru knew he was in trouble, says historian .
 CNN's John Sutter says the question is an attempt to get him to say something unkind about the Obama Administration . Sutter: "I see through you Gary. And the trick question, which attempting to get me to say ... is a trick question," he says .
 FDR's handling of the Second World War is magisterial, presidential leadership . FDR falls into that category, says President Kennedy . Kennedy managed multiple crisis crises as well as FDR, says historian .
 "It's hard to see that in the last 50 years, of something quite, of this caliber of decision-making," says President Obama . "We're not going to see this in 50 years. We're going to have this kind of decision making," he says .
 "We've had access to the Soviet archives, and it wasn’t even clear then. And that’s more clear now, that we’ve had access,” says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "That's more clear than now,
 The Chinese invasion of India didn’t have that apocalypse character to it, says CNN.com’s John Defterios .
 The two largest countries in the world were fighting a border war, but it was not obvious at the time . The two countries fought a war, and while it was now obvious that it was a border conflict, it wasn't obvious .
 There is a part of Galbraith's memoirs where he says, an Indian politician th th had come to him on about the 18 or 19 and said that; she had just been to the Northeast Frontier Agency, and she was reporting that people up there were being told that all
 And she -not identified -agrees that yeah, she's probably overwhelmed by events . And she also says she is probably overwhelmed with events .
 She is the only Indian politician who went there at the time, so while he protected her in the diary, you don't have to be Sherlock Holmes to figure out who he was talking to .
 There were people who were afraid that that could happen. Now that sounds ridiculous today, but there people were afraid of that possibility. Now, it's not ridiculous today. It's ridiculous that people are still afraid today .
 President Kennedy spoke highly highly of the efficiency of the Kennedy Administration . The White House has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 The Kennedy Administration did a number of things in Vietnam that, retrospect, looks sort of dopey, but let that go . Let that go. The Kennedy administration did a lot of things that, in retrospect, look sort of daffey . Let's let it go. Let's
 "I've been really interested in this topic since I was a child. I'm really glad that you wrote this book," says author . "It's really important that you write this book. I've always been interested in it," she says .
 My grandfather served in the Indian Army so he has told me a lot about these events, and I think they are very reflective of the geopolitical issues that are going on today . I think the events are reflective of today's geopolitical issues .
 I was just curious since in your book you focused on United States relations, and I understand this is more looking at the actual events that happen during this time versus what’s going on today . In your book, you focus on the actual U.S. relations, rather than
 There hasn't been a significant change in policy, compared to China where there's been a lot of mobilization there hasn’t been a change, or in policy. Because so far there’s been a much of mobilization, but on India's side, compared .
 Ayub Khan was given a dinner at Mount Vernon . He was taken to Newport, Newport, because Mrs. Khan wanted to give him a good dinner .
 Newport Cottage is known as The Cottage in Newport, Newport, England . It is the same idea as our idea of cottages in Newport .
 Nehru was unusually silent and tired, and he did not respond to conversation . He was unusually tired and tired at the time of the assassination .
 Someone forgot to open the flue in the fireplace when they started the fire, the state dining room filled with smoke . They came to the White House for the State Dinner; somebody forgot to .
 Nehru was already passed his peak performance, but the 1962 War with China was really a blow to him . Nehru had already been passed out of the prime minister's job .
 He didn't give up on being leader of the third world, he still aspired to do that, but now he realized that China was going to be his competition and not his friend in that . He didn’t give up trying to be leader of third world .
 The Indian army was equipped with Lee Enfield rifles, leftover from the First World War, if not from the Third Anglo-Afghan War .
 Chinese troops are wellequipped with automatic weapons, many of whose officers had fought in the Korean War . Now they were fighting Chinese troops who were welleqipped with . automatic weapons .
 Indian troops were often outnumbered, they were always out-equipped, but they fought very, very bravely . The Indian troops fought bravely, despite being out-of-its-resourced .
 Jaswant Singh would go on to be Foreign Minister in the first BJP Government, and a real architect of U.S.-Indian rapprochement . Singh was the Foreign Minister of the first government .
 He saw the 1962 War as the crucible which shaped modern India . Read his memoirs here .
 China, and the humiliation of 1962, was the critical moment for the U.S. President, Obama says .
 I urge you to read Avoiding Armageddon, I tried to write about that in there . I urge readers to read avoiding Armageddon .
 The Nixon Administration on India, like on many things, decided that anything that Kennedy had been wrong had to be wrong, and therefore they were going to go the other way . The Nixon administration on India decided to go other way, he says .
 Indira Gandhi was really, really good at figuring out how to snub people, and enjoyed it immensely . Nixon was one of her favorite targets .
 In 1962, 'In 1962, I think is very relevant to a lot of today. But as I said in an odd kind of way, the journey, as it progresses, has brought us to a situation where in 1962, the story is relevant to today .
 I don't think there's going to be another Indo-China War, I think that’s a highly unlikely scenario. I don’t think there’�t be a war, I’m sure there is no war between China and the West .
 I wouldn't be surprised by incidence on the India-China border, but I don't think either one of these countries, sees the territory at stake here as worth going to war over . I wouldn’t be surprised if it happened on the border .
 South China Sea, the United States, Russia, Japan, India, but India is part of constellation .
 When China tested nuclear weapons in 1999, Vajpayee's letter to the President was all about China . As I said, when China tested its nuclear weapons, the letter was about the country .
 Pakistan is a secondary consideration, and a consideration because it is an ally of China . Pakistan is also an ally with China, which is a major ally of the U.S.
 India tested its Agn9-5 intermediate-range ballistic missile, which for the first time gave India a missile capable of reaching Beijing . India finally tested the missile in either 2012 or 2003 -2013 .
 Indian leaders say they see themselves in an arms race with Beijing . They say for 50 years they had been the loser in that arms race, and that the Agni-5 finally now was an equalizer .
 That they could nuke Beijing just as China could . nuke all of their cities, they could. nuke . That is just as many cities as Beijing could . China could.nuke .
 If there is another India-Pakistan War in the future, the question of where the Chinese come in and where the Americans come in will determine, I think, an awful part of history .
 This might be a naïve question but it's certainly been on my mind for a quite a while. And this might be an answer to it, I'm not sure what I really want to know .
 In 1962 he was a high school student in Calcutta learning how to duck under tables, whenever a plane flew over it . In 1962, he was learning to ducks under tables when he was growing up in the city .
 Tibet, the Dalai Lama connection, the other was the leadership of the nonaligned world. And one reason was of course the Tibet, Tibet, and the leadership . The Dalai Lama's connection to Tibet was the other .
 I was wondering whether your book touches on anything internal in the Chinese political structure . I was also wondering whether you had touched on anything in your book about China .
 Mao and Chou, in particular, were in charge of Mao's regime in China, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter asks whether this was one way of Mao to sort of say that, look, we are in charge, and don't mess with us internally .
 Nehru wanted to lift up Mao to be his equal in leading the third world . Nehru: "I wanted to lead the world. I wanted to be the leader of the world's third world"
 Mao was not Nehru's equal, Nehru, in some of the Chinese literature . Some of the statements they wrote at the time, which we now know were carefully written by Mao himself .
 Nehru portrayed as this Anglified Indian who was trying to rebuild the Raj . Nehru was portrayed as trying to build the Raj. Nehru is portrayed as a modern Indian who is trying to make the Raj stronger .
 Mao was an incredibly paranoid man, probably fell into some of these conspiracy theories . It's was a way to outdo Nehru, weaken his -whatever problems he had at home, secure Tibet, and stick it to Khrushchev all at the same time .
 The U.S. didn’t really know China either in 1962, the author says . He says the reason for the delay was that they didn't really know what China was going on .
 Ayub Khan was afraid that if he started a second front, the Chinese could stop the first front, and he'd be left hanging out to dry . Their relationship with the Chinese as in its very infant stages; and he was .
 By 1965, the relationship is matured enough, that now Ayub Khan thinks that if he starts the war, the Chinese will be there to back him up . The relationship between the two countries is mature enough to be strong enough, says Khan .
 A careful analysis of Pakistan's position in 1965, 1971, and 1999, the Cargo War, is that at the moment of truth, the Chinese usually say, I'm sorry, but I can't hear you, there's something wrong with the line .
 China is not going to sacrifice its national interest for Pakistani objectives . They are critical to the development to the Pakistan Nuclear Weapons Arsenal; but China will not sacrifice national interest to Pakistan .
 Bruce Drexler: "This is a story that is more than 50 years old, and making it relevant and interesting" "We thank Bruce for taking the story that's more than half a century old and relevant," he says . "We are proud to be able to talk about