 The Soviet Union had limited range missiles that were only capable of being launched against Europe . But the United States possessed missiles capable of striking anywhere within the entire Soviet Union .
 As it is often said, when it comes to national security, leaders sometimes make irrational decisions . As it's often said: "When it comes . Sometimes, leadership sometimes makes irrational decisions," says CNN's Tom Charity .
 This deployment of weapons in Cuba would double the Soviet strategic arsenal . It would provide a credible deterrent to a potential U.S. attack against the Soviet Union .
 The Soviet Union was able to capitalize on Fidel Castro’s fear that the U.S. was out to overthrow his socialist government . Fidel Castro feared the United States was trying to overthrow him .
 For the U.S. having a communist country in the Western Hemisphere was an embarrassment and national security risk . For the United States, having a . communist country . in the . Western Hemisphere, it was a national . security risk. For the . United States. Having a communist .
 The Soviet Union presented this plan to Cuba as insurance against a U.S. invasion, such as the failed attempt at the failed Bay of Pigs in 1961 . The plan was presented to Cuba by the Soviet Union as insurance .
 The Soviet Union worked quickly and secretly to build missile installations in Cuba . Realizing this was the best means of holding onto power in Cuba against a belligerent neighbor, Fidel Castro accepted the proposal .
 President John F Kennedy discovered through reconnaissance photographs that the Soviet Union was constructing missile installations on Cuban soil . President Kennedy discovered that the Soviets were building missile installations in Cuba .
 Only 90 miles of ocean separated the U.S. from nuclear missiles . This meant that only 90 miles from the United States .
 For seven days there was considerable and intense debate as to how the U.S. should respond to this threat . The United States has been under fire from the Taliban in Afghanistan for years .