 No reproduction in any form of this book, in whole or in part, may be made without written authorization from the publishers .
 The tensions which keep these two countries on the edge of conflict are as dangerous as they are inevitable . The tensions bear directly on the future direction of Asia . They are part of the potentially even more significant problem of Chinese-Soviet rivalry .
 Chinese actions toward India provide a critical index of the extent to which Peking is willing to risk nuclear war in its drive to extend Chinese power in order to fulfill an imagined destiny . Peking's actions are an example of how Peking will risk a nuclear war with India .
 History of hostile co-existence which underlies Sino-Indian relations is worth exposing to view . For this reason, the history of hostile relations between China and India should be exposed to view, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Implicit in the long record of India-China contact are geopolitical reasons for Communist China’s present hostility toward India . The two countries have been at odds for decades .
 Some of the realities of border policy were lost sight of by independent India’s political philosophers . They sought new formulas more consistent with their urgent desire for world peace and Asian solidarity . Unfortunately, however, some of the reality of the border policy was lost sight .
 China’s true intentions and the reasons behind them could not, therefore, become fully recognized until the Tibetan revolt in 1959 . The flight to India of the Dalai Lama provoked Peking to come out from behind its fagade of friendship and reveal an openly threatening attitude .
 India can blame Peking for its added deceit in camouflaging them with peaceful pretension . If Red China's intentions and motivations were not at first clear, it can blame it for its deceit .
 India naturally wanted to believe that China was sincere in subscribing to Nehru’s Panch Sheela, the five principles of peaceful co-existence . It was hoped that China would subscribe to the five-prong Sheela principles of peace .
 India also wanted to believe that its 1954 pact with China on the status of Tibet, which established these principles, was sufficient statement of policy toward China . The 1954 pact was a statement of India's policy toward Tibet .
 Nehru could not rely on physical containment; this had been possible for Britain but was impossible for militarily weak, independent India . Nehru was not able to rely on the physical containment of his country .
 Nehru could not depend on collective defense artangements without doing violence to the concept of non-alignment which he symbolized . He could not afford to rely on collective defence artangement . He symbolized non-aligned ideology .
 India followed a policy of moral containment until Peking's own actions revealed this policy’s inadequacy . With the options thus limited, the options were limited, with India following a policy that was ineffectual .
 Through events and necessity there evolved a new policy of containment . The policy involved both Soviet and Westerm aid and a modified stand on non-alignment .
 Whether this policy will work in the long run depends on many factors, including the ability of India and Pakistan to resolve their festering Kashmir dispute .
 Any case study of Chinese aggression must take into account certain fundamental drives and constants which have characterized China’s history and have led inexorably to its present position . China's aggression has led to its rise in power in recent years .
 India-China relations emerge as a geopolitical rondo, the basic theme of which is the inevitability of conflict at points where the countries come into contact . The basic theme is that conflict is inevitable at points of contact between the countries .
 Tibet and the Himalayan border region, from Assam to the Pamirs, are important today . It is for this reason that Tibet is important today. Tibet is an important part of the region . Tibet is a major source of tension between Tibet and India .
 Tibet may not be the sacred center of the universe which the early Aryan tribes of India believed it to be, but it is the political junction of Asia’s three largest land powers—China, India, and the Soviet Union . Tibet is a political junction between China, India
 Asia's ideological watershed dividing democratic South Asia from totalitarian China . It is also Asia’s ideological watershed . China is also the region's ideological boundary dividing democratic S.A. from communist China .
 The Tibetan plateau has traditionally served as a no-man’s-land hetween antagonists . The great Himalayan range has been a rampart to guard India's approaches . It has traditionally been a no man's-land Itween .
 Tibet is thus the stage on which the historical drama of China-India relations has been enacted . Tibet is the stage of China's historical drama with India since Tibet began .
 The drama begins to an overture of Buddhist scriptures hailing the eightfold path of right beliefs and serving as siren song to the Chinese far beyond . The film is set to be screened in China on October 28 .
 Nehru’s fivefold doctrine of Panch Sheela was an appropriate forerunner of Nehru's fivefold theory of fivefold teachings . The teachings of Lord Buddha were filtered through the Himalayan passes to blend with a primitive Tibetan cult of magic to become Lamaism .
 Sectarianism and corruption led to serious internal political unrest in Tibet . Tibet was left vulnerable to predatory moves of its Mongol and Chinese neighbors .
 First act of China-India relations climaxed by the invasion of Lhasa by the Chinese Emperor K’ang Hsi in 1720 .
 Successive Mongol invasions of Tibet had made China aware of the vulnerability of its borderlands .
 The Manchu Emperor installed in the Potala a puppet claimant to the throne of the Seventh Dalai Lama . The move established at the same time China’s first significant claim to Tibet .
 Plans of the British East India Company to explore Tibet as a commercial market and find an open back door to China died with the Third Panchen Lama at the court of the Manchus .
 Whether the Panchen died of smallpox or was murdered by his Chinese hosts to prevent the British from using him to get a foothold in Tibet is not clear .
 Imperial Russian expansion eastward collided with Manchu expansion westward and provoked boundary tensions which still affect Sino-Soviet relations . The Manchu-Russian border tensions still affect relations between China and Russia .
 The Chinese people’s concept of greater China has never been abandoned, and today the Russian treaties are attacked by Peking as the products of imperial aggression . While a stronger Russia was able to impose its will by a series of treaties in the nineteenth century, the Chinese people's concept
 Agents of the Czar also probed southward into the Pamirs, where they engaged the British in a game of imperial intrigue during the last part of the nineteenth century . The Czar's agents were also involved in the Crimean War .
 Great Britain was unwilling to overextend itself in Tibet and for more far-ranging reasons of policy found a basis for compromise with Czar .
 By an agreement signed in 1907 both rivals agreed to a neutral buffer belt separating the two empires . The buffer belt extended from Persia to Tibet .
 The vast and inhospitable Tibetan plateau provided an ideal buffer for India’s northem frontier . It was an ideal frontier for India's northern frontier .
 An inner line of defense in the form of a belt of Himalayan dependencies flanked by separately administered security zones . This was reinforced by an inner line-of-defense in the . form of . defense .
 Russia saw Tibet as an essential buffer with which to protect the outer reaches of its empire, and Sinkiang as a potential inner line of defense corresponding to Britain’s Himalayan barrier . Russia, too, saw Tibet . as an important buffer to protect its empire .
 The formula of Chinese suzerainty but not sovereignty in Tibet suited the purposes of both England and Russia . The formula was agreed by both countries in the 1930s and 1940s .
 It provided a legal Chinese presence and thus avoided the dangers that would result from a vacuum . Yet it deprived Peking of any legal excuse to annex Tibet whenever it became strong enough to do so .
 Britain pressed for an agreement on Tibet which would define a clear boundary between Tibet and Assam and establish a secondary buffer zone called “Inner Tibet” between Tibet proper and China . Britain, also farsighted enough to anticipate a resurgent China, pressed for a clear
 The declining Chinese refused to ratify efforts to deprive them of sovereignty over Tibet . But the declining Chinese are conscious of their heritage and destiny .
 The disintegration of the Chinese Empire and the long humiliation of the Japanese occupation before and during World War II temporarily eliminated China as a power in Asia .
 Never did the Chinese lose their fundamental conviction that they would ultimately dominate Asia, nor sign away what they conceived to be their legal basis for domination . But never did . never lose their . conviction that . they would eventually dominate Asia .
 Act Four began with the Red Chinese invasion of Tibet in 1950 . Nehru played the lead in the 1950s with Nehru playing the lead .
 Curzon, then Viceroy of India, had the power to eliminate the incipient Russian threat . Nehru did not have the strength to prevent a Chinese invasion of Tibet, already underway .
 It was a significant mistake of principle for India to accede formally to China’s absorption of Tibet . While de facto accommodation thus had to be made with superior force, it was a serious mistake for India .
 China had in 1914 refused to ratify Britain’s formula for Tibet when the power position was reversed . Even an enfeebled China had refused to accept the formula .
 Nehru saw fit to use the 1954 treaty with China on Tibet to enunciate Panch Sheela . The real tragedy, however, was that Nehru used the treaty to enounceate Sheela. The treaty was signed by the Indian president in 1954 .
 India’s new ideology of Panch Sheela was at cross-purposes to its historical need to refuse recognition of Chinese sovereignty in Tibet . The significance was that while China used its basic ideology, revolutionary Communism, to complement and rationalize its geopolitical need to secure Tibet .
 Tibet, which has been absorbed by China, no longer exists as a buffer protecting India . Tibet is no longer a buffer against India, says Indian diplomat .
 China now covets the south slope of the Himalayas . The move is a logical consequence of its obsession with territorial security . The country's position is a reflection of its advancing position .
 Despite India’s dynamic role since independence as a champion of non-alignment, China persists in branding India a “running dog” of Great Britain and the U.S. China sees the Himalayas as a point of confrontation with the West .
 KashmirPamir knot region at the western extremity of the Himalayas . Three disputes --those between the Soviet Union and China, India and China --become interlocked in the Kashmir region .
 Stretching northward from the trijunction of Kashmir, China and the USSR is the disputed Sinkiang-Soviet border . The border is where Sino-Soviet tensions simmer . China and Russia are at odds over the border .
 In Kashmir itself India and Pakistan face each other uneasily across a cease-fire line . The two countries fought a brief but bloody war in September 1965 .
 A conference sponsored in Tashkent by the USSR in January 1966 brought the two antagonists to reaffirm the cease-fire line established two decades ago by the United Nations . In the process created new tensions between China and the Soviet Union, whose opposing Kashmir positions reflect their conflict on the
 A vitally needed military supply road leading from Tibet to Western Sinkiang across the disputed Aksai Chin plateau in northem Ladakh holds the key to China’s xiv border dispute with India .
 India and Chinese patrols still snipe at each other as a reminder that more significant hostilities could break out with relatively little provocation . India and China patrols are still sniping at each side .
 Western-initiated anti-Communist collective defense systems founder in a morass of political complexities . Pakistan's linchpin, Pakistan, draws closer to Communist China . The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization and the Central Treaty Organization were founded in 1973 .
 With China’s occupation of Tibet and the extension of a military road network southward to the Himalayas, the buffer zone has shifted to Himalayan border states, where China now competes with India for primacy .
 Seen from New Delhi, this area is no substitute for the Tibetan plateau, whose vast distances and impossible terrain for so long barred the way to India . But seen from the New Delhi this area has no substitute, says New Delhi .
 As seen through Peking's eyes the relationship between India and the Soviet Union is distressingly reminiscent of Britain’s co-existence with Russia in Central Asia in 1907 . The relationship between Russia and India was distressingly similar to Britain's relationship with Russia .
 The breakdown of the buffer system places Communist China and the Soviet Union in dangerous proximity along the tension-ridden border of Sinkiang, where subversion and ethnic hostilities are rife .
 This confused matrix of intertwined tensions can be blamed on the disappearance of a buffer system no longer possible in a modern world of rapid communications . Reduced to its essentials, this can be traced back to the disappearence of the buffer system .
 What has changed is the scope and potential consequences of tension in South and Central Asia, says CNN's John Defterios . "What has changed?" he asks .
 The flowering of China’s first atomic mushroom on a remote Sinkiang testing range on October 16, 1964 was an event long dreaded by Western, Soviet and uncommitted leaders alike .
 Operational perfection of Peking’s nuclear war machine may possibly generate increasing Chinese bellicosity . Operational Perfection of the Peking's nuke war machine could generate increasing tensions with the U.S.
 Neither Marxist planning nor renewed efforts toward birth control seems able to prevent the population explosion . China’s population explosion is also likely to be a problem .
 There may be ugly logic in the fact that Red China has made faster progress in the art of annihilating life than in preventing it . Red China may be making faster progress than preventing it, says the author .
 Also dangerous is the ideological weaponry implicit in Peking’s role as champion of revolution and enemy of peaceful co-existence . Peking is also dangerous for Peking as it is perceived to be a champion of revolutionaryism and enemies of peace .
 Peking’s doctrine was described in September 1965 by Defense Minister Lin Piao as a master strategy to encircle North America and Europe by Africa, Asia and Latin America . The so-called revolutionary rural areas of the world were the target .
 This is Peking’s bid to gain political strength from the colored and underdeveloped peoples of the world who comprise the majority and to exploit their economic frustrations and racial sensitivity . Peking's bid to exploit the racial sensitivity and economic frustrations of the underdeveloped is to exploit them,
 Implicit in this plan is Chinese-inspired unrest and instability in Asia and Africa for decades to come, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 To what extent Communist China is prepared to risk major nuclear war in fomenting wars of liberation and violent revolution is a critical question . China's willingness to risk nuclear war is critical question.
 China’s actions more than its words will give clues to the answer to the question . China's actions more likely to answer the question: 'China’�
 China's border dispute with India reached one climax in 1962 and another in 1965 . China has tended to prove doctrine by action rather than doctrine by doctrine .
 Future developments in Sino-Indian relations must reveal further indications of China’s intentions . China's intentions must be watched carefully for this reason, writes Andrew Hammond .
 While awaiting the developments of the future, it should be helpful to examine the lessons of the past, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "It should be a good time to learn from the past"
 The curtain of history is raised for the first act in a drama which began a long time ago . The curtain has been raised for first act of history in a long-awaited drama .
 Tibet is where China and India first met and where they have known each other the longest . The scene is Tibet, where the two countries first met in Tibet .
 The country would be invaded by Tartars of Upper Tartary, according to Russian President Vladimir Putin . The country was invaded by the Tartars, who are believed to be in the region .
 Thirdly, that the latter would sack and ruin the land and send all the spoils to their own country . Thirdly that the . latter would . send all of the . spoils . to their . own country. Thirdly . that they would . sack and . ruin the
 Fourthly, that they would murder many religious Lamas, destroy monasteries and convents, profane temples and commit other horrors . They would murder them, they said . They said .
 Sixthly and lastly, that China would attack, defeat the tyrannical usurpers and conquer the Kingdom. Sixthly that China . would attack . The Kingdom .
 Tibet’s book of Lungh-ten, the prophecies of Urgyen . The earliest Aryans believed the world to be a lotus floating on an ocean .
 In the center, touching the heavens, was a magnificent eruption of snowclad peaks encircling like a flower the heart of the blossom which they called Meru . The eruption was the center of the eruption of a volcano which they call Meru.
 Tibet is a 15,000-foot plateau which in modern times has been known as Tibet . Tibet is the name of Tibet and Tibet .
 From Tibet flow the great rivers of Asia like an enormous network of veins, from Tibet . From Tibet, the rivers flow from Tibet to the world's most populous regions .
 The waters of the Ganges, Brahmaputra, Indus, Salween, Mekong, Yellow and Yangtse all rise in the icy passes of greater Tibet . They run for thousands of miles until they escape into the seas and escape into rivers .
 Tibet's Tibetan plateau covers an area nearly twice the size of France . The Tibetan plateau is located between the Himalayas and the Karakorum Range to the west .
 The vast wastes and jagged outcroppings form a moonscape of indescribable Hindu gods, Buddhist saints and assorted demons left over from a more ancient time mingle in the pantheon of Lamaism .
 Tibetan folklore tells how the virgin ogress became lost in a Himalayan pass close to the border of India . Tibetan folklore says she became lost during her journey .
 Near the point of despair, she was rescued by the monkey who wooed her with wild fruits . The monkey rescued her from despair .
 This legend of a simian Adam and sinful Eve, set in a Himalayan Garden of Eden, is an ingenious synthesis of Genesis and Darwin . The story is set in the Himalayan garden of Eden .
 Tibetan descendants of Dras-rin-mo and Hulumandju have been spared unwelcome trespassers . The land's natural ramparts, forbidding deserts and rarified atmosphere have spared them unwelcome trespassing .
 The peoples of the several lotus petals have historically found Tibet neither a convenient crossroads for trade nor a viable invasion route through which to attack each other . Tibet is not a convenient trade or invasion route for Tibetians .
 In the main it has been a successful buffer insofar as it kept apart the historically antagonistic empires of Tartary, China and India, but this role is a trying one . The role has been trying one.
 Tibet has had to cushion many shocks of aggression, and for varying periods of time—including the present—it has suffered the humiliation of foreign occupation . Tibet has also had to cope with many shocks, including the present, and suffered from foreign occupation.
 In the past it has always been able to throw off its conquerors and ultimately reassert its independence because of its hub position . Yet in the past, the past has always managed to throw them off their conquerors . This is not the first time the country has been attacked by its
 No one neighbor, however covetous, could in the past indefinitely hold Tibet in the face of another neighbor's opposition . Tibet has long been a source of tension between China and Tibet .
 Tibet became a nation in the seventh century through tribal conquests and diplomacy . Song-tsen Gampo, a remarkable chieftain from Ladakh, is credited with having introduced many elements of Indian culture .
 Under his banner Tibet invaded western China and after seven years of campaigning forced the Emperor to relinquish his daughter . The Emperor relinquished his daughter to Tibet in order to stop the invasion .
 The Tibetan leader's prize was to have nearly MANCHUS AND MONGOLS 3 as much impact on the land as her husband . The prize was a woman who had nearly as many impact on her husband as her own .
 She shared honors in the royal household with another wife, a Nepalese princess . She also shared honors with another woman in the household .
 Both wives in fact collaborated in converting their mutual husbands to Buddhism . Both wives converted their husbands to Buddhism .
 Song-tsen’s rule came to light in Tibet nearly two hundred years earlier . Tibet's philosophy had filtered into Tibet two centuries earlier, but it did not gain significant momentum .
 His Chinese queen encouraged the importation of Buddhist scriptures from India . She provided the impetus for the development of a written Tibetan language based on Indian script .
 She also encouraged the establishment of monasteries where a clergy could be trained .
 From astrological studies the Queen had learned that Tibet was “like a female demon lying on her back’—probably a variation of the story of Tibet’s Eve, Dras-rin-mo . Tibet was likely to have been Tibet's Eve, a variation
 Under the warrior king, Ti-song De-tsen, it became one of the great powers of Asia . The kingdom was one of Asia's great powers .
 Northern India, Baltistan, Gilgit and Kashgar all fell to Ti-song De-tsen’s armies . China was forced to pay tribute .
 He set about to purify and invigorate Buddhism in his realm . Recognizing the progressive degeneration of Buddhism .
 He was influenced by an Indian Tantric Buddhist teacher whom he invited to Tibet, Padma Sambhava, or Urgyen, as he was known by Tibetans .
 The lives and transmigrations of Urgyen as recorded in Tibetan scriptures are closely modeled on the life of Lord Buddha . The lives of Urgeden are similar to that of the Buddha . Urged to be a Buddhist monk in Tibet .
 Tibetans have a strong addiction to black magic, Tibetans may have used black magic . The Tibetans used the sorcery of the primitive ‘Bon’ religion which predated Buddhism .
 He emphasized the union of spiritual and material forces, symbolically representing them as the sexual union of god and goddess .
 The sexuality of Urgyen’s teachings appealed to the Tibetan monks and stimulated a trend of increasing licentiousness within the monasteries of the sect .
 The Jesuit Desideri studied Urgyen’s scriptures in 1716 and was astonished by his powers of prophecy . The Jescians were astonished by the power of his prophecy .
 The first prediction which was to prove unerringly accurate warned that Tartar invaders would conquer Tibet . The prediction was accurate and predicted Tartar invasion of Tibet .
 What Carpini learned about Tibet was for the most part vague and inaccurate . The Tibetans are Tibetans and Tibetans .
 Genghiz Khan conquered the high plateau in 1206 and again in 1226-1227 . It is known that he conquered it twice in the past . It's known that Gen. Khan conquered it in the early 12th century .
 The Great Khan recognized the political advantages of a religious link with Tibet . Great Khan also recognized the religious advantages of the religious link .
 Kublai Khan invited the Head Lama of the large and influential Sakya monastery near Lhasa to his court and later declared him ruler of Tibet . The Head Lama was the leader of the Sakya Monastery .
 Sakya priest-kings in Tibet began a dynasty of Sakya priests-kins in Tibet . They drew support from the Mongols . The Mongols supported the Sakya .
 The relationship was more that of patron-priest than suzerain-vassal in the political sense . The relationship between the two was more than that of a patron, rather than a political vassalist .
 Kublai’s armies never penetrated deep into Tibet, nor was any effort made to administer it . The Tibetans were never allowed to enter Tibet .
 In fact, the ecclesiastical influence of the Tibetan Sakya Lamas in Mongolia was far more important than Mongol political influence in Tibet at that time . The Sakya Lamaas were more influential in Tibet than the Mongols in Tibet .
 The priesthood abandoned celibacy and certain monasteries reveled in sexual orgies . The orgies made mockery of the faith they represented . Monasteries were notorious for their orgies, orgies and sexual assaults .
 Doctrinally the Red Hats became lost in the worship of a confusing assortment of goddesses and demons . The Red Hats worshiped a variety of demons and gods .
 Tsong Khapa launched the Gelugpa reform, more commonly known as the Yellow Hat movement . The reformist monks wore the yellow miters to distinguish themselves from the supposedly debauched Red Hat monks .
 New monasteries were opened in which the purified doctrine was studied . The purified doctrine of monasticism was studied in monastic monacities .
 Yellow Hats found patrons and protectors among Mongol chieftains to the north . The Yellow Hats were patrons of the Mongols . They were also patrons of Mongols and were protected by Mongols in the region .
 Sonam Gyatso entered history as the Third Dalai Lama . This title was posthumously awarded also to his predecessors, believed to have been his pre-incarnations .
 It was the Fifth Dalai Lama who broke the power of the Red Hat sect during the 17th century . The Dalai Lama was the last Tibetan leader to break up the sect .
 The Great Fifth, as he is now known in Tibet, allied himself with Gushi Khan, Chief of the Ocelot Mongols of “Lower Tartary’—the Koko Nor region in northeast Tibet . The Great Five allied himself .
 With the encouragement of the Fifth Dalai, Gushi Khan marched the Oelots into Tibet . With the help of the 5th Dalai, he marched into Tibet in Tibet .
 Panchen exercised ecclesiastical power over 6 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE an area west of Lhasa from his throne in the Tashilhunpo monastery near Shigatse . The Panchen in successive reincarnations thereafter exercised . power over the area .
 The Fifth Dalai Lama selected his beloved teacher (and posthumously, his teacher’s three predecessor incarnations) as Panchen . The Dalai Lama chose his teacher's three previous incarnations of Panchen.
 The Great Fifth must also have credit for building the Potala—thereafter the traditional See of the Dalai Lama and famous landmark of Lhasa . The Great 5th Dalai Lama is credited with building the famous landmark .
 In 1652 the Dalai Lama traveled to Peking to visit the first Manchu Emperor of China . The visit was an act of diplomacy and good neighborliness . The Chinese have since twisted it to allege China's domination of Tibet .
 It was not until the rule of the second Manchu Emperor, K’ang Hsi, that China exerted any meaningful power over Tibet . In fact, it was only until the reign of K‘ang . Hsi’s reign was the last of the Manchu
 Only after he died was authority restored to the lay monarchy . It was used by the Mongol proconsuls to exercise power in Tibet .
 Sangve Gyatso, his Grand Vizier (and possibly his bastard son), went to great lengths to conceal his death for several years . There is some question as to the exact time of death because SangveGyatso's death was not discovered until several years later .
 Sangye Gyatso firmly established himself as Regent after the Fifth Dalai was no longer alive . Sangye became the Regent when it became known that he was not alive .
 This deceit so infuriated the Chinese Emperor that he began plotting with the Mongols against the Vizier . This deceit angered the Emperor so he plotted to kill him .
 In 1705 Latsang Khan, a Qosot Mongol prince who had commanded the Grand Vizier’s forces, seized the government in a military coup detat . Khan seized government in 1705 .
 Latsang however, was able to consolidate his power only with the support of Emperor K’ang Hsi . Emperor K'ang . Hsi was Emperor of Tang dynasty .
 This was the first beginning of meaningful Chinese political influence in Tibet . Tibet is now a major source of influence in China's Tibet .
 Kang Hsi reasoned that a Qosot Mongol ally in Tibet would provide a buffer against the hostile Dzungar Mongols from the area now known as Sinkiang who by then were seriously menacing the western reaches of his empire . The Tibetan leader hoped that the ally would provide
 Manchu supremacy in China was relatively safe so long as Tibet remained a friendly neighbor or neutral buffer . Tibet was a neutral buffer to Manchu's rule in China .
 If Lhasa were to fall under Dzungar domination and if Tibet were absorbed into a greater Mongolia united by common religion, Manchu rule would be gravely jeopardized . Tibet is one of the world's most populous cities .
 Latsang needed Manchu support not only to ward off the Manchu and MONGOLS 7 predatory Dzungars but also to defend his secular throne against Yellow Hat conspiracies aimed at restoring ecclesiastical power . The Manchu were the only Manchu to protect Lats
 The Sixth Dalai Lama was the key to serious discontent, which seethed within the Yellow Hat monasteries and brought them into conspiratorial contact with the Dzungar and Oelot Mongol tribes .
 A witness to the intrigues in Lhasa and faithful chronicler of them was Ippolito Desideri, whose sympathies were clearly with Latsang Khan . A witness of the intrigueues in the Lhasasasasa was a chronic chronicler Ipp
 Critics describe him as a boy of exceptional intelligence and talent . Less harsh critics say he is an exceptional talent .
 The Lama was loved by the Tibetan people and provided a potential rallying point for any uprising . Dissolute as he was, the Lama was known for his drug use . He was also known as the 'Lama Lama' in Tibet .
 In 1707 the Qosot Khan sent the doomed Lama on a journey to China . It was allegedly for ceremonial purposes but actually to dispose of him . The Khan sent him to China to be disposed of .
 The Tartar escort stopped in Li-tang short of the Chinese border to carry out its sinister design . Tartar escorts stopped short of Li-Tang short .
 The Dalai Lama asked trusted members of his entourage to tell the Tibetan people not to weep, that he would be reborn on the borders of China near the spot of his execution . Tibetans should search for him, the Dalai Lama said, in a poignant scene before his death .
 This enraged the orthodox Tibetans, particularly the Yellow Hat clergy, who refused to recognize the illegal selection . Tibetans were angered by the decision to allow the selection of Tibetans .
 Even Emperor K’ang Hsi, on whose favor Qosot Mongol rule depended, thought Latsang had gone too far . Emperor K'ang . Hsi was on the verge of overthrowing his son's reign .
 China believes this act provides a basis for claiming suzerainty over Tibet . The latter shrewdly extracted 8 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE tribute from Latsang as the price for Chinese protection .
 Tibetans, with justice on their side, would later claim that the acts of an alien and imposed Mongol king cannot be considered binding on the Tibetan nation . The Chinese henceforward refused to concede that Tibet was wholly independent of Peking .
 The Yellow Hat monks plotted with the Dzungar and Oelot Mongols, whose leader was Tse-wang Rabden . Latsang was unable alone to resist his authority .
 This chieftain raised two armies, one of which he commanded personally, and prepared to invade China . One of his armies was one of the two armies he raised personally . He also commanded personally .
 The objective of the first army was to regain the child Seventh Dalai Lama and block the Chinese Emperor from sending reinforcements to Latsang . The Chinese Emperor was also trying to block reinforcements from sending them back .
 Rabden's ultimate goal was to conquer all of China and seize the throne from the Manchus . Rabden’s ultimate and very ambitious goal was conquering all of the China and seizing the throne . The ultimate goal for Rabden was to take over the throne of China
 A 6,000-man expeditionary force of combined Mongols and Tibetans led by a warrior monk, Tsering Dundup . Tibet had to be wrested from Latsang, and this was the task of the second army .
 Tse-wang Rabden was unable to “liberate” the child Dalai from the Chinese . His Dzungar-Oelot force was severely mauled by the Emperor's forces . The child Dalai was captured by the Chinese Emperor .
 In the meantime, Tsering Dundup spread the word among the Yellow Hats that his approaching army was accompanied by the true Seventh Dalai . The Seventh Dalai is still in Tibet .
 On December 1, 1717, the invading force attacked Lhasa from four directions . The invading force invaded Lhasas from four different directions .
 According to pre-laid plans ladders were let down from Lhasa’s walls, enabling the attackers to scale the ramparts more quickly . The attack was carried out by a group of men known as the Taliban .
 The northern and eastern gates of the city were thrown open by secret sympathizers at a precisely agreed-upon time . Secret sympathizers threw open the gates at the precisely agreed time .
 The ravages of the Mongols were terrifying, but no less so were the excesses of their confederate Yellow Hat monks . The Mongols' excesses were no less terrifying than those of the monks .
 Yellow Hats savagely set upon their Red Hat rivals, massacring all they could find and destroying their monasteries . No longer restrained by Latsang, the Yellow Hat savagely attacked their rivals .
 The Potala, more heavily fortified than the rest of the city, was held until the end by Latsang and a handful of loyal defenders . Manchus and the Mongols were the last of the Mongolians to leave the city .
 The Mongol king escaped through a secret passage just ahead of his pursuers only to be cut down as he tried to flee the town . He was cut down trying to escape the town but was eventually cut down by his pursuer .
 This marked the end of the Qosot Mongol dynasty in Tibet and fulfilled with startling accuracy still another prophecy of Urgyen’s . This is one of many prophe prophe prophecies that have been fulfilled by Urgyan .
 Urgyen had written that Tibet would be invaded by Tartars of Upper Tartary which was, in fact, the home of the Dzungar Mongols . The Tibetans believed the Tartars would invade Tibet .
 The Tartars would sack the land and send home the spoils, he said . He added that the land would be sacked by the Tartars and sent home the proceeds .
 He predicted that they would kill lamas, desecrate monasteries and commit many other atrocities . Moreover, he predicted that the group would commit atrocities against lamas .
 Rabden’s abortive invasion of China by way of Siling was only a tactical feint in support of the invasion of Tibet, but the Emperor knew that the Mongol's ultimate goal was seizure of his own throne . The Emperor knew the ultimate goal of the Mongol’
 With Latsang dead and Tibet secured, Tibet was lost, an important buffer against the Mongols was lost . The Dzungar goal was now possible, and achievement of the goal is now possible .
 Lhasa fell to the Dzungars on the plea of the threatened Latsang Khan . The Chinese army had begun the long and arduous march toward Tibet . On the request of the Latsangs Khan, a Chinese army began the long march .
 The Emperor estimated disillusionment with the new Mongol masters must be rising in Lhasa . The Emperor still had custody of the Seventh Dalai Lama .
 Chinese troops by forced march crossed the great desert to Dam, just north of Lhasa . Chinese troops crossed the . desert to dam, just . north of the . Dam, in the desert, by force .
 The Chinese dug in behind a hastily built stone fort in preparation for a final attack on Lhasa . The Chinese made the tactical blunder of digging behind the hastily built fort .
 The Chinese delay at Dam gave the Dzungar troops time to prepare an attack . The Chinese delayed the attack at Dam in order to prepare for attack .
 Weakened by the long march, the Chinese were unable to break out of their fortifications . They found themselves surrounded and imprisoned by a strong body of Dzingar troops .
 When this source of food was exhausted, they ate the bodies of less hardy comrades as the latter succumbed to starvation . The bodies of those who died of starvation were eaten by the group .
 After enduring a month’s siege, the survivors surrendered only to be massacred to the last 10 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE man as they filed out of the fort .
 Emperor vowed he would repay the Mongols . This was an unbearable humiliation for the Emperor, who vowed to do so .
 Many of his ministers were strongly opposed to risking a new campaign in Tibet, which would be enormously expensive and difficult to sustain . K’ang Hsi was determined to crush the Mongols .
 He knew that unless he could defeat them they would rapidly become strong enough to threaten his empire . He knew he had to defeat them unless he did .
 He sought Mongol mercenaries who were a match for the fierce Dzungars defending Lhasa . He particularly sought mercenaries who could be a match against the fierce Dzungar defending Lhasa. The Mongol mercenaries were the subject of the siege .
 The second expedition, launched in 1720, was commanded by the Emperor's fourteenth son . The expedition was led by Emperor's son .
 The main force was this time sent by way of Tachienlu—a more populated route on which the army could live off the land . This time, the army was sent to a more densely populated route .
 With the Chinese army rode the young Dalai Lama—the Emperor's trump card . The Dalai Lama is the son of the Dalai Lama, who is a Tibetan Buddhist monk .
 Tibetans along the invasion route were invited to join the crusade under the banners of the true Dalai Lama and to drive from their land the alien Dzungar Mongol rulers . Tibetans were invited along the border by the Dalai Lama to fight the invasion .
 Tibetans turned out by the thousands to welcome their Dalai Lama . The grand army marched toward Lhasa, the Tibetan capital of Tibet, in Tibet .
 Many monks willingly joined the Chinese force, while others who lagged behind were prodded to join . Many monks were forced to leave the country, but others were not .
 The huge invading army arrived at the outskirts of Lhasa, where it confronted a weakened garrison of only 4,000 Dzungars . The weakened garrison knew that they could expect no reinforcements .
 This victory is of considerable historic significance to the Chinese since it provided the first real basis for their claim to Tibet . This victory was significant for the Chinese, who claim the region .
 Urgyen had foreseen it and had entered it in the record nearly a thousand years before . Urgyan had predicted it and entered it into the record in the history of Urganen . Urganan's death in Urgangan was a suicide attempt .
 This holy city was a religious See for the Mongolian tribes just as much as it was for Tibetans . Tibetans and Mongolians were at the center of their religious beliefs .
 The patron-priest formula which had kept these two peoples in a unique alliance would now keep Tibet a vassal of the Chinese Emperor instead . Tibet would now be kept under a Chinese emperor instead .
 Manchu rulers experimented with various approaches to the problem of controlling Tibet . George Bogle was the leader of the first English mission to Tibet .
 One of the most practical ways was to prevent the investiture of succeeding Dalai Lamas—by murder if necessary . The Dalai Lama was assassinated in 2009 .
 Tibet was ruled by Tibetans who were responsive to China for more than a century after the Manchu invasion . Tibet has been ruled by the Tibetans since the early 1900s .
 As the Dalai Lama’s power eroded under the regency system, the Panchen Lama assumed greater importance throughout the country . The Dalai Lama is the spiritual leader of the Tibetan people .
 One outstanding Panchen, Lobsang Paldan Yeshi, at length dared to defy Peking. Yeshi .
 He had made contact with a new empire fast rising in India to the south—an empire of British merchants . But this was because of the new empire growing in India .
 Queen Elizabeth signed a royal charter establishing the East India Company . The way had been opened for British power in South Asia on the last day of the sixteenth century . Queen Elizabeth affixed her seal and signature to the charter .
 Company's flagship Hector dropped anchor off Surat on the west coast of India . Eight years later the Company’s flagship Hector was launched in India .
 William Hawkins rowed ashore on August 24, 1608 to become the first Englishman to reach the Moghul realm . Hawkins was the captain of the ship, which arrived in the summer of 1608 .
 Thus began an imperial adventure which would make England great and have a profound effect on the course of history . Thus began the imperial adventure .
 Hawkins was concerned with trade, not empire, with money, not glory . Hawkins was not interested in empire, but he was concerned about trade . Hawkins died in 1918 at the age of 50 .
 He was concerned about his own skin. Even more immediately 12 Backdoor to China 13 he was worried about his skin .
 Hawkins made his way to the fabled Moghul court at Agra, south of Delhi, where he petitioned Emperor Jehangir for license to trade . Despite Portuguese hostility and intrigues Hawkins was successful .
 Having succeeded in poisoning the Emperor’s mind against Hawkins, the Portuguese had won the first round against the English . Hawkins had poisoned the Emperor's mind with the poison .
 The Company somehow survived despite intense Portuguese hostility . Clinging tenaciously to its beachhead at Surat, the Company survived . The Company was forced to leave Surat in 1881 .
 Portuguese naval squadron was routed off Surat by British men-of-war in 1615 . Not until 1615, when the Company was safe, was it safe .
 New trading depots were opened throughout India, and England’s merchant knights grew rich . England's merchant knight grew rich.
 Clive’s victory at the Battle of Plassey near Calcutta in 1757 secured Bengal for the Company . It marked the real beginning of British power in India and marked the beginning of the British rule .
 It was inevitable that the Company would dream of riches beyond the great Himalayan barrier on the north . But it was inevitable it would be inevitable that it would want to explore beyond .
 Herodotus’s tales of limitless treasures of gold had reached India from Tibet . Herodotuses’ time tales of unlimited treasures of treasure had reached the country from Tibet.
 Every river that cascaded from the high Tibetan plateau had washed down gold-flecked sand to excite the coastal dwellers of its delta . Every river which cascaded . from the . high . Tibetan plateau . had washed . down gold, flewn sand to . excite
 The corporate imagination of the East India Company conjured up an El Dorado which could be had for the taking . The company's corporate imagination was to create a 'El Dorado' for the company .
 The Company was intrigued by reports received as early as 1644, describing Tibet as an unlimited source of borax . Tibet was reported to have been a huge source of the borx in 1644 .
 English merchants traded heavily in this commodity, buying it in India from native traders, who brought it in driblets out of Tibet, and selling it in the world market on a near monopoly .
 The English were also interested in new markets for their manufactured goods . The English also wanted to expand their market for their products .
 Tibet and West China soon be investigated as outlets for English cloth goods . Company’s Court of Directors, meeting in London, met in March 1768 with a recommendation that Tibet and west China be investigated .
 In 1771 the Directors raised the idea of exploring the Himalayan principality of Bhutan, north of Bengal, and the Assam Valley, as well as Tibet, with an eye to developing new markets .
 It took Warren Hastings, a highly controversial, visionary Governor of Bengal, to carry out this policy . But it took him to carry it out, he says .
 Teshoo Lama received unexpectedly a letter from Lobsang Paldan Yeshe, the Third Panchen Lama of Tibet, in March of that year . He found a long-sought excuse when he received unexpected a letter .
 Bhutanese raiders in 1772 had kidnapped the Maharajah of Cooch Behar, a vassal of Tibet who ruled over a small princely state wedged between Bengal and Bhutan . The raiders had kidnapped a small state of Tibet from a small kingdom in
 The kidnapping had provoked Hastings to send a punitive expedition into Bhutan . Hastings sent an expedition to Bhutan in response to the kidnapping .
 Outfought by Company troops, the Rajah of Bhutan sought protection from the Panchen Lama, who was his suzerain, and the latter took the unprecedented step of writing Hastings . Hastings was the first time Hastings was attacked in Bhutan .
 Hastings selected as his emmissary to Tibet, George Bogle . Bogle was a twenty-eight-year-old Scotsman in the Company, who was smart, personable and well grounded in affairs of Bengal and Bhutan .
 It is indicative of the Governor’s confidence in Bogle, or perhaps his judgment of men, that he gave his young ambassador wide powers .
 Hastings’ * Lobsang Paldan Yeshe is customarily known as the Third Panchen Lama . Hastings was awarded the title posthumously . This formula for numbering does not take into consideration three predecessors to the actual first Panchen .
 Bogle was instructed to inquire about the countries which lay between Lhasa and Siberia . The latter obviously included China, but also included China . Bogle also instructed to ask about the nations which lay in the region .
 Hastings farsightedly recognized the strategic implications of Tibet’s hub position vis-a-vis India, China and Russia . Hastings did not yet have precise enough geographical data with which to refine these implications .
 He was accompanied by Alexander Hamilton, a surgeon of the East India Company, and Purangir, an emissary sent by the Panchen Lama to guide them .
 As the party passed through Bhutan, it was intercepted by a messenger from the Panchen Lama asking Bogle to postpone his entrance into Tibet . Bogle's party was stopped in Bhutan by a request to postpone its entry to Tibet .
 The Panchen’s letter explained to Bogle that Emperor Ch’ien Lung of China had decreed that no “Moghul, Indian, Pathan or Englishman” should be admitted to Tibet without royal authority . Therefore, Bogle must await permission from
 After appeal delivered by Purangir, the Panchen waived his objections without further reference to China . The Panchen waives his objections .
 Only later did Bogle discover that the trouble had been in Lhasa—not Peking . Bogle later discovered the trouble was in Lhaa, not Peking.
 The Panchen confided in Bogle that the Regent of the child Dalai Lama in Lhasa had been the obstruction to his mission . Panchen ultimately confided to the Panchen that he had been thwarted by the child Lama .
 This puppet of the Chinese had warned that the English objective was to conquer Tibet . He warned that he was trying to conquer the region .
 The Panchen Lama did not accept the Chinese stricture and had the political sense to recognize that the English could provide a counterbalance to Manchu power .
 He overruled Lhasa and received Bogle at a temporary camp site near the southern Tibetan city of Shigatse .
 Bogle described the Panchen Lama as a man about forty years old, “of low stature and, though not corpulent, rather inclined to be fat . His whiskers never above a month long.”
 Almost immediately the Panchen apologized for his Bhutanese vassal—criticizing him for his unnecessary attack on Cooch Behar .
 He told Bogle that he had always disapproved of Bhutan’s capture of the Cooch Behar prince and the war with the Fringies .
 Panchen Lama confided to Bogle that the Regent had encouraged Bhutan to war on Cooch Behar . Bogle: "I'm not surprised that Bhutan has gone to war with Bhutan"
 Because the Regent’s judgment was patently wrong, the Panchen had felt strong enough to override him and receive the English emissary . The Panchen overruled him and received the English envoy .
 Lama disregarded Lhasa, believing Hastings had acted in good faith by withdrawing from Bhutan . The Lama was convinced that Hastings' withdrawal would improve Bhutan's chances of peace .
 In effect, he told the Regent to leave relations with the British to him . The Regent told him to leave British relations with him .
 Talks with Panchen Lama began auspiciously and in a spirit of conciliation . Talks with the Panchen Dalai Lama are in the spirit of conciliation .
 Bengal, Bengal, was very close to him since he had lived there during two previous incarnations . Bengal, he explained, was a very close place to him . He explained that Bengal was very important to him and his family .
 Regent sent two emissaries from Lhasa to talk with Bogle . Bogle: "It was clear in the end that they would make no trade agreement"
 Lhasa emissaries refused to act on behalf of the Emperor . Pleading the need to gain Emperor's permission, they refused to take action .
 The Panchen Lama seemed genuinely sorry that he could not accommodate the British request for trade rights . He said he was sorry he couldn't accommodate the request .
 Trade relations were not established, nor was he able to convince the Lhasan authorities that British intentions were entirely peaceful .
 He gained for England the confidence and friendship of the Panchen Lama, who was to prove a strong champion of the Company’s interests .
 He genuinely liked the Panchen Lama; not unnaturally this sentiment was reciprocated . The Panchen Dalai Lama was a genuine admirer of the Dalai Lama .
 Bogle had bridged a wide cultural gap to find an enduring personal relationship which gained for England and the Company a valuable friend . Bogle's friendship with England was a valuable friendship .
 The first embassy to Tibet was also immensely useful for the information Bogle was able to bring back .
 Tibet was a key part of the trade route between Tibet and China . Tibet was important in the continental trade of Asia . Tibet is now a major destination in the world .
 Tibet produced gold, musk, yak-tails, wool and salt which Tibetans exchanged for cloth goods, leather and luxury goods . Most of the trade with China was along the caravan route via Sining, Tibet .
 Usually the caravans were so-called tribute missions, but they nevertheless constituted a form of organized trade . The 18th century was the first of the world's most significant trade-caravans .
 The Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama would send to the Emperor rich ‘tribute’ cargoes of ceremonial scarves, holy relics, amber rosaries, bronze Buddha images and incense . The Emperor would send them rich “tributes” of ceremonial
 In exchange, the Emperor would send the Lamas presents of satin, silver goods and gold trinkets . In many cases, the gifts exceeded the value of the Tibetan trains .
 In fact, the retinue of the tribute caravans included Indian trading pilgrims called gosains . They waxed rich and influential on their lucrative trade .
 Whatever its ceremonial origins, tribute had little political meaning in Tibet by the eighteenth century . The Tibetans were paying tribute to Tibetans in tribute .
 Hasting’s intuition had told him that Russia—however far from Lhasa—posed a danger not to be ignored . Hasting: Russia, however far away, posed a threat not to ignore .
 Bogle's intuition was reinforced by Bogle’s intelligence, which revealed that significant trade between Tibet and Russia did exist . His intuition was confirmed by the intelligence of his intelligence .
 This trade was conducted by Kalmuks from Eastern Turkestan and Buriat Mongols from Siberia . The trade was for the most part conducted by the Kalmikas from Turkmenistan and by Buriat Mongolols .
 In yearly caravans they brought furs, Russian hides, yak tails, yak-tails and fresh-water pearls . They exchanged for cloth, amber, spices and gold for cloth .
 His interest in her was apparently aroused by stories which filtered through to Lhasa telling of Russia-China boundary quarrels .
 Bogle sensed that the Lama was, even then, genuinely concerned about the possibility of a clash between Asia’s two expanding empires as they veered closer to each other in Central Asia in the 1970s .
 Bogle’s strategic insight into the Himalayan and trans-Himalayan region proved to be amazingly accurate . Bogle's strategic insight was amazingly accurate.
 British Himalayan policy was for many years consistent with his conclusions . It must be assumed that his recommendations to Hastings influenced the early shaping of British policy .
 China's supply lines to Tibet were much longer and more hazardous than those from India . This was equally true for the Chinese, whose routes and supply lines were more dangerous than India's .
 Communist China in mid-twentieth century first built roads before it attempted to consolidate its control over the Tibetan plateau . Then extended its road network southward to the Himalayas as a requirement for ultimate control of Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan .
 The threat of a new empire rising in India to challenge Imperial China in Asia was ominous enough to the Manchus . The threat to India from India in India in the early 1900s was ominous .
 Emissaries of this empire to visit the court of the Panchen Lama and negotiate behind the backs of the Chinese proconsuls in Lhasa was to give immediacy to the threat . But for emissaries to . visit the . court of this . empire to . negotiate
 If Tibet were to fall under the Company’s influence, the Manchu Empire would be flanked by two “barbarians’’—the British as well as the Russians’ — the British . Tibet would have been flanked by the two ‘barbar
 He could do little about the British, but he could at least try to bring the Panchen to heel . The Panchen will be the first time the British have beaten them in a row .
 Ch'ien Lung sent repeated messages inviting the Panchen Lama to Peking during the years 1777 and 1778 . Ch’ien Lung was invited to visit Peking in 1777, 1778 and 1780 .
 Perhaps he realized that in Peking he would be vulnerable to Chinese pressures, he said . He said: "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to live in China again."
 Or perhaps perhaps he was genuinely apprehensive about the smallpox epidemic which raged through China . Or perhaps he had been genuinely worried about the epidemic .
 The Emperor invited the Panchen Lama in a letter written in 1779 to celebrate his seventieth birthday . The message described elaborate plans which were being made to celebrate the Emperor's seventh birthday .
 The Panchen could no longer refuse; when he finally did accept, however, it was with great reluctance . He finally accepted the Panchen's offer of marriage with the Queen of England .
 He confided to a few friends that an inner instinct warned him that he would never return to the country . But he told friends that he was going to return to his childhood home .
 Panchen Lama set forth on his epic visit to China in July 1779 . Filled with this foreboding, he visited China in 1779 and set forth .
 Five thousand troops were his escort as he marched regally through Tibet . The Dalai Lama was escorted by five thousand troops .
 This journey was a rare spectacle, which brought crowds of his countrymen to pay homage as he swept by . Crowds paid homage to the countryman as he passed by .
 Whenever he paused, a platform caparisoned with rich brocades and deep cushions was erected . The platform was erected in his honor and was filled with rich furnishings .
 Enthroned above his people the Panchen sat patiently, his right foot extended and unshod so that the faithful could touch it with their foreheads as they filed by .
 Purangir, faithful agent of the Company, caught up with the party on a mission for Hastings .
 Hastings arranged a plan for Bogle to go to Canton by sea in the naive hope that a trade agreement with Tibet could be worked out with the Emperor of China . Hastings had arranged to send Bogle by sea to China in the hope of a trade deal with Tibet .
 Purangir was to solicit the Panchen’s approval of the plan, then meet Bogle in Canton and escort him to Peking . Bogle was to be escorted to China, where he was to meet the leader .
 Bogle hoped also to take up with the Emperor the matter of debts owed by Chinese merchants to English sea traders . The Panchen Lama was also keen to discuss debts owed to Chinese merchants .
 The English had been unable to gain access to Peking and the Emperor’s court to redress their grievances . Heretofore the English were unable to access Peking .
 Bogle believed that by riding in on the Panchen’s coattails he could perhaps at least gain a royal hearing . Bogle said he hoped to ride in on Panchen's coattail .
 If satisfaction could not be obtained on the spot, he hoped to set up some permanent channel of communications to the Emperor through which complaints could be heard .
 As the Panchen Lama neared the Emperor’s summer palace at Jehol, the receptions became more numerous and progressively more elaborate . The receptions became increasingly elaborate .
 At one place His Holiness was met by the Emperor's first son riding at the head of 10,000 royal troops . The Emperor's son rode with 10,500 royal troops at one point .
 The Panchen Lama was not required to kowtow or otherwise signify vassalage to the Emperor . As had been the case when the Great Fifth Dalai Lama visited the Manchu court, the Great
 The Panchen Lama raised the matter of his relationship with the English . It was on the fourth day of meetings that he raised the issue .
 He asked suspiciously about “the extent of the country” ruled over by this prince and the number of his forces,” he said . The prince also asked about the extent of his country’s borders, and how many forces his forces were .
 Ch’ien Lung feared that the British Empire in Asia would rival his own and eventually absorb Tibet . His replies were cautious, but we can assume they did nothing to dispel his fears .
 In the autumn the Emperor returned to Peking from Jehol accompanied by his holy guest . The Emperor returned in the autumn .
 The Panchen Lama once again raised with the Emperor the matter of the British. Here the Emperor once again .
 One can guess that either either Purangir exaggerated the sincerity of the Emperor’s response or the response was made simply in an effort to be polite .
 Chinese records include no mention of this conversation, but then it is unlikely that they would . Chinese records of the conversation are not mentioned .
 Emperor would not want the Panchen Lama's views a matter of permanent record . It is unlikely he seriously considered corresponding with British trading company .
 It is difficult to believe that the Panchen Lama would have been naive enough to think that he could bring the Chinese Emperor to endorse his close relations with the British .
 More likely the Panchen Lama raised the matter to impress upon the Emperor that the British could be protectors of Tibet if China attempts to interfere with Tibet’s autonomy .
 This was in all probability a political maneuver . Panchen Lama’s strategy of playing the Chinese off against the British, he says .
 It would have been interesting to see whether the Emperor allowed Bogle to join 22 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE them in Peking .
 He probably would have found excuses to exclude him since to do otherwise would be tantamount to condoning close Tibetan-English ties . To do otherwise, he would have been seen as a traitor to Tibet .
 The Panchen Lama suddenly sickened and died . The matter never came to a test, however .
 Tibetans historically distrust Chinese motives when a Grand Lama is invited to Peking . Tibetans distrust Chinese intentions when invited to visit Peking. Tibetans traditionally distrust China's motives .
 They assume that the Chinese will impose their will on him or, failing this, dispose of him on the assumption that his next incarnation will prove more malleable . The Chinese assume that, failing to succeed, they will either be disposed of him .
 A large body of opinion in Tibet was convinced that the Panchen Lama was murdered in Peking . It was natural, therefore, that a large body . of opinion was convinced he was murdered .
 Whether or not the Emperor was guilty of the Panchen’s death, he certainly gained by it . The Emperor gained by the death of his predecessor, the Emperor .
 Power in Tibet reverted to the Dalai Lama in Lhasa and was held in escrow for him by the Regent . The Regent was under the Chinese Ambans’ watchful eyes .
 The Regent, long a puppet of the Chinese, opposed relations between Tibet and the British . He could be relied upon to follow Peking’s dictates .
 Hastings' Tibet policy rested heavily on the relationship between Bogle and the Panchen Lama . Hastings’ Tibet policy relied heavily on Bogle’s relationship with Bogle . Bogle was a key figure in the Tibetan community .
 With their passing went the Company’s best chances for trade with Tibet . Tibet was their best chance to trade with the Tibetans .
 Hastings sent another mission to Tashilhunpo in 1783 under Lieutenant Samuel Turner . The new incarnation of the Panchen Lama was still a child, and his Regent gave Turner no encouragement whatsoever .
 Hastings’ “forward policy’s collapse came not long after he was relieved as Governor General . Hastings was relieved of his post as the British Prime Minister in 2009 .
 Lord Charles Cornwallis stumbled badly on Himalayan policy . Lord Cornwallis, who replaced him, stumbled badly in Himalayan diplomacy .
 Through ineptitude, Hastings lost even the goodwill which Hastings had gained . Hastings lost his goodwill through ineptitude . Hastings had lost the goodwill he had gained.
 A series of petty disputes over currency and trade had touched off a Gurkha invasion of Tibet from Nepal in 1788 . The child Panchen’s Regent at Tashilhunpo had turned to the Company for help .
 Regent confided that if British help was not forthcoming he must accept Chinese military assistance . In a pathetic letter to the Governor General the Regent said he would accept help from China .
 Manchus would use Gurkha invasion as excuse to tighten Peking’s hold on Tibet . This he did not want since he knew that the Manchu would use it as an excuse for the invasion . Peking knew he wanted the invasion to tighten his grip on
 Cornwallis responded tardily and unimaginatively, claiming that the Company could not afford the cost of war against Nepal, had no reason to attack Nepal and did not want to offend the Chinese Emperor lest it disrupt the Company’s sea trade with China .
 The commander to whom the Emperor had first entrusted Tibet's defense actually bought off the Gurkhas with promises of tribute rather than risking battle with them . Tibet's first commander bought off his troops with promises to pay them .
 Peking kept it secret from Peking as long as it could be, but when promised tribute payment to the Gurkhas was not forthcoming the skeleton clattered from its closet . This act of cowardice was kept secret from the Peking government .
 The Gurkhas, who felt cheated, erupted again in 1791, this time sacking the Panchen Lama’s treasure-laden monastery at Tashilhunpo . This time, they sacked the monastery, which is now a Buddhist monastery .
 Emperor sent under forced march a large army which routed the Gurkhas in a brilliantly conducted campaign over icy passes during the winter of 1792 .
 The Gurkha Rajah of Nepal tried to mend his fences with the British . While his troops retreated from Tibet in disorder, his troops were in disorder . Nepal was ruled by the British at the time .
 He hastily signed a trade pact which the Company had long been seeking, hoping thereby to qualify for defense assistance . The pact was signed by the company hoping to get defense assistance from Russia .
 Cornwallis refused to help the beleaguered Nepalese, thus alienating victor and vanquished alike . Cornwallis angered the Emperor and failed the Tibetans .
 Cornwallis despatched Captain William Kirkpatrick to Kathmandu to attempt mediation . Cornwallis sent Captain Kirkpatrick in Kathmandus to try to mediate .
 Cornwallis’ offer of mediation was unfortunately too late to help Nepal and was resented by the Chinese, whose victory entitled Peking to impose terms on Nepal . Cornwallis offered to help but it was too late .
 Kirkpatrick only served to excite further suspicion that the British had secretly backed the Gurkhas in their ill-fated adventure in Tibet .
 As predicted by the Panchen’s Regent, the Chinese tightened their grip on Tibet . The Panchen's Regent said the move was a sign of China's growing influence in Tibet .
 The Dalai and Panchen Lamas were forbidden to exercise power independently of the Chinese Ambans . The Dalai was banned from exercising power independent of the Ambans in China .
 The latter, moreover, were empowered to select puppets of their choosing as Lamas . The latter were also empowered to choose puppets they wanted to be Lamas.
 It was the intention of the Emperor to absorb Tibet into the Manchu empire . It was intended to deny it any of its traditional attributes of autonomy . The Emperor wanted Tibet to be absorbed into the empire .
 A tablet describing the new terms of Chinese control was erected in September 1793 in front of the Jo-kang, Lhasa’s holiest place of worship .
 More than a century passed before the British again made a serious attempt to penetrate Tibet . Lord Curzon was the Viceroy of India, 1898-1905 .
 When the attempt was finally made, it involved other stakes than commerce . The attempt was made in a bid to make the world's first attempt at a trade deal .
 Imperial Russia not only threatened British interests in India but endangered the balance of power in the Orient . The spreading power of Imperial Russia threatened the British interests of India . Imperial Russia's influence in India and the rest of the world .
 Although the Russian Empire had been expanding for four hundred years, it had been confined to the heartland of the Eurasian continent . The Russian Empire was confined to Russia's heartland, but the Empire was expanding .
 Russia pushed southward toward Britain’s empire and threatened to upset power equilibrium in the East it became of vital concern . This expansion had not troubled the British, but when in the nineteenth century it became vital concern.
 Russia began to extend its rule modestly toward the end of the fourteenth century . The Mongol tide had begun to recede from its highwater mark of conquest .
 By the middle of the sixteenth century the Khanates of Kazan and Astrakhan had fallen to the Russians . By the end of the 16th century, Russia had taken control of the region .
 A century later found the Russians on the banks of the Amur River in Siberia, where they skirmished with advance units of the Chinese . The Russians fought with advance Chinese units in Siberia .
 A line between Russia and China was finally drawn by the Treaty of Nerchinsk in 1689 . The Amur Basin was awarded to the Manchu Emperor, K’ang Hsi, by the treaty .
 While this agreement remained in force for nearly two centuries, it did not contain Russia's eastward expansion indefinitely . The agreement was reached in 1881, but it was not extended indefinitely .
 Two years later by the Treaty of Peking the Manchus relinquished to Russia the land between the right banks of the Ussuri and lower Amur rivers and the Pacific Ocean . The treaty was signed by Russia in 1945 .
 This permitted Russia to build Vladivostock and from this base extend its influence along the northern Pacific coast . This allowed Russia to expand its influence in the region .
 The 1860 treaty and the supplementary protocol of Tarbagatai, signed in 1864, took advantage of the declining Manchu power to realign China's western boundary in Russia’s favor . The treaty was signed in the wake of the Manchu's declining power .
 China regained part of the rich and strategic Ili Valley leading into western Sinkiang, which had earlier been lost through Russian pressure . The Treaty of Ili, as it is sometimes known, was signed in 1903 .
 Peking has recently attacked the protocols as imperialist-imposed, ‘unequal’ treaties . It uses today as a basis to insist on a redefinition of its Central Asian boundary with the Soviet Union .
 A sense of Great Russian nationalism overlay a deeper, more instinctive drive to control the Asian hordes which had once conquered the Russian people . The Russian people were driven by a desire to control their enemies .
 In the nineteenth century exploration and imperial conquest were the trend in the Western world . In the 19th century exploration was the main focus of exploration .
 Cossack horsemen, like adventurers and pioneers everywhere, were irresistably drawn to the next prize over the horizon . Cossacks horsemen were drawn to each other's next prize, then on the next one .
 Tashkent was taken in 1864, Samarkand in 1868, Bokhara in 1869, Khokand in Khokan in 1876, Merve in 1884 and Pendjdeh in 1885 . The city was taken by the Taliban in
 By 1895 the Russians had reached the Pamirs, overlooking the Indian subcontinent . The Pamirs were located in the region of the Pamiran region of India .
 This was the time of the ‘Great Game,’ a name invented by Indian Army officer Captain Arthur Conolly to describe BritishRussian political fencing in Central Asia . Conolly invented the name to describe the British-Russian fencing .
 Conolly forfeited his own life for the Game when he was beheaded in Bokhara . Conolly was on a secret mission for the government of India . He was killed during a mission for India .
 The Great Game 27 empires veered perilously close to each other as the nineteenth century came to a close . Long-range reconnaissance and espionage of this kind served as probing antennae of two THE GREAT GAME .
 By the end of the nineteenth century there had developed in Russia a cult of Vostochniki, or “Easterners,” who believed that it was Russia’s mission to conquer continental Asia .
 Prjevalskii helped popularize the concept of Central Asian unity with Russia with Russia . He was the founder of the Central Asian Communist Party .
 In the same year Crown Prince Nicholas toured the Far East, dramatizing Russia’s increased interest in the region . In 2013, the Russian Crown Prince visited the region and toured it for the first time .
 Ukhtomskii predicted Russia would defeat Japan and then conquer China in 1904 . He predicted that Russia would conquer China and then defeat Japan .
 These were strong words, particularly since they were spoken by a man who served as the Crown Prince’s mentor on Far Eastern affairs . The Crown Prince's mentor served as a senior adviser to the crown prince .
 Nicholas' adoption of an aggressive policy toward Asia after he became Czar can probably be traced in some measure to Ukhtomskii’s influence . Nicholas’ adoption of a more aggressive policy can be traced to his influence in Asia .
 Witte promoted the construction of the Trans-Siberian Railway as a means of encouraging industry and marketing Western Siberia’s grain production . Witte was also influential in promoting the construction .
 Both men had visions of a Russian empire in Asia, although Witte viewed it more from an economic point of view . Both men viewed the Russian empire as an economic factor in Asia .
 He saw in a Far Eastern rail network a means to compete commercially with England in China .
 Russia’s contacts with Tibet had initially been through the Mongols, many of whom were Lamaists . Russia's contacts with the Tibetans were initially through the Mongolols . The Mongols were many of them Lamaists.
 Catherine the Great had initiated a correspondence with the Mongolian Grand Lama of Urga betraying her more than casual interest in Mongolia . Catherine the . Great had . initiated correspondence with Mongolian . Grand . Lama of . Urga .
 Catherine asked for advice on how to meet Catherine's increasingly aggressive moves toward Mongolia . Catherine's request was accompanied by a request for advice from a lama .
 In Peking, Russia was viewed as another foreign barbarian . Russia's domination of the Mongols posed a threat in Central Asia more formidable than the British traders in India and along the coast .
 The British Empire in India was still separated from China by the Himalayas and the endless wastes of Tibet . The Russian "White Horde" inexorably advanced toward the Chinese across the flat steppes of Central Asia .
 The Mongol concept of Tsagan Khan has an ancient parallel in Tibetan mythology . The concept is similar to the concept of Tibetan Khan in the ancient world of Tibet .
 It was prophesied that Song-tsen Gampo, founder of Tibet’s religion, would one day be reincarnated as a mighty prince and conquer the world in the name of Buddhism . The Tibetan people are believed to be the descendants of the Tibetan people .
 The prediction specified that the seat of the new empire would bear the name Chang Shambhala . It would be located three thousand miles northwest of Lord Buddha’s birthplace in northern India .
 Mysterious Buriat Mongol lama sought to promote Russian policy in Lhasa . Mysterious lama was found useful by a most mysterious Mongol Lama .
 Aguan Dorjiev was the most effective player of them all in the Great Game which swirled around Tibet at the turn of the century . This extraordinary agent of the Czar was known by various names and aliases .
 He had a disturbing effect on the Central Asian balance of power . He set in motion a series of moves and countermoves which would ultimately provoke the British to march on Lhasa .
 As tutor and confidant of the Dalai Lama, Dorjiev gained enormous influence in Lhasa . He convinced many Tibetans that Czar Nicholas II was, in fact, the great Prince of Buddhism .
 Lord Curzon, Viceroy of India, was at first not inclined to take the Buriat lama seriously .
 London became suspicious of Dorjiev only when Hardinge, then British Chargé d’Affaires in St. Louis, became suspicious . Hardinge became suspicious when he became a British official in the 1980s .
 Mystery-monk's audience with the Czar at Livadia Palace in Yalta . St. Peters burg sent article to Foreign Office .
 Dorjiev had been described as a representative of the Dalai Lama and was rumored to have brought a letter to the Czar from His Holiness . Hardinge’s report aroused deep suspicion in London and Calcutta .
 The presence of Russian troop concentrations in Central Asia tied down British forces in India . Even if a Russian invasion of India seemed remote, the presence of Russia's presence of troops in the region tied down comparable British forces .
 This was awkward at a time when the ‘thin red line’ was stretched to the limit against the Boers in Africa . The “thin red lines” was stretched in Africa during the apartheid era . This was an awkward moment for the South African nation .
 The British Raj could not allow its subjects in India to see nearby a power comparable to British power . Also the British Raj couldn't allow its subject in India a rival power .
 Curzon's first act as Viceroy was to bring under his personal control of the vulnerable borderlands . Curzon’s first act was to . bring under . his personal . control the vulnerable . borderlands under Curzon was to be brought under personal control .
 He reasoned that China’s Sinkiang dependency north of Ladakh and Tibet would eventually fall to Russia . He reasoned, for example, that . China's Ladakh region would fall under Russian control .
 Sinkiang a consul general guarded by an impressive Cossack escort . The latter had already been stationed in Kashgaria, China .
 There is much talk of a new Russian rail line which would extend to Eastern Sinkiang and make an invasion of that area logistically feasible . There is also talk of an extension of that rail line .
 If Tibet came under Russian influence, India would be exposed and vulnerable along its entire 2,500-mile northern boundary . Tibet is India's northern border with Tibet .
 Sir John Ardagh was Director of British Military Intelligence in 1896 . He argued for fixing a definite boundary in the Pamirs far enough forward to prevent Russian expansion into Turkestan and Hunza .
 He felt that the Sino-Japanese War had revealed serious Chinese weakness and that the consequences of this would be eventual Russian annexation of Kashgaria .
 Czar's envoys reputedly had dangled before him enticing offers of aid . The Czar’s envoys were reputed to have offered him aid .
 Curzon supported Ardagh’s views mainly because the Russians had established a threatening military outpost in the Taghdumbash-Pamir area north of Hunza . Curzon backed Ardagh's views because of the Russians' presence in the area .
 In March 1899 the British government proposed to Peking that China recognize Hunza’s claims to the western end of the Taghdumbash area . In return for which the British would agree to negotiate a firm boundary in the Aksai Chin area where Ladakh, Tibet and
 British were anxious to clear up this festering dispute in Taghdumbash which made Hunza vulnerable to Russian intrigues . They probably would have made major territorial concessions to the Chinese in Aksai Chin had the latter accepted the British offer to negotiate .
 London would probably have conceded to the Chinese most of the arid Aksai Chin plateau . The arid plateau is today the crux of India’s northwest boundary dispute with China .
 The Chinese would not agree, however, and missed the opportunity never again to be offered by the British . The Chinese missed the chance to offer the British the opportunity again, however .
 Curzon began to view Dorjiev's activities as having an important part in Russia’s master plan for Asia . With this perspective, Curzon . Curzon. began to see Dorjev as having been important part .
 Dorjiev argued that China was too weak to protect Tibet from the British and might, in fact, give the country to the British as a sop . The Dalai Lama's appeal to the Dalai Lama was calculated to appeal to Russia with a line .
 English infidels would then occupy Lhasa and usurp the rule of the lama priests . Lama priests would then usurp their rule of lama .
 The Buriat extolled Russia as a powerful military nation which could protect Tibet . Tibetans believe Russia is capable of protecting their homeland .
 Hinting that Czar Nicholas II had embraced Buddhism, he pointed out that the classic patron-priest relationship would give the Dalai Lama ecclesiastical power over all of the Russian Empire .
 Dorjiev also brought a letter to the Dalai Lama from the Czar inviting His Holiness to send an envoy to Russia for further discus . The Dalai Lama is invited to visit Russia to meet with Russian President Vladimir Putin for further discussions .
 Swayed by Dorjiev’s influence, the Dalai Lama, without notifying the Tibetan National Council, impulsively sent to St. Louis . The Dalai Lama sent the letter to the U.S. Embassy in Washington, D.C. and the Vatican .
 An ornate cushion to serve as his throne while he talked to the great White Lama was created in St. Petersburg, Russia . The cushion was created for the White Lama to sit on during his talks with him .
 Tibet’s Prime Minister made it clear to the Dalai Lama that he had overstepped the bounds of his authority by making plans to visit Russia . Tibet's Prime Minister intervened, however, and said he was overstepping his authority .
 Tibet's National Council is not yet convinced that Tibet needs Russian protection, says Dalai . He also reminded the Dalai that the National Council does not yet believe Tibet needs protection from Russia .
 The Dalai Lama sent a mission consisting of eight senior statesmen headed by Dorjiev, whom he accorded the rank of plenipotentiary . Dissuaded from going to Russia, the Dalai Lama instead sent instead a mission .
 The group made its way across India under the very nose of the British and boarded a ship for Russia . The group boarded the ship and made their way to Russia .
 By June 1901 Dorjiev was back in Russia, much to the consternation of Curzon . Curzon sent him back to Russia .
 The Dalai Lama's visit to Odessa in 1901 was reported in the June 25, 1901 edition of the newspaper Odessa Novosti . The city would welcome that day an “extraordinary mission from the Dalai Lama”
 Dorjiev, leader of the mission, “had letters from the Dalai Lama which would raise the matter of a permanent Tibetan mission in St. George’s .
 Count Lamsdorff dismissed as “ridiculous” and “utterly unfounded” stories that the Tibetan group had a diplomatic role . Russian Foreign Minister compared Tibetan mission to similar missions sent by the Pope to the faithful around the world .
 Nicholas II had a somewhat romantic and mystical nature . The project was the kind of undertaking which would appeal to Nicholas II .
 Sir Cecil Spring Rice, later British Ambassador to the U.S. wrote Sir Charles Hardinge about the atmosphere in St. Louis . Sir Hardinge was a British ambassador to the United States .
 One called for stationing in Lhasa a prince of the Russian royal house as ambassador . Another called for the Russian prince to be an ambassador .
 Russia and Tibet conclude an agreement requiring Russia to come to Tibet’s rescue in the event of attack by the British . The other, more serious, suggests an agreement that would require Russia to rescue Tibet from the British attack .
 The Dalai Lama was very much in favor of concluding such a treaty . Dorjiev had done his job well. The Tibetan leader had done a job well, says Dalai Lama .
 A little intelligence leaked out to British frontier officers in Darjeeling and Kalimpong, India . The intelligence was leaked to frontier officers .
 It was mainly unreliable hearsay from native travelers . But by the time this type of news reached India it was hopelessly out of date .
 The Boxer Rebellion of 1900 provided an occasion for Russian troops to occupy Peking as part of the international rescue mission . Russian troops occupied Peking in 1900 .
 Russia penetrated deeply into Manchuria and Western Turkestan . Russia was not yet at war with Japan, but it had penetrated into the region .
 The Pamirs were under the Czar’s control, and it was generally accepted that Chinese Turkestan and Mongolia would probably be next . Mongolia and China Turkestans were also under control .
 Russia needed the Czar’s protection against Japan, which posed a serious and immediate threat, it said . Russia needed protection from Japan, it added .
 Russia would find an understanding with China useful because of a similar imminent threat from Japan . Russia, for its part, would find it useful to avoid a similar threat from China .
 The rumor of a Sino-Russian accord could not be established as fact, and both Peking and St. St. Vladimir Putin have denied it . However plausible this reasoning may have appeared, the rumor was not established as facts .
 Denials, THE GREAT GAME 33 however, did little to allay the fears and suspicions of Great Britain .
 Curzon himself asserted that he was a firm believer in the existence of a secret understanding—if not a secret treaty—between Russia and China about Tibet .
 Reports of Russian success in Lhasa all the more difficult for Curzon to bear was his own painfully obvious lack of success . Curzon: "What made reports of Russia's success in the country's first major election victory was a failure"
 Curzon’s efforts to communicate with the Dalai Lama were being rebuffed . Curzon was in St. Petersburg, Russia, when he was forced to leave the country .
 The Dalai Lama refused to admit British traders under the terms of treaties signed with the Chinese . He refused even to have the matter discussed. Not only had the issue discussed .
 Curzon: It was now obvious that there were influences at work in Lhasa specifically hostile to the British . Curzon was convinced that the British were not interested in the region's culture .
 Russian players in the Great Game seemed to be outscoring British players . The Great Game is being played in Russia's version of the World Cup .
 On June 26, 1902 he sent a representative named White to Giagong in Sikkim to reassert British rights to the territory which had been previously seized by the Tibetans . The Tibetans had seized the territory .
 Tibetans retreated behind the line recognized by the British . This threat of force succeeded, and the Tibetans were forced to retreat .
 Lhasa protested the validity of the 1890 convention between India and China which defined the Sikkim border with Tibet, claiming that the Tibetan government had never signed it . Just as it had not honored the Chefoo Convention of 1876 in which China permitted Britain to trade in Tibet,
 Chinese Amban in Lhasa promised to produce a high-level Tibetan to begin negotiations . White’s mission provoked a response from the Amban .
 Curzon had little faith that the Tibetans would ever get down to negotiations . Curzon, correctly, he said, "had little faith" that they would ever negotiate .
 The Viceroy still saw force as the only solution to Tibet's problems . Believing that the root of the difficulties with Tibet was 34 Russian influence in Lhasa .
 On January 8, 1903, he proposed to London that a mission with armed escort be sent to Lhasa . The mission would settle once and for all India’s relationship with Tibet .
 Any move deep into Tibet could be expected to bring a stronger reaction from St. Louis County .
 As a compromise, the Viceroy was given authority to send a mission to Khamba Dzong . Khamba is the nearest inhabited place inside Tibetan territory easily reached from Giagong .
 Curzon chose as leader Major Francis Younghusband, an officer of the India service who had already made a brilliant record along the frontier . Curzon also chose Major Francis Ynghushusband as leader .
 His escort would consist of two hundred rifles, calculated to make his negotiating voice more convincing . He would be accompanied by two hundred rifle-wielding men .
 Plan called for Younghusband to meet in Khamba Dzong with high-level emmissary of the Dalai Lama and a representative from China . Plan calls for meeting with high level emmissaries of Dalai Lama .
 It is hoped firm agreement on trade and boundary matters could finally be reached with Tibetans at this meeting .
 Curzon would have convincing evidence that Lhasa had no intention of abiding by British-Chinese agreements . But if agreement proved impossible, Curzon could have evidence .
 The real significance of this would be the confirmation that Tibet had fallen under serious Russian influence . Tibet is now under serious influence, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The Khamba Dzong mission failed since an adequately ranking Tibetan negotiator never appeared . The mission failed because of the lack of a sufficient Tibetan negotiator . Khamba is located in the Tibetan city of Khamba, Tibet .
 Curzon grasped at every shred of evidence which supported his stand that Tibet must be brought to heel by armed invasion . Curzon: "The Tibetans are not the Tibetans. They are the only Tibetans who have ever been in Tibet."
 Younghusband, no less aggressive than Curzon, obliged the Viceroy by sending back all sorts of intelligence which supported the forward policy . Curzon sent back intelligence that supported the policy, which led to the return of intelligence .
 Curzon’s force of will and tenacity more than anything else was responsible for finally wearing down London's resistance . Curzon's force, tenacity and tenacious tenacity were responsible for wearing down resistance .
 In October 1903 Younghusband was authorized to advance into Tibet as far as Gyantse . He was authorized by the government to advance in Tibet . In 1903 he advanced into Tibet .
 Prime Minister Balfour’s Conservative government—wobbly and unsure of itself—was proceeding warily lest it risk censure for an adventurous policy in Tibet .
 The mission's escort was augmented by nearly three thousand men under Brigadier J Macdonald . The Great Game 35 was the first of the Great War's 35th anniversary .
 Younghusband was called to the summer capital in Simla for final orders . He was frank in acknowledging his bewilderment at the instructions which he received .
 Obtaining ‘satisfaction’ for real and imagined insults against the Indian government seemed like a strange purpose for a military expedition . At issue were important matters of trade rights which the British had been seeking since 1873 .
 Younghusband saw little difference between his objective and that of Warren Hastings a century before . Warren Hastings was a leader in Hastings' efforts to get the job done .
 Younghusband and Curzon both understood that the real issue was British primacy in an area essential to the security of India .
 Imperial Russia could not be allowed to enter the vacuum which was being created by the disintegration of the Manchu Empire . Imperial Russia couldn't be allowed into the vacuum .
 Younghusband’s force reached Gyantse in April 1904 . After one brief engagement with Tibetan border troops and another clash along the way, the force reached the border .
 Tibetans were no more willing to negotiate here than at Khamba Dzong . The Tibetans, however, were not willing to go to the negotiating table . Tibetans are no more likely to negotiate with the Dalai Lama .
 London had no alternative but to order the mission to advance on Lhasa . London was already already more deeply involved in Tibet than it wanted to be .
 British column moved quickly to Tibet's capital, meeting only minor opposition along the way . The British column met only minor resistance along the route .
 On August 2 Younghusband came within sight of the Potala and saw the goal which had so long eluded Englishmen . The goal was the first of its kind to be scored by the Englishmen in the Roman Empire .
 Dalai Lama and Dorjiev fled northward to Urga, Mongolia, where they became political refugees under the protection of the High Lama of Mongolia . The Dalai Lama is now living in Urga .
 The Grand Lama was also accompanied by his Chief Magician, whose magic now failed . An earlier prophesy promised that the ‘Year of the Wood ao would bring disaster to ibet.’
 Curzon withdrawn from India in the midst of the expedition to Lhasa . Curzon had been withdrawn from the expedition in the middle of it .
 This removed the architect of the forward policy and its staunchest defender . This removed him from the position he was in charge of the team .
 The cautious Balfour government wanted to withdraw from Tibet as soon as possible . The cautious government backed 36 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE into .
 Younghusband negotiated a treaty with the defeated Tibetans which deviated from his instructions . The treaty was especially worrisome to Whitehall .
 One clause specified that the British were to occupy the Chumbi Valley until the indemnity had been paid—a period of seventy-five years . One clause in the agreement stipulated that British would occupy the area for seventy years .
 London wanted neither to occupy Tibet nor place an agent in Lhasa . London had earlier gone on record to this effect in correspondence with India .
 Both Curzon and Curzon had argued that there should be a British resident posted permanently in Lhasa .
 It is a measure of Younghusband’s convictions that he exceeded his instructions in negotiating a treaty . If left to stand, the treaty would have made Tibet a virtual vassal of England .
 Although there was something grand about Younghusband’s march to Lhasa, he treated the political aspects of his mission in a most cavalier fashion . Although there were something grand, there was also something cavalier about the mission .
 His actions cannot be condoned even in the light of history, and London certainly did not forgive him at the time . His actions were not condoned, and his actions were never condoned .
 He was to some extent made scapegoat for the Tibet policy which had never been popular and had become embarassing as Great Britain sought agreement with Russia . The Tibet policy was never popular with the public, but it had become acutely embarrassing .
 He must bear a fair share of blame for allowing a myopic view of the Tibetan problem to enable him to conclude a solemn agreement which could never be carried out . Nevertheless, he must bear some of the blame for not carrying out the deal .
 The stationing of a British representative in Lhasa would imply political aims and would thus be unnecessarily provocative to St. St. Mary's St. Louis .
 London was then trying to reach an entente cordiale with St. Petersburg, Russia, with whom London was trying to negotiate .
 Younghusband negotiated directly with the Tibetans, excluding the Chinese Amban . The other disturbing fact was that he had negotiated directly . The Tibetans were excluded from the Chinese government .
 This could be interpreted to mean that Tibet and Britain no longer recognized China’s suzerain role . Britain had assumed the position of suzeraining in China's place, writes Andrew Hammond .
 This not only added to Russia’s uneasiness but outraged Peking as well as Peking, as well . This is not the first time Russia has been in contact with China since the start of the year .
 London knew that China’s legal presence in Tibet was valuable to prevent a vacuum which the Russians might find inviting . Beijing knew that it was vital to prevent the Russians finding it inviting .
 A new agreement had to be reached with Peking to rectify the situation . Clearly a new agreement must have been reached with Beijing .
 On April 27, 1906, after eighteen months of negotiations, Great Britain reached agreement with China on Tibet . Great Britain and China agreed an agreement on Tibet on Tibet in 1906 .
 Younghusband’s Anglo-Tibetan Convention of 1904 was endorsed by China only after important modifications had been made . China only endorsed the convention only after significant modifications were made .
 Peking wanted Great Britain to recognize full Chinese sovereignty over Tibet . Peking had wanted Great British to recognize Chinese sovereignty .
 The British agreed to preserve Chinese suzerainty and give up any privileged position secured by Younghusband’s agreement . This, of course, was rejected as being inconsistent with Tibet's buffer role, but the British did agree .
 London stabilized Russia relations in Central Asia by the AngloRussian Convention of 1907 . London stabilized Russian relations in the region by the convention .
 This important treaty settled competing interests of the two countries in Persia, Afghanistan and Tibet . The treaty was signed between Persia and Tibet in 1883 .
 Both countries agreed not to station representatives in Lhasa and to negotiate with Tibet only through China . China and Tibet have agreed to stop talks with Tibet from visiting Tibet's capital .
 Tibet, in short, would henceforward serve as a buffer between India and Russia . Tibet, Tibet, is in short to serve as an India-Russia buffer . Tibet would be the first Tibetan colony to join Russia in Tibet .
 Tibetans refused to sign either the . Anglo-Chinese Convention of 1906 or the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907 . With their traditional disregard for Chinese suzerainty and with perhaps more foresight than the British .
 The Dalai Lama had hoped for Russian support . Nevertheless, the agreement ended whatever hopes he had for Russian backing .
 The 1907 treaty provided the real framework for a period of British-Russian co-existence in Asia . The Great Game may have officially ended when Younghusband marched into Lhasa, but the treaty provided real framework .
 Curzon left India before Younghusband’s mission was completed, and with him went an era . Curzon also left India, but with him, the end of the era was an end to Curzon's mission .
 Curzon had a concept of empire which fitted the Victorian period that was ending . Curzon's empire fitted a Victorian period which was ending, he said .
 This did not prevent his own crown from perishing nor his kingdom from waning . But this did not stop him from becoming a king .
 This controversial Viceroy’s forward policy made sense in the context of its time, but times were changing . This controversial policy was made sense but times are changing, he says .
 Curzon had been wrong and London right in one critical respect, Tibet could never appropriately be a British vassal . Tibet could not appropriately be an appropriately British . Curzon was wrong, London was right in Tibet's fate .
 Lord Curzon’s Tibet policy has been accused of providing China with an opportunity and excuse to reassert power which heretofore had been only a ‘constitutional fiction’—to use Curzon's own words .
 Balfour's government has been blamed for permitting 38 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE . China to regain its position of power in Tibet by insisting on a new treaty which re-established Chinese primacy in Tibet .
 If Curzon could defend himself, he would doubtless argue that London’s diplomacy, by undoing what he had accomplished, was to blame . Curzon: "If Curzon were able to defend himself he would say that London's diplomacy, which undoed what he'd accomplished
 Lord Morley, Secretary of State for India, did believe that Chinese control of Tibet was tolerable so long as the border states of Nepal, Sikkim and Bhutan remained firmly under British control . Forward policy adherents argued that abandonment of Tibet to China set a bad precedent .
 London at the turn of the century sought to use Chinese influence as a counterbalance against Russian power . Yet it is understandable that London sought to try to use China as counterbalance . London has demonstrated to be the more dangerous of the two.
 The formula which the British were groping for in the early twentieth century was an autonomous Tibet, subject to a weak Chinese suzerain, and guaranteed by a British-Russian treaty .
 This formula denied Tibet to Russia, provided a buffer for the Indian Empire and enabled India to trade freely with Lhasa . This formula provided India with a buffer to the Russian Empire .
 London could have justified its action by the need to reach accommodation with Russia so that both empires could co-exist peacefully from Persia to the Pamirs . But even without this consideration it would have been folly to push the boundaries of British rule northward beyond the Himalayas and across the
 Even if required British forces had been available, they could never have been supported in far-off Tibet garrisons . Even if the required forces were available they could not be supported .
 For Britain to man a common frontier with China was to invite conflict in an area where China had the advantage . Moreover, for Britain to engage in conflict with China, it would invite conflict .
 The British had traditionally viewed Tibet as a lucrative extension of the subcontinent market . But its trade value could never be worth the cost of policing what would surely prove to be a hostile Tibetan population .
 The Indian subcontinent, for all its diversity, is a geographic entity with natural boundaries . The seas and the mountains are the natural boundaries of the region .
 Tibetans, however, are not part of the subcontinent any more than they are part of China . Tibetans are Tibetans but not Tibetans in Tibet .
 They have always considered themselves separate and independent despite temporary foreign incursions and fluctuating Chinese suzerainty . They have also considered themselves independent .
 The British in 1906 could only have ruled with force—more force than could be spared in view of far-flung imperial commitments . In 1906, the British were in the midst of a crisis in Europe .
 The Tibetan plateau was a buffer in the sense that it was a political no-man's-land . India’s defense was doubly assured by a system of border states or frontier zones under British influence . The border states were added to the Indian army in the 1930s and
 The Northwest Frontier Province, the princely states of Kashmir, Bhutan and Sikkim, and the Kingdom of Nepal were turrets astride the Karakorum and Himalayan battlements . The kingdom of Nepal was the last of the world's most famous turrets .
 Imperial Russia similarly needed a buffer belt, and this was provided in Northern Persia, Afghanistan and Tibet . The 1907 AngloRussian Convention provided this buffer belt for Imperial Russia .
 The emirates and khanates of Turkmanistan and Turkestan, Sinkiang and Outer Mongolia were included in St. Louis' list .
 Nicholas can be criticized for harboring fantasies which led him to grasp at the key to Lamaist power in greater Tibet and Mongolia . Curzon can be accused of cherishing outdated dreams of expanding empire . Nicholas can similarly be criticized .
 Dorjiev and Younghusband in very different ways were themselves skillful players of the Great Game . Dorjeviev was himself a skillful player of the great game .
 Curzon rescued England at the eleventh hour from Curzon’s zeal . But the instincts of the Russian Foreign Office were not strong enough to check the adventures of the political dilettante Nicholas .
 The Dorjiev operation, once revealed, had to be played to its logical but foredoomed end . Thus the Dorjev operation had to play to its natural but forerally end . The operation was played to a logical but ultimately fatal end .
 China’s frontier policy has had the advantages of long-established tradition and consistency . China's frontier policy is a tradition that has been consistent for decades .
 The Great Wall defines the limits of the Middle Kingdom, the citadel of the Empire . It defines the limit of the Great Wall in China .
 Successive dynasties have pushed China’s frontiers deep into the inner Asian borderlands of Manchuria, Mongolia, Sinkiang and Tibet . Successive Chinese dynasts have been blessed with power or the “mandate from heaven”
 During the ebb phase of dynasty the frontiers have contracted as the tribes and vassals reasserted their independence from the Han Middle Kingdom .
 These phases of the cycle may have determined China’s de facto 40 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE boundary lines . China's de facto boundary lines may be determined by these phases .
 China says the real boundary is still the point of greatest thrust during earlier periods of expansion . But never are the Chinese in any doubt .
 In 1907 the Manchu dynasty had nearly reached the end of its life cycle . The Manchu Dynasty was nearly in its final years .
 By the end of the century Peking’s inability to defend Lhasa was proof of Manchu impotence . Peking failed to defend the city from Russian intrigues or British invasion .
 The Emperor would make one last effort in Tibet before the ‘divine mandate’ was withdrawn . But the Emperor would continue to make one final effort .
 Even in dying, the sinking regime was perhaps conscious of its obligation to some still unknown future dynasty . Emperor was extremely reluctant to accept an outer limit of the Heavenly Empire in the subcontinent .
 The genesis of the ‘McMahon Line’ is a story of Great Britain’s efforts to limit Chinese authority in Tibet . Great Britain tried to limit the Chinese authority and to commit the Chinese to accept the Himalayan crest .
 The drawing of this line represents a vital phase in Chinese-Indian relations . The Chinese government is drawing a vital line in its relations with India .
 China's Communist dynasty would reap the benefit of its predecessor’s stubbornness and sense of greater Chinese destiny in refusing to accept Britain’�s formula .
 Independent India, inheritor of Britain’s Indian empire, would suffer the consequences . Independent India would suffer from the consequences. Independent India will suffer from consequences, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Tripartite meeting of India, China and Tibet in Simla in 1913 on the status of Tibet began with the flight of the Dalai Lama from Lhasa to Mongolia .
 British forces had chased the Lama from the Potala into ignominious exile . British diplomacy had foiled his scheme with Dorjiev by concluding the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907 .
 The Dalai was an exile, whose return to Lhasa required Chinese cooperation . He was exiled from Tibet, but his return to the country required cooperation from China .
 Tibet’s God-King was not without some bargaining power . Although under the Emperor's control, Tibet was under Tibetan control .
 The Chinese found it in their interest as well as his to 41 42 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE reach an accommodation . The Dalai was allowed to retum. The Chinese had seen how difficult it was to control Tibet without him .
 Before leaving Peking the God-King also made peace with the British .
 Despite earlier promises made to him, it soon became apparent that the Chinese would be content with nothing less than total absorption of Tibet . The Chinese soon became content with the Tibetan people dying in Tibet .
 An expeditionary force under General Chao Erh-feng moved against Tibet . The expeditionary forces attacked Tibet in Tibet in 18th century . The Tibetans were killed in Tibet .
 Dalai appealed to the British to stop Chao Erh-feng . The Dalai had fled the capital to avoid Younghusband’s invading army .
 Two thousand Chinese troops under General Chung Ying entered Lhasa in February 1910 . It was too late, however, for it to be too late to stop the invasion .
 Peking had put a price on the head of each of the Tibetan ministers, and it was clear that they intended to force the Dalai Lama himself to serve under duress as puppet to Chao’s occupation army .
 The Dalai decided to flee to the protection of the British . Rather than endure this, the Dalai decided again to flee the country .
 Chao Erh-feng had drawn up a new administrative blueprint creating an enlarged province of Sikang and incorporating in it much of eastern Tibet . The province will be enlarged to include much eastern Tibet, including Tibet .
 Direct Chinese jurisdiction would, in fact, have extended to within sixty miles of Lhasa if this plan had been carried out .
 Peking tried in 1910 to press old claims to Nepal, Bhutan and Assam Himalaya . Other ominous clues to Peking’s intentions were attempts in 1910 . Attempts in 1910 were made to press claims to Bhutan, Bhutar, Nepal, Assam and
 London warned Peking in strongest terms that any attempt to make good these false allegations would be resisted . Provoked by official Chinese announcements describing areas as being in vassalage to China .
 Poyul is a town just north of Abor tribal territory along the Tsangpo-Brahmaputra River . Chinese designs on the Himalayan foothills of Assam were underscored by the dispatch of troops to seize Poyu .
 More serious were reports that Chao’s agents had convoked a meeting of Mishmi tribal headmen and elicited from them expressions of allegiance to Peking . The Mishmi headmen were said to have expressed allegiance to the Chinese government .
 Such evidence of Chinese pressure in Assam Himalaya—India’s northeast frontier with Tibet—made the British extremely uneasy . McMAHON DRAWS A LINE 43 .
 If the Assam hills were to fall under Peking’s control, the rich Assam Valley itself would no longer be tenable . Peking's control of the region would not have been tenable if it fell under its control .
 British coastal trade with China was flourishing and could not be jeopardized, says PM . Trade with China is flourishing and can't be jeopardised .
 St. Petersburg, Russia, held a convention in 1907 . The convention was held in St. Louis, Missouri, on July 28, 1907 .
 Despite repeated warnings from the government of India regarding Chinese moves toward Assam, London found itself in a dilemma which made retaliation difficult . London was forced to take action against China despite repeated warnings .
 The Himalayan foothills are inhabited by aborigines . The Akas, Daflas, Apo, Manis, Miris, Abors and Mishmis . The Himalayan foothills are inhabited by the Akas, Daflas
 There was no governmental structure—no tribal federation—with which the British could negotiate with the British . The British were able to negotiate with tribal leaders in 17th century .
 Assam kings traditionally used petty bribery to keep the hill tribes from raiding into the valley . When the British acquired Assam in 1826 as a result of the First Burmese War they simply continued the same system .
 Military occupation or civil administration in the usual sense of the word would not only have appeared difficult but, until Chao Erh-feng’s campaign, it would have been unnecessary . Until now, it has been difficult to imagine a military occupation of Vietnam .
 Another approach to the hill tribe problem was to create a buffer zone which would reduce friction between the civilized valley dwellers and the primitive hill tribes .
 The Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation of 1873 described an ‘inner line’ running eastward along the foothills from the Bhutan boundary . The Bengal eastern Frontier Regulation was published in 1873 .
 North of the outer line were the tribal areas of Assam Himalaya which the British in 1910 considered part of their sphere of influence and responsibility . The British considered the area to be part of the Indian sphere of power .
 As long as tribes existed in a free state and there appeared to be no question of rival foreign influences on them, the British saw no reason to disturb the existing situation .
 British tea and lumber interests in Assam eyed the forested Himalayan foothills with undisguised interest . Government officials longed to explore in depth this uncharted, primitive area .
 Government of India Act of 1858 forbade occupation and discouraged exploration . Official policy was enunciated in the 44 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE Government Act of India .
 The act specified that the revenues of India could not be used to defray the expenses of any military operation carried on beyond the external frontiers . The act stipulated that India's revenues were not to be used for military operations .
 There could be no question of British military protection for business ventures or exploration in the tribal areas of the Assam foothills .
 Political reaction in Great Britain against Younghusband’s expedition to Lhasa had caused the new Liberal government of CampbellBannerman to steer clear of any moves in the Assam hills which could be interpreted as a return to a forward policy .
 Noel Williamson, Assistant Political Officer at Sadiya, Assam, proposed in 1911 to travel up the Dihang extension of the Brahmaputra toward Tibet into Abor tribal country .
 This was followed up with another telegram on March 23 which ‘assumed’ that it would not be necessary for him to go beyond the line . The telegram was followed by a telegram from March 23 that said he would not need to go .
 Calcutta knew its men well and clearly had its wind up about Williamson, so once more he was queried . Williamson was asked to explain why he should not have been sent to India .
 Williamson was in the vicinity of the village of Kebang, whose inhabitants were frightened by tales that the English party was the vanguard of a British punitive mission .
 A band of Kebang Abor warriors, later estimated at more than one hundred, tracked the Englishmen . They first found Williamson's companion, Dr. Dr. James Williamson . Dr. Williamson was killed by the Abor .
 Gregorson was left by Williamson to tend some sick porters at Panggi encampment . He was left to tend sick porter porters .
 The frenzied Abors fell on the helpless doctor and cut him down with their swords . The doctor was cut down by the Abors . The Abors were killed in the battle .
 The tribesmen, now blooded, continued after Williamson, whom they overtook . They overtook at a village called Komsing, north of Kebang .
 While talking with village elders, Williamson noticed that four armed Kebang men had joined the circle . McMAHON DRAWS a line 45 .
 At this moment one of the warriors flourished his long knife, and on signal the Kebang warriors fell on Williamson and hacked him to death . Williamson's death was the first of its kind in the history of the world .
 Most of Williamson's porters were also slaughtered on the spot, although a few managed to escape through the dense forest and make their way back to Sadiya, where they reported the massacre . Williamson was able to accomplish what he had sought to do in life—bring the Assam
 His tragic death provided an excuse to send a military campaign into the Assam hill tribe areas, including those infiltrated by the Chinese .
 Major General Hamilton Bower in 1911 led the Abor Expedition, which was meant to demonstrate control and pre-empt administration of the Himalayan southern slopes before the Chinese could do so .
 Chao Erh-feng had occupied Lhasa, but he had not completely subjugated Tibet . He had captured the region, but not completely ruled out Tibet .
 Active resistance to the Chinese continued in the southeast, while in Lhasa the people passively resisted the Chinese in every way they could . Active resistance continued to the southeast .
 The Panchen Lama, whom the Chinese had wanted to head the government in the place of the Dalai, refused to do so . He was wanted to take over from the Dalai Lama, who had refused to take control .
 Tibet's National Assembly adopted a sullen and sometimes hostile attitude toward the alien occupation force . Tibet's Tibet National Assembly has adopted a sullen and sometimes hostile attitude toward the occupation force .
 From exile in India the Dalai Lama did what he could on a diplomatic level to help his country . The Dalai Lama is currently living in exile in the Himalayas .
 He even secretly solicited Russian aid, only to suffer the humiliation of having his one-time “protector’—now bound by the Anglo-Russian 1907 Convention—reject his plea through official British channels .
 Peking realized that it could not rule Tibet without the God-King unless they deployed a tremendously large army of occupation . The Chinese would remember for forty years, when they would next seize an opportunity to occupy Tibet . Peking ultimately realized that .
 The Emperor and the Manchu dynasty were swept away by the Chinese Revolution . Before China could reach an arrangement with the Dalai Lama, the Emperor was swept away from power .
 The upheaval, which began in 1911 and made China a republic, was felt almost immediately in Tibet . The upheaval began almost immediately and was felt in Tibet almost immediately .
 The Chinese garrison in Lhasa mutinied and broke up into unrully mobs, which foraged through the countryside, looting as they went . The mobs looted the countryside and looted the city .
 Tibetans rose against the disorganized Chinese and slaughtered thousands of them before the British intervened to rescue survivors . With a 46 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE vengeance bred of hatred and long frustration, Tibetans killed thousands of Chinese .
 By 1918, the Dalai Lama was able to return safely to Lhasa and reassert his authority . By January 1918, he had been able to re-establish his authority in the Himalayan state .
 The most meaningful bond between the Manchus and the Dalai Lamas had been the patron-priest relationship . The most significant bond between them was that of the Dalai Lama . The Dalai Lama is a former Tibetan monk .
 This cord of religion had been snapped when a secular republic came into being . The Cord of religion was snapped when the republic came to being. This cord was snapped by secular republic .
 The Chinese concept of empire, to the contrary, was not religiously based . In 1912 the new Republic proclaimed Tibet, Mongolia and Sinkiang as equivalent to provinces of China . The new Republic declared Tibet and Mongolia as integral to the Chinese state .
 Tibetans recognize the new President of China, Yuan Shih-kai, as a successor to their Manchu patron . By no stretch of the imagination could Tibetans . Tibetans recognized the new president of China as successor to Manchu .
 They may have traditionally recognized that some suzerain authority was vested in the Emperor . However, they never recognized the authority of the Chinese state . They never recognized that authority was granted to them .
 Dorjiev had felt it necessary to disguise Nicholas II with the robes of a “White Lama” before attempting to project him in the patron’s role . It is significant that Dorjev, who understood Tibetan psychology, had . felt it . necessary to . disguise
 The Dalai Lama declared Tibet’s independence by refusing to acknowledge that he drew his authority from China’S recognition of him . He declared Tibet's independence by publicly refusing to . acknowledge that . he drew . his authority . from China's recognition .
 Dorjiev was welcomed back to Lhasa after being welcomed back by the government . Dorjev was the first person to be welcomed back into the country's capital city .
 Speculation that Outer Mongolia had concluded a secret pact with Tibet led to speculation . This disturbed both the Chinese and the British .
 Tibet’s status and boundaries once and for all. It also resulted in new urgency to settle Tibet's status . Tibet has been ruled out of Tibet by Tibetans since 1959 .
 Neither the Chinese Republic’s policy of considering Tibet a province nor the Dalai Lama’�s rejection of Chinese suzerainty suited the British . The Dalai Lama rejected the idea of Tibet as a province in Tibet .
 London found useful Peking’s “suzerain’ role since it provided China with some legal primacy yet deprived it of effective control . London found it useful P.E. to Peking's ‘suzerian’ position since it . provided China
 Russia's legal presence prevented a vacuum which Britain still feared might be filled by Russia . The UK still feared that Russia might fill the void .
 Chao Erh-feng’s campaign, particularly his probes into Assam, was particularly notable . The Russo-Mongolian Agreement of 1912 made Outer Mongolia a virtual protectorate of Russia . Outer Mongolia was a virtual preserve of Russia.
 47 had made clear of the dangers of an ambiguous status for Tibet . McMAHON DRAWS a line .
 In August 1912 London proposed to the new Republic that Tibet’s status be negotiated on the basis of the situation which had existed before Younghusband’�s mission . London proposed that the status of Tibet should be negotiated based on the situation before the mission .
 The Chinese agreed not only to negotiate Tibet’s status with the British but to accept a representative of Lhasa as co-equal plenipotentiary in the negotiations . After much reluctance, the Chinese agreed to accept the representative .
 The inclusion of such a representative was, in fact, an important part of Britain’s diplomatic plan, says Simon Tisdall . ‘Such a representative’ was ‘important part of the diplomatic plan’, he says .
 Tibet’s full participation in the negotiations would constitute evidence of autonomy, thereby adding substance to whatever agreement on Tibet was finally reached . Tibet was calculated that it would contribute to the negotiations . It was calculated . that Tibet's full participation .
 Simla conference began in India’s picturesque summer capital in October 1913 . Simla was the first conference to take place in Simla, India's picturesque capital, in 1913 .
 Host and British delegate was Sir Henry McMahon, Secretary to the Government of India and an impressive Victorian, who officially assumed the role of “mediator” between the other two participants .
 This pose was adopted in part for tactical reasons, but it was also meant to circumvent the prohibition against direct negotiations with Tibet contained in the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907 . The pose was used for military purposes, but also to circumvent prohibition on direct negotiations between Tibet .
 The Chinese were represented by Ivan Chen, who fought stubbornly for China’s position but seemed, nonetheless, genuinely committed to reaching a settlement based on compromise . The Chinese are represented by  Ivan Chen .
 China was not forced to attend Simla nor did Chen’s performance in any way suggest that he was negotiating under duress . Contrary to later Chinese claims, China did not force to attend the meeting .
 The main point of contention during the six months of negotiations was the boundary between China and Tibet . Tibet is the only Tibetan territory under Chinese rule of Tibet .
 The area which is ethnically Tibetan has always extended further than the area under Lhasa’s political control . Ethnic Tibetan has extended further into Tibetan territory than the political control of the region .
 An Outer and an Inner Tibet be created, an Outer and Inner Tibet .
 Outer Tibet could serve as a buffer between India and China . Outer Tibet would be master of its own internal affairs and serve as buffer between China and India .
 Inner Tibet would serve as a buffer between Lhasa’s Tibet and Russian-dominated Outer Mongolia . Inner Tibet is an integral part of China, and is part of Tibet .
 He equated “frontier” with “buffer” and defined each as a tract of neutral territory separating two potentially antagonistic neighbors . The buffer zone was created by President Obama in 1994 .
 He believed that it was the frontier, buffer zone which had greatest importance and considered a boundary line of considerably lesser significance—particularly when it ran through uninhabitable mountain or desert terrain .
 China and Tibet were unable to agree on a boundary between Inner and Outer Tibet . The Simla Convention prevented China from ratifying the treaty . The treaty was ratified by China in 1959 .
 The India-Tibet boundary itself, proposed at Simla, did not cause the difficulty . In the light of the current China-India boundary dispute it is significant that the India-China boundary itself was not the issue .
 The McMahon Line runs along the crest of the Himalayan watershed in India’s northeastern frontier area . This line, known since as the McMahon Line, runs along Himalayan crest .
 McMahon sought to make Assam Himalaya secure and remove any ambiguity about India’s sovereignty over the tribal areas on the mountain's southern slope . McMahon wanted to remove ambiguity about the sovereignty over tribal areas in the mountain .
 China raised no objection to McMahon’s formula at Simla in 1914 or in the several years following the conference . Britain still hoped for Peking's acceptance of the convention in Peking in the years following .
 Communist Chinese negotiators denied that Tibet-Indian boundary question had ever been formally raised at Simla . But in 1960, during boundary discussions with India, China denied that the Tibet-India boundary question was ever formally raised .
 They alleged that the subject had been discussed only “secretly,” behind the back of their delegate . The delegates alleged that they had discussed the subject only ‘secretly .
 In 1914 McMahon insisted that the political status of Tibet could not be meaningfully discussed until the limits of the country were defined . In 1914 he insisted that Tibet's political status should not be discussed .
 McMahon suggested that to save time he discuss boundary discussions with the Tibetan delegate . Ivan Chen explained that he was not yet authorized to join in boundary discussions . McMahon suggested he discuss the issue with his Tibetan delegate instead .
 A Palace of Punakka in Bootan is a Finnish palace of the same name . The Palace was built in the 1930s .
 Dalai Lama visited Calcutta during his 1956 visit to India . The Dalai Lama was visiting India for the first time in six years . He visited the city during his visit to Calcutata .
 High in the Himalayas the Dalai Lama rests with a squad of loyal Khamba tribesmen in his flight from the Red Chinese in March 1959 .
 The Anglo-Tibetan Boundary Agreement of 1914 was reached in 1914 . McMAHON DRAWS A LINE 49 of these discussions .
 McMahon had tabled a statement with an explanatory map describing the boundaries of Tibet . Even before this, on February 17, McMahon had .
 Chen was concerned with the India-Tibet boundary question at Simla, regardless of any subsequent claims to the contrary . Thus to a significant extent Chen was . Concerned with the issue, he was concerned about the India and Tibet boundary .
 The Chinese government refused to be a party to it even though Chen had initialed the draft agreement . Chen had initially agreed to the deal, but it was rejected by the Chinese government .
 Subsequent but unsuccessful efforts were made to gain Peking’s adherence to the Convention . Subsequent attempts were made by the Chinese government .
 Peking’s main reason for rejecting the Simla Convention stems from its unwillingness to relinquish rights to territory which it considers to be eternally part of the ‘celestial’ realm . China considers territory that is eternally in the “celestial realm’
 It is likely that the idea of negotiating on equal terms with a country which it considered to be a vassal prejudiced China against any reasonable solution .
 Tibet’s right to “settle her own relations with India” has, in fact, been recognized by China, as pointed out by India in 1961 . Tibet's participation in the Simla conference was at least tolerated by China . Yet by a series of other bilateral
 The door was left open in the event China chose later to accept the Simla agreement . The deal would be left open if China chose to accept it .
 Peking’s attitude remained consistent with constant and historical Han assumptions which consider “retreat” a phenomenon of weakness and “advance” an inevitable consequence of regained strength . Republican Peking .
 China would not sign away what it assumed it could regain at a later date . China said it would not agree to a deal with the U.S. to take back what it thought it could recover .
 Tibet was never again an opportunity to resolve the status of Tibet and establish its boundaries to the satisfaction of all parties . As a result there was never a chance to resolve Tibet's status, Tibet was not resolved . Tibet has never been settled in Tibet's borders .
 China was easy prey for Japan, whose imperial ambition included at a minimum all of East Asia, Australasia, and the Western Pacific . China, the “sick man of Asia,” was an easy prey .
 United States army officers investigating the feasibility of an alternate overland route by which the Allies could supply China was completely bypassed by the combatants . Except for a reconnaissance mission to Lhasa by Tolstoi and Dolan, the U.S. troops were unable to reach Lhas
 Before World War II, a new storm was gathering which would be infinitely more significant for Asia . Yet, even before Japan attacked China and well before WWII, the new storm would have been more significant . It would be more significant to Asia if it were attacked by Japan .
 The Thirteenth Dalai Lama saw its implications for Tibet before he died in 1931 . With astonishing foresight and political acumen he saw its impact on Tibet, he saw the implications of Tibet .
 1950 was a year of crisis in Asia. From a government of Tibet telegram to the Secretary General of the United Nations in 1950, protesting Chinese Communist aggression . 1950 was the year when the Chinese Communist government invaded Tibet. 1950 was also the year of China's invasion of Tibet .
 It was the year the Korean War began and the year France faced defeat in its exhausting war in Indo-China . It was also the year that the French saw defeat in the war in India .
 South Asia was troubled by problems which were less only by comparison . South Asia is troubled by . problems which are less only . only a comparison .
 A revolt against the ruling "Rana" aristocracy focused momentary attention on the remote Himalayan kingdom of Nepal . The revolt against Nepal's ruling “Rana’s aristocracy’ took place in the early 1900s . A revolt in Nepal was a revolt against its ruling
 India’s relations with Pakistan were still tense in the wake of partition . The U.N. Security Council examined the Kashmir dispute at the United Nations .
 Communist insurrection wracked Hyderabad State in Central India . Linguistic, religious and sectional antagonisms less dramatically tore at newly independent India’s fragile unity .
 For Tibetans it was a cataclysmic year— more ferocious even than its name suggested . Tibetans were more ferocious than their name suggested. Tibetans suffered from a series of devastating attacks on their homeland .
 On August 15 the shocks of the fifth worst earthquake in recorded history caused several mountains in Tibet to shift and villages to be buried . Several mountains in the Tibet region were shifted and villages were buried .
 Eyewitness reports tell of landslides which filled valleys and blocked rivers . Other eyewitness reports filtered through to the rest of the world and told of landslide .
 It was reported in the Calcutta Statesman on August 16 that the epicenter of the earthquake was a point in the Eastern Himalayas about fifty miles from the northeast border of Assam .
 The severity of the shocks was such that at the Alipore meteorological office the pen of one of the seismographs was thrown completely off the recording drum . Holiday crowds in Calcutta celebrating Independence Day ran for shelter .
 Tibet’s tragedy was compounded when the Tsangpo River—father of the mighty Brahmaputra—fought its way out of a prison of earth created by the quake and rampaged wildly through Assam, washing out two thousand villages as it went .
 The important center of Sadiya in Assam was inundated, while thousands were made homeless in the area surrounding Jorhat . Thousands of people made homeless .
 Landslides forced the Tsangpo to find a new bed in some places many miles from the old . Landslide had forced them to find new beds in some of the world's most remote areas .
 The Thirteenth Dalai Lama in his last will and testament, the greatest catastrophy of all befell Tibet . Then, recalling the warnings sounded by the Dalai Lama, the Tibetan leader said, "The greatest catastrophe of all" was Tibet . The Dalai Lama said Tibet was a
 More than 30,000 troops of Communist China's so-called People’s Liberation Army invaded eastern Tibet . The People's Liberation Army is based in Tibet, Tibet .
 This was Communist China’s first violation of independent Indian territory . The Red forces traveled a route which later was the site of a secretly constructed Chinese trunk road . This latter thrust went unnoticed for several years .
 The main attack was aimed at the town of Chamdo, whose defenses crumbled on October 19 . The town's main attack on Chamdo is aimed at Chamdo .
 Ngapo Ngawang Jigme, the Commissioner General of Kham Province, commanded three thousand Tibetan defenders, fled as the Chinese approached . He was quickly intercepted by advance columns and forced to surrender the province to the invaders . Ngapo Jigman was forced to give up Kham Province
 It was at this time that Ngabo was persuaded to shift his personal loyalties to the Communists . He thereafter became prominent as Peking's most important collaborator .
 Chinese forces secured control of the Chamdo-Lhasa road and prepared to march on Lhasa itself . Soon after the fall of Chamdo, Chinese forces were poised to march into Lhasas itself .
 The invasion of Tibet had been loudly heralded by China’s propaganda machine . It tried on one hand to weaken Tibet's will to resist and on the other to intimidate the Government of India and THE YEAR OF THE IRON TIGER 53 prevent it .
 India was accused of crimes of aggression and expansion which Communist China itself intended to commit . Cause was purposely confused with effect in such a way as to reverse blame . India's crimes were committed by the Communist China .
 The new Indian nation was challenged by Peking to prove its independence by repudiating the British-India policy toward Tibet . Peking challenged the new India nation to repudiate its independence . The new nation relinquished rights in Lhasa inherited from the British Raj .
 According to Communist propaganda, India—“a running dog of the Anglo-American imperialists’’ — was the aggressor . India was a "running dog" of the British imperialists, Communist propaganda said .
 Robert Ford maintained communications at Chamdo for the Tibetan government when the Chinese invaded . Robert Ford had maintained communications for Tibetan government during the invasion .
 After his capture by the People’s Liberation Army he was brutally interrogated in an effort to force him to confess that he had murdered Geda . He had been the instrument of secret British collaboration with Tibet .
 The real details of Geda’s death are obscure, but if he was killed by Tibetans, it is certain that his executioners felt it justified . Geda's executioners were likely to have killed him in Tibet in Tibet .
 Geda was a collaborator who had sold out to the Chinese many years before . Geda had been a collaborator with Geda, who sold out many years ago .
 Doctrine may, of course, be interpreted or it may evolve, but it must not be obviously ignored or violated . HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE must be made with enough grace and ingenuity to maintain a semblance of consistency .
 The Tibet issue struck close to the heart of Peking’s most dangerous problem, Han dominance over the many ethnic minorities in China . Peking is trying to deal with the problem of Han dominance in China, which is a problem .
 Stalin had established basic Communist doctrine on nationality and minority question . Stalin had specifically defined a ‘nationality’ eligible for full national independence .
 The Chinese People's Republic avoided the problem in its own case by denying that its minorities fulfilled the requirements established in Stalin’s doctrine . The Chinese government avoided the issue by denying the requirement .
 An early statement by Peking on this subject is contained in the Constitution of the Chinese Soviet Republic, drawn up in Kiangsi under Mao Tse-tung's leadership on November 7, 1931 .
 Unhappily for the Tibetans, Chinese minority doctrine shifted away from Stalin’s statement and for that matter from the Kiangsi Constitution . The Tibetans are now living in China's own minority doctrine .
 China announced in 1950 that the “liberation” of Tibet was one of the main tasks of the People’s Liberation Army . Nationalities Affairs Committee met in Peking to discuss the Tibet question .
 Vice-Chairman Chu Teh directed the meeting and reiterated his government’s determination to “free” the Tibetan people . Vice-chairman Chu teh said the government is determined to free Tibetans from Tibet .
 The Year of the Iron Tiger explained the newest interpretation of the minority and nationality policy as laid down in the government’s Common Program .
 The People’s Political Consultative Conference first applied to the Tibetan case in 1949 . The document, which had been adopted by the PPP in September 1949, specifies that “All nationalities have equal rights and duties”
 The threatening tone of Peking’s propaganda, particularly as contained in repeated announcements promising that Tibet would soon be “liberated,” was the only doctrine with meaning for Tibet . Peking's propaganda was the most threatening tone, especially in its propaganda .
 The Lhasa National Assembly, convening in extraordinary session, recognized the need to seek outside help and made preparations to send friendly delegations to those countries which could reasonably be expected to come to its rescue . The Lhaas National Assembly is convening .
 Special envoys were prepared to plead Tibet’s cause in the capitals of India, Nepal, Great Britain and the U.S. Special . envoys had been made to plead for Tibet's cause in Nepal, India and Great Britain .
 It warned that any nation receiving a ‘friendly delegation’ from Lhasa would be considered hostile to the People’s Republic of China .
 India’s new Ambassador to China is determined to reach a peaceful settlement of the Tibet issue . Panikkar was determined to find a peaceful solution to the issue .
 Nehru "in general" agreed with his convictions that the BritishIndian policy of claiming special political interest in Tibet could not be continued by independent India . He also claimed that Nehru “in general’s convictions’ in general” were that the policy could not continue
 Hope was fast running out for Tibet, and in Lhasa it was becoming clear that if any autonomy were to be retained it would have to be the result of direct negotiations with Peking .
 Tibet succumbed to Communist pressure and agreed to sending a mission to negotiate agreement on their future relationship . Finding no alternative course, Tibet decided to send the mission . Tibet and Tibet have been at odds for decades .
 56 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE mission delegates were held up in India en route to Hong Kong because British authorities procrastinated in issuing visas to them .
 Tibetan delegation's mandate to negotiate or the propriety of its negotiating at all were in doubt . They perhaps did not want Crown territory to be involved in any settlement in which the Tibetan delegation’s mandate was in doubt.
 The British were understandably hesitant to provide good offices for an agreement which would not have world acceptance . Since there were bound to be elements of duress implicit in the negotiations, the British were also understandably hesitant .
 Talks began in New Delhi with the newly arrived Chinese Ambassador to India in September 1950, but almost immediately the Chinese insisted that they be moved to Peking . Talks were held at the request of the then-Chinese Ambassador to New Delhi .
 New reports of Red troop movements toward the capital caused the government to stop its delegation in transit to Peking . At first the unhappy Tibetans agreed since Peking’s propaganda was threatening .
 Tibet was willing to negotiate an honorable settlement but not yet willing to be puppets of a Chinese-controlled regime in Lhasa, Tibet . Tibet is willing to talk but not to negotiate as puppets for a Chinese regime, Tibet says .
 New Delhi reacted officially to Chinese military action in Tibet on October 21 . Indian Ambassador Panikkar was instructed to present the Chinese with an aide memoire of concern .
 India appealed mainly to China’s self-interest rather than showing concern for its own well-established rights in Tibet . The approach was most revealing, India's approach to China was most telling .
 The need for a peaceful solution was emphasized in terms of Chinese self-interest, not the principle of world peace which India professed to hold as the main pillar of its foreign policy . India's foreign policy is based on the principle that world peace is important .
 On October 26 another Indian note pled for a peaceful approach to the Tibet problem . It urged China to cease hostilities lest the Tibetan delegation feel that it was negotiation under duress .
 There was no reference to the rights of the Tibetans nor to the fact that Chinese action represented an affront and danger to India . Still, there were no references to rights of Tibetans .
 Nehru made a curious effort to excuse China’s actions by blaming the Soviet Union for misguiding China with inaccurate intelligence . During an interview with a Reuters correspondent in Kashmir on October 30, Nehru said China had misguided China .
 Nehru recalled recent Moscow releases which alleged that Anglo-American intrigues in Tibet were aimed at bringing Tibet into an anti-Communist bloc . Nehru: Recent Moscow releases alleged that . Anglo-Americans were trying to bring Tibet into anti-Soviet bloc .
 He wondered whether China might not have been influenced in its decision to move into Tibet . The year of the Iron Tiger was 57 .
 Nehru was attributing Chinese sins to Soviet misadvice . Peking, with considerably more candor, presented its own case in a note .
 New Delhi's argument that Peking’s actions in Tibet in Tibet jeopardized China's admission to the U.N. was dismissed as irrelevant . New Delhi argued that the Tibetans' actions jeopardized the country's admission . The Tibetans’ argument was dismissed .
 New Delhi realized it must take a stronger line, and on October 81, for the first time in this crisis, it officially recognized that India’s interests were at stake . New Delhi's decision to take stronger line was made in October 81 .
 This was a move toward realism, though its tardy introduction perhaps prejudiced the case . This was the first time the film had been shown in the U.S.
 It was acknowledged in a note to Peking that Tibetan rights should have been considered . The Tibetan rights were never considered in China's favour .
 From a legalistic point of view it is significant that the word ‘suzerainty’ was used to describe China’s relationship with Tibet . The word was used in reference to the relationship between China and Tibet .
 This suggests that India at this date still held to the British position on Tibet . This suggests India still held the position of Tibet .
 New Delhi’s note also claimed definite commercial and communication rights in Tibet . Rights inherited from the British inherited from Tibet .
 Most of the rights referred to had been the fruits of British imperialism, this passage probably only strengthened Peking’s conviction that India still fronted for the British Empire .
 A Chinese Communist delegation presented their credentials to the United Nations to present a complaint against alleged U.S. aggression in the Taiwan area . The presence of the delegation gave the U.N. a discreet opportunity to negotiate informally with China on the issue of Chinese participation in the Korean war
 The first indication of India’s position had been revealed by N Gopalaswami Ayyangar, Railway Minister and member of the Foreign Affairs Sub-committee .
 India is prepared to support Tibet's case to the extent that China should have solved this question by peaceful means, he had said .
 Salvador’s request until a better idea could be formed of a peaceful settlement . The year of the Iron Tiger is 59 .
 Tibet aflairs are the exclusive concern of the Chinese government . The USSR delegate agreed with the United Kingdom proposal but added that Tibet is not an exclusive concern .
 Taiwan made very clear that Tibet had been part of China for seven hundred years . Nationalist China expressed shock at the Communist Chinese militant approach .
 Tibet protested the postponement and reiterated that it would accept any decision which the United Nations would render . Tibet said it will accept the decision by the U.N. to be made .
 Tibetan delegation stopped in India and told not to proceed to China . Tibetan delegation had not even reached China . Tibetans had been told they were not allowed to enter China .
 Dalai Lama had instead appointed a three-man delegation to present his country’s appeal directly to the United Nations . The group had reached India on its journey to Lake Success by the time the Steering Committee had taken its action .
 The lesson was still pertinent nine years later when Communist China administered the coup de grace to Tibet . The Dalai Lama again appealed to the U.N. again from his place of refuge in Mussoorie, India .
 In 1950 sympathy from the non-Communist world was abundant, but the willingness and ability of the free world to support its convictions with tangible acts of assistance were very limited . In 1950 sympathies were abundant from non-communist world but the ability to support the Communist Party with tangible
 Tibetan people felt they had been let down by India and the United Nations . They could not easily grasp why the U.N. was unable to censure Communist China and marshal world opinion .
 It was very difficult to understand why the U.N., which was at war with the Chinese-supported forces in North Korea, could not apply the same standards of aggression to the Tibet case .
 World attention was indeed focused on the war in Korea to the exclusion of lesser crises . World attention in Korea was focused on World War II, but not on lesser crises such as Korea .
 China timed its invasion of Tibet to coincide with this event . It is likely that China timed this invasion of Tibetan territory to coincide .
 India believed it important to retain Communist China’s 60 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE confidence . India was genuinely concerned about the threat to peace posed by China's role in the war .
 Peking criticized India’s forebearance on the Tibetan question . Yet Peking continued to criticize New Delhi's role in Tibet .
 The Chinese People’s Liberation Army must enter Tibet, liberate the Tibetan people, and defend the frontiers of China . The Tibetan people must be liberated, says the Chinese People's Liberation Army .
 The conscientiousness with which Peking provided itself with a new doctrinal basis for its actions was certainly motivated by the threat which the regional autonomy thesis presented to China in the handling of several other national minority groups . China's conscientiousness was motivated by a threat presented to the government in the
 To justify its aggression, India was linked with ‘imperialist aggressors’ who were interfering with China’s domestic affairs. Finally, to justify its . aggression, they were linked with . “imperialists” who were . interfering with . China�
 When Nehru discussed the Tibetan situation in Parliament on December 6, he strangely made no mention of China’s entry into the Korean War .
 Tibet had to rely on its own efforts to appease the iron tiger which held it tight . It was not far enough to help Tibet, which had to come to terms with its own people .
 The Red Chinese invaders knew that the Fourteenth Dalai Lama was the key to control in Tibet . Mao Tse-tung to Edgar Snow, Red Star Over China, was Red Star over China .
 Peking concluded that effective suzerain authority depended on some cooperation by the Dalai Lama . Every other formula for control tried in the past had simply reinforced Peking’s conclusion that . Peking's conclusion: “Every other formula . tried to control tried to . past had
 Chinese had tried to bypass the Dalai by substituting for him the authority of the Panchen Lama or by ruling directly through Chinese military power, but neither of these methods had worked .
 Only when some viable relationship had been established between the Chinese patron and the Tibetan God-King or his regent were they able to make their suzerain authority felt in any meaningful manner .
 Chinese for many years encouraged rule by a regent even if it meant for the child Dalai to be murdered before he came of age . Rather than risk the investiture of a Dalai Lama who might prove intractable, the Chinese encouraged rule .
 "A regent, lacking divine authority and public worship, was infinitely easier to manipulate," he said . A regent was "infinite easier than a regent" to manipulate, he added .
 Chao Erh-feng could accomplish short-range objectives, but so long as a large army could not be easily moved and supplied, military rule in the face of a rebellious Tibetan population was out of the question .
 In 1950 Chinese Communist strategy based on centuries of experience required an accommodation with the Dalai Lama so that Tibet could be controlled and administered through the existing monastic structure without the need for an enormous military presence .
 Roads and airfields had to be built so than an army of occupation large enough to enforce it could be supported . But before direct rule could be achieved, roads and airfield were built .
 The Panchen Lama’s authority and power had to be increased so that he could be used as a counterweight to the Dalai in the critical interim period before the Red army could take over . Simultaneously the Panchen Lamid's authority was increased .
 The Chinese plan also called for large-scale programs to indoctrinate and educate Tibetan youths . The plan would wean them from Lamaism so that the Dalai Lama's influence on the new generation would be lessened .
 Peking planned to dilute the population by mass importation of Chinese laborers and farmers . Then to insure a docile population, Peking wanted to keep the population docile, he said .
 In an effort to reach the Dalai Lama and gain his cooperation the invaders made a clumsy effort to subvert his eldest brother, Thubten Jigme Norbu . In an attempt to reach him, the invaders tried to subverted his eldest son, the Dalai Dalai Lama .
 As Chief Lama of Kumbun Monastery in northern Tibet, Norbu was readily accessible to the Chinese . He was immediately taken into custody and subjected to severe pressure .
 Norbu's approach to Norbu was astonishingly crude . Either through innate arrogance or colossal insensitivity, Norbu is astonishingly rude . Norbu has been accused of being arrogant or insensitivity .
 They dangled before him the prize of the governorship of Tibet if he could successfully bring his brother into camp . They described to him their plan to absorb and communize Tibet and dangled .
 Dalai Lama realized that he would probably be held hostage and used as a lever to force the Dalai Lama to accept Chinese demands . As the Chinese approach became more threatening he realized that .
 Norbu feigned willingness to cooperate with his brother, Norbu says . He says he would be better served if warned of the Chinese plan . Norbu's brother says he will cooperate with the Chinese government .
 Norbu reached Lhasa on December 8, 1950, where he warned the Dalai Lama against permitting Chinese forces to enter the capital . Norbu was traveling with two other lamas from Kumbun . He was warned against allowing Chinese forces into the capital in 1950 .
 It was clear from the efforts made to subvert Norbu that the Dalai figured prominently in Peking’s strategy to control Tibet . The Dalai was a key figure in China's strategy to take over Tibet .
 Dalai Lama should leave Lhasa and seek refuge in a safe area where easy flight to Indian sanctuary would be possible . Dalai Lama's flexibility of action could 64 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE be assured, says Dalai Lama .
 The Chinese had requested an early response to their terms conveyed by Norbu . Norbu is based in Beijing, China's largest city .
 Tibetans were to send a negotiating delegation to China overland through Kham Province . According to these terms, the Tibetans would be able to negotiate overland with China . Tibetans had to send negotiating delegation overland to China .
 This route was specified because the delegation which had been sent earlier was held up in India . The delegation was sent to India because it had been held up by an earlier delegation .
 Chinese believed Indian government was influencing them to procrastinate . The delegation to Peking was originally stopped on orders from Lhasa . The Chinese believed they were influencing the Indian government .
 His Holiness reluctantly left Lhasa for Yatung in the Chumbi Valley near Sikkim where he could wait in safety . On the morning of December 18, his Holiness left the country for safety .
 The Dalai Lama was then only 16 years old, by tradition two years too young to assume power from the Regent . He was only 16 when the Dalai Lama assumed power in Tibet .
 Tibet's National Assembly hastily staged the investiture ceremony in November . It was intended to provide Tibet in this hour of national emergency with a ruling pontiff . But the National Assembly, on advice from state oracles and lamas, hastily staged it .
 This would deprive the Chinese of any opportunity to bypass the God-King or replace him with the Panchen Lama in their efforts to gain political control . The Chinese would not be able to bypass him or replaced him with him in their bid to gain power .
 The investiture would also serve to unite the country in crisis and minimize the importance of any factionalism within the government . It would also help unite the nation in crisis . The country is in a crisis .
 Tibetans were haunted by the prophecy that the line of Dalai Lamas would end with the Thirteenth Dalai Lama . Tibetans also haunted by prophecy that line of Tibetan Lama would end . The Dalai Lama is the current leader of Tibet .
 If two years were allowed to pass before the Fourteenth was enthroned, this prediction might well come true .
 Only by moving up the investiture and holding it before the Dalai left Lhasa could such a catastrophe be averted . Only by holding the Dalai's investiture before he leaves the Dalai could avert a catastrophe .
 The British Tibet scholar had dismissed this prophecy as a fabrication of some mischievous . This belief was clearly reflected in the Chinese notes to India . The Government of India’s note of October 31 was not drafted in such a way as to persuade the Chinese to believe otherwise .
 The events of 1950 must have seemed to Tibetans as an unhappy fulfillment of this persistent prediction . Yet it is understandable that the National Assembly was moved to take the precedent-breaking step of enthroning the Dalai at so young an age .
 As he had done in his Thirteenth reincarnation, the Dalai Lama sought sanctuary from Chinese invaders in the shadow of India . The Dalai Lama is now living in exile in India .
 This time China’s traditional expansionistist stimulus had been . The centrifugal force generated was essentially the same as that which had thrust Chao Erh-feng's . troops into Lhasa in 1911 .
 Sixteen days after his departure from Lhasa he set up headquarters on Tibetan soil in Yatung within easy reach of India should negotiations with Peking break down . The Tibetan leader set up his headquarters 16 days after leaving Lhasi .
 The Lhasa bureaucracy was left practically intact, and the two Prime ministers, Lukhangwa and Losang Tashi, exercised control in the capital .
 Peking ignored the Dalai Lama’s investiture, which had taken place in Lhasa on November 17, on the grounds that he had not yet attained the legal age of eighteen . The Dalai Lama's investiture was taken place on the same day as he was given the
 Legal Tibet government remained in Lhasa under the Regent, Ta Dra. Thus, according to this view, the legal Tibet government stayed in L.hasa .
 Peking’s Nationalities Research does not admit that he assumed power from the Regent until the spring of 1951 . That is, until after he had returned to Lhasa from Yatung and after a Chinese representative had been reinstalled in Lhasi .
 Chinese Ambans or High Commissioners in the Court of the Dalai Lama must attend the investiture ceremony . The Chinese have technically sustained the precedent in which the Chinese are in attendance at the ceremony .
 It was important to prevent the Dalai from leaving his country and thus placing himself beyond Chinese control . The Dalai left his country to be placed beyond China's control .
 Peking would consider admittance of the Dalai Lama a hostile act . Peking’s threatening propaganda exerted considerable pressure on India, says India .
 Peking would have found some solace in its legal position that the Dalai Lama had not yet come of age and could therefore not have legally assumed power . But should these threats have failed, Peking .
 The government of India was never put in the position of having to refuse the Dalai Lama political asylum in 1951 . However, the government made clear that it would not welcome him nor support him in exile against the Chinese .
 For the Dalai this was an important sign that New Delhi's policy toward Tibet and China had departed from the traditional policies of British India . circumstances had changed since his Thirteenth reincarnation .
 Peking dates the Dalai Lama’s assumption of power and the resignation of the Regent from February 1951 . The Dalai Lama assumed power in 1951 .
 The Chinese had to recognize the Dalai Lama’s new position by February if they were to accept the credentials of the negotiating group which departed Lhasa in February . The Dalai Lama's new position had to be recognized by February .
 Ngapo Ngawang Jigme, Tibet’s Quisling, was named leader of the new Tibetan delegation . The new delegation will be the first Tibetan delegation to join the Tibetan parliament .
 He was already in Peking when other members of the delegation, traveling overland via Kham and Chungking, arrived . He traveled overland to Peking via Kham, Chungking and Peking .
 The Panchen Lama, also slated to play an important role for the Chinese in Tibet, arrived in Tibet for peace negotiations .
 Talks began on April 29 between Ngapo Ngawang Jigme and Li Wei-han, Chairman of the Commission of Nationalities Affairs for the Chinese People’s Republic .
 Tibet delegation subjected to intense pressure to meet Communist terms . Members of the Tibet delegation were subjected to pressure to comply with Communist terms.
 The Chinese presented the delegation with a ten-point draft agreement and insisted that they agree to it . The Chinese gave the delegation a draft draft agreement .
 The draft was initially rejected after strong resistance by certain members of the Tibet delegation . It was then replaced with a relatively more moderate 17-article draft .
 This too was based on the same objectionable thesis that Tibet is an integral part of China . Tibet is not part of Tibet, but Tibet is part of the Chinese state of Tibet .
 The draft was presented NOT A NEEDLE OR THREAD 67 as an ultimatum and accompanied by unmistakable threats . Although still unacceptable to the Tibetans, the draft was this time presented not a NEEDLE or THREADREAD 67 . Tibetans were still unacceptable .
 The delegation was forbidden to request instructions from its government . Failure to accept the draft would bring further military action against their people, it was told .
 The original authentic seal had been kept in Lhasa as a precaution against just this type of coercion . The original, authentic seal was kept there as a . precaution against . just this kind of coercion.
 Peking announced a resolution called Agreement on Measures for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet between the Central People’s Government and the Tibet Local Government had been signed on May 23, 1951 . The resolution was signed without prior notification of the Dalai Lama .
 The outrage which had been perpetrated by the forced imposition of the 17-Point Agreement was not revealed publicly until the Dalai Lama reached Indian sanctuary eight years later . The outrage was only revealed until he reached India eight years after .
 He claimed that his representatives were compelled to sign the agreement under the threat of further military operations against Tibet . The agreement was signed by his representatives in Tibet .
 The 17-Point Agreement is a significant document since it provides a false front for the Chinese absorption of Tibet . It is an indication of China’s true nationalities doctrine .
 The agreement is in accordance with the “Common Program,” but the next eight years in Tibet would see the discrepancy between theoretical doctrine and actual practice, as well as the role of doctrine in masking the discrepancy .
 Violations of the agreement became fully apparent after the Dalai Lama’s flight in 1959, exposed the Chinese doctrine of nationalities as a screen behind 68 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE which the Han Chinese could make good their consolidation of the greater China mainland .
 The opening statements of the 17-Point Agreement humiliated the Tibetans . Tibetans were humiliated by the opening statements . The 17-point Agreement humiliated Tibetans, Tibetans.
 Lhasa agreed agreement should not be given for Chinese forces to advance further into Tibet . This is a violation of instructions given by the Tibetan government to avoid further incursions .
 Dalai Lama's main hope was that his country could be spared Chinese militatry occupation . This had led him in the first place to agree to negotiations, he says . In fact, it had been the Dalai Lama’s main hope that this had led to negotiations .
 This is a critical clause which shows Peking’s intention to work ostensibly through the existing institutions and the monastic system of Tibet . China was to abandon after 1956 when it felt itself strong enough to rule directly . This is the policy which China felt it could do after 1956 .
 “Mao’s Panchen” heretofore never recognized by the Tibetan government as the true reincarnation of the Ninth, was readmitted to Tibet and accorded full status . Thus ‘Mao's Panchen,’t recognized by Tibet as the
 This was a major concession by Lhasa and one of the most damaging ones . This was the first major concession to be made by the Chinese government in the country .
 Peking had accepted the existing religious and political framework, NOT a NEEDLE OR THREAD 69 . It had insinuated its creature, the Panchen, into a key position of this framework . The Panchen was a key figure in the Chinese government's decision to adopt a new state
 He was intended as a control on the Dalai, a reminder of the alternative figurehead available to the Chinese if the Dalai Lama should refuse to cooperate with them .
 Peking in this way sought to revive the classic rivalry between the two lamas and split the Tibetans into hostile camps in order to facilitate Chinese control of a hostile population . The Tibetans are now in a hostile position in Tibet .
 Point 8 calls for the integration of the Tibetan armed forces into those of the People’s Liberation Army .
 These clauses gave Peking an opening wedge with which to indoctrinate Tibet, militarize it and convert it ultimately to a Chinese province . Tibet is now an important part of China's Tibet policy .
 It was the abuse of these points which more than anything else finally incited the Tibetans to revolt . Tibetans were finally able to revolt against the government of Tibet .
 Point 14 was of interest to the Government of India, concerned with its traditional trading rights and privileges . Point 14 has been a point of interest for the Indian government .
 Three clauses of the agreement deal with the role of the People’s Liberation Army . The agreement was signed by the South Korean government .
 Indicative of how these clauses would make regional autonomy a farce is the fact that they were not announced for several months . The clauses were only announced months ago .
 Point 15 calls for establishment of a “Military and Administrative Committee and a Military Area Headquarters in Tibet” to ensure the implementation of the 17Point Agreement . Point 15, for example, calls for the establishment of an “military and administrative committee and a military area headquarters in Tibet
 This clause was a tip-off that Peking intended a military occupation upon which China’s control would be based . Peking wanted to use this clause as a pretext for its military occupation of China .
 China expropriated and depletion 70 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE of Tibet’s stockpiled grain supply . This served later to justify the Chinese expropriation and depletion of the grain supply.
 Dalai Lama came very close to leaving Tibet for sanctuary in India rather than return to govern in the context of this agreement . The Dalai Lama's visit to India was in context of the agreement .
 On one hand he did not want to be a party to Communist administration in Lhasa . On the other hand he wanted to avoid being seen as a Communist Party Party .
 On the other hand, he had an obligation to return to his people and do what he could to lessen the impact of Chinese occupation . On the same hand he had a duty to help his people .
 Peking exerted maximum pressure on the Government of India to refuse asylum . Peking exerts maximum pressure to refuse him asylum .
 A Chinese Communist “Advisory Delegation” under Chang Ching-wu was flown quickly to Calcutta and sought feverishly to find Norbu whom they suspected of arranging asylum details for his brother . Norbu was arrested in the wake of his brother’s
 The Chinese Ambassador in New Delhi also came to Calcutta, where he managed to track down Norbu . He appealed to him with a combination of threats and promises . Norbu was arrested in the wake of the incident in November .
 Three abbots from Sera, Drepung and Ganden monasteries in Lhasa plead with the Dalai Lama to seek guidance from the State Oracle . The Dalai Lama was eventually persuaded to return to the monastery .
 It is likely that the Dalai found a mirror for his own conscience in the pleadings of the abbots and the verdict of the State Oracle . This more than the mystical response of the Oracle caused him to return .
 The God-King returned to Lhasa on August 17, 1951, but not before he had met General Chang Ching-wu in Yatung to discuss their future relationship . The China-King met with the general to discuss his future relationship with the General .
 Chang was Peking’s first instrument to convert Tibet into a wholly subservient province of China . Chang was the first instrument of Peking's first instrument .
 On October 26, units of the so-called People’s Liberation Army totalling three thousand troops entered Lhasa under the command of General Chang Kuo-hua . The People's Liberation Army is based in Tibet .
 NOT A NEEDLE OR THREAD 71 reached Lhasa on December 1, having entered from the northwest . A second contingent of about equal size NOTA NEEDLE or THIRD 71 arrived on Dec. 1, 2012 .
 Tibet’s second largest city, Shigatse, was garrisoned by the Chinese on November 24, while the army reached Gyantse on N ovember 29 . The Chinese army has also reached Tibet's second city, Gyantese .
 By the end of 1952 the Communist Chinese army was in effective occupation of Tibet . Tibet was ruled out of Tibet by the Chinese army .
 The 17-Point Agreement had promised that the army would not take a “needle or thread,” yet its demands increased daily . The army had promised to not take any ‘needle’ or ‘thread,’ but demands are increasing daily .
 Two successive forced loans of barley demanded of the Tibetans threatened Lhasa with famine . The Tibetans were threatened with famine if they refused to accept the loans .
 It had to be carried out subtly so it would not appear that the traditional monastic system was being tampered with or that the 17-Point Agreement was being ignored . Yet it had to carry out subtly to avoid appearing to tamper with monastic tradition .
 The Chinese forced the Dalai Lama to remove his two co-ruling Prime Ministers, Lukhangwa and Losang Tashi,’ on the grounds that they were uncooperative and were inciting the people to disobey the occupation agreement .
 Dalai Lama named Lukhangwa Special Secular State Councillor in charge of Cabinet . Losang Tashi, the Grand Steward, was elevated to the same rank for ecclesiastical matters .
 He faced two troublesome alternatives: either to contact and guide the Cabinet directly or allow the Cabinet to rule without his close supervision . Their departure, however, faced him .
 In the first instance, by entering more directly into administration and becoming more accessible, he would lose some of his divine aura . In the other instance, the president would be more accessible and more accessible .
 In the second instance he would relinquish lay authority to the Chinese . In the first instance, he would give control of the country's affairs to the government .
 Either alternative suited Peking, which was intent upon lessening his authority . Peking wanted to lessen its authority .
 For the first time the Panchen was equipped with a private armed force with which to police his seat of rule . The Dalai’s lay power and authority was confined to Lhasa Province, where he was closely observed and controlled by a large Chinese garrison .
 In October 1951 the Chinese proclaimed monetary and economic reforms enabling them to confiscate properties belonging to Tibetan nobles . Tibetan nobles were forced to leave Tibet in 1951 .
 A cultural department was established which acted as the medium through which propaganda was disseminated . Marxist doctrine was taught in the cultural department . The department was used to disseminate Marxist propaganda .
 Tibetans are indoctrinated with Marxo-Buddhism, a hybrid version of Marxism developed for Tibetan consumption . This was augmented by several front organizations designed to indoctrinate Tibetans . Front organizations were also set up by the Communist Party .
 Tibetan branch of New Democratic Youth Federation of China was opened in Lhasa on May 4, 1952 . Cultural Association of Patriotic Youth founded a few months later . Tibetans have been involved in the Chinese revolution since 1949 .
 The Dalai Lama began to work on a land reform plan when he took office in Tibet . He began to realize the inequity of Tibet’s land tenure system . Tibet has a long history of land reform .
 He decreed the cancellation of agricultural debts and made provisions for seed loans to the peasants . The former president also decreed that agricultural debts were cancelled .
 Chinese sought to divert credit to themselves by providing tax and debt relief and by taking over the Dalai Lama’s seed NOT A NEEDLE OR THREAD 73 loan program . Unfortunately the Chinese were anxious to gain mass support .
 Anti-landlord propaganda was disseminated in a complementary effort to sharpen the class cleavage . Anti-landslord propaganda aimed at sharpening the class divide in the United States .
 Tibetans, regardless of class, clung to their traditional ways . Tibetans resented Chinese innovations, even those few which benefited them . The Tibetans are proud of their traditional way of life and resented China .
 Near-famine conditions caused by the seizure of Lhasa’s grain reserves was fanning public opposition to the Chinese . Near famine conditions in the country were fanning opposition to China .
 Peking's propaganda angered rather than impressed Tibet’s highly religious population, which resented an alien ruler . Peking’�s propaganda, obviously at variance with visible facts, angered the population, it said .
 Rumors from the north that Chinese farmers were being given Tibetan land alarmed peasants and landlords alike . Rumors of land given to Chinese farmers alarmed peasants, landlords alike.
 The 17-Point Agreement promised that the People’s Liberation Army would not take a ‘needle or thread,” it gradually dawned on the Tibetans that a whole way of life might be taken from them . Tibetans fear that their life will be taken away
 As early as 1952 the embryo of organized resistance began to form in defiance to the alien master . This is the first time organized resistance has been organized since 1952 . The first act of resistance began in 1952 in defiance of the Soviet Union .
 The events of 1950 and 1951 are entirely consistent with China’s historical approach to its border lands . China's approach combined an obsession with the security of the Middle Kingdom and an urge for territorial aggrandement .
 The vast Tibetan-Sinkiang area could not be allowed to slip from China’s control and be divided between the Indians and the Russians . Peking still considered by Peking to be Western dominated .
 With free access to Tibet India could dominate trade and sow dissension between the Tibetans and the Chinese . The Tibetans are divided between Tibet and China . India could be able to dominate trade in Tibet, say experts .
 Sinkiang, which still seethes with anti-Chinese sentiment, was flanked by Tibet . Tibet is flanked by China .
 Lhasa, the Holy See of Lamaism, had influence over Mongolians as well as Tibetans . The Holy See had influence on Mongolians and Tibetans as well .
 With Peking’s historical perspective it was possible to conclude that the Soviet Union had at least residual interest in Tibet . Peking's historical perspective is possible .
 The Tibetan highlands represented a base for political action throughout the Central Asian borderlands . In the nuclear age it had a dangerous potential as a strategic base for bomber squadrons and missile launching pads aimed at China . Tibetans had a potential to be strategic bases for bombers and missiles aimed at
 Peking would have to proceed in three stages, all of which were provided for in the 17-Point Agreement . To achieve this, 74 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE Peking .
 First, road and air communication facilities between China and Tibet would have to be built . China would need to build the facilities to link Tibet with Tibet .
 Peking’s plan would orient Tibetan trade toward China rather than India . These facilities, according to Peking's plan, would orient Tibet's trade to China .
 Chinese immigration into Tibet would dilute the hostile Tibetan population . But, more important, they would facilitate mass Chinese immigration to Tibet .
 Such facilities would also permit China to support strong military forces in Tibet . The facilities would be to protect Chinese immigrants, Chinese rule and the newly built supply routes .
 The second stage of control would be the imposition of direct military rule in place of indirect rule through the Dalai Lama . The Dalai Lama and the traditional theocratic machinery of government would also be in charge .
 This stage required a powerful military presence and a softening of the Tibet population through propaganda, education and weakening of the powerful Lamaist religion . This stage not only required a strong military presence but also required the softness of the Tibetan population .
 A study of the 17-Point Agreement reveals the framework within which such a program could be legitimized and carried out under a variety of guises . The 17-point Agreement could be used to legitimize and carry out under various guises, experts say .
 The Han saw as the ultimate solution to the ethnic problem of Tibet the eradication of the Tibetans . The Han wanted to eradicate Tibetans from Tibet . Tibetans were the only Tibetans to be eradicated from China .
 The evidence amassed by the International Commission of Jurists in 1959 and 1960 to support the charge that acts of genocide have been committed in Tibet by the Chinese is impressive . The evidence is impressive, with evidence amassed from 1959 and 60 years later .
 Curzon described it as a belt of land which could provide a frontier in depth which could not be crossed without sounding the alarm of invasion . Curzon: It could provide an area of land, or a frontier, which could be a belt, of land or frontier .
 Curzon saw the Himalayan regions of Kashmir, Nepal, Sikkim, Bhutan and Assam Himalaya as an inner line of defense for India protected by a Tibetan buffer region . Communist China today views Himalayan region as its outer line-of-defense, necessary for the
 Peking sees Himalayan states as irredentist regions to be regained as soon as possible . NOT A NEEDLE OR THREAD 75 also assigns to them an offensive role . Peking, which sees the Himalayas asirredentists regions, also assigns them offensive role
 Before China’s real Tibetan and Himalayan policies could be realized there was much to be done . China's real Tibetan, Himalayan policy is still to be realized, says author .
 India and the rest of Asia would have to be lulled into accepting Peking’s peaceful pretensions while the wounds of Tibet healed . Peking would be lulling India and other Asian nations into accepting its peaceful pretension .
 In international politics when a buffer state is abolished by a powerful nation that nation is considered to have aggressive designs on its neighbors . The buffer state was abolished by the U.S. in 2009 .
 China's occupation of Lhasa upset India’s traditional relationship with Tibet . Acharya Kripalani, Indian Parliamentary Deputy, was Indian Parliamentary deputy in 1954 .
 New Delhi recognized that it must be satisfied with some new kind of relationship with its northern neighbor . New Delhi has been in talks with Russia since 2009 . The two nations have been at odds for years .
 China would dictate the terms of this relationship with the U.S. It was obvious that it would dictate terms of the relationship, he said .
 Peking was quick to inform the Government of India that “problems relating to Sino-Indian diplomatic, commercial and cultural relationships with respect to Tibet may be solved properly .”'''—that is, through Peking, not Lhasa.
 The Indian Foreign Office announced in September, 1952, that its representative in Lhasa would henceforward hold only consular rank and its trade missions would be considered extensions of the Lhasi Consulate General .
 Status of India’s traditional trade and communication rights was nevertheless ambiguous . The status of these rights is still ambiguous, according to the Indian constitution .
 Peking had made it clear that it would no longer be bound by ‘unequal treaties” imposed on Tibet by “imperialists” yet it had not made clear to India what its new relationship with Tibet must be .
 It had to determine what its attitude and policy toward China itself would be. China had to decide what it had to do to deal with the country itself .
 From England, India inherited treaties governing its relationship with Tibet . India inherited a 76 ENTER PANCH SHEELA 11 fundamental geopolitical situation . Neither independence of India nor the Communist revolution in China had changed .
 In the traditional British view the Himalayan range was of strategic value as a defense barrier only if the Tibetan plateau behind it was kept from hostile hands . The Himalayan mountain range is a strategic value only if it is protected from hostile forces .
 The security of the subcontinent thus required Tibet as a neutral buffer zone . Tibet was a neutral zone for the Indian Empire . Tibet is now a permanent buffer zone between Tibet and India .
 Britain had gone to great lengths to prevent Tibet from falling under the control of Russia at the beginning of the century . Britain feared the high plateau would be used as an invasion route to India .
 Lord Curzon may have exaggerated this threat, but few then denied that there was a line beyond which Russia could not advance in Central Asia without India being in jeopardy . India was in danger in the 1950s, when Curzon's threat was exaggerated .
 Younghusband’s expedition ran along the northern borders of Iran, Afghanistan and Tibet . Britain had been prepared to defend it with force of arms . The expedition took place on the border between Iran and Afghanistan .
 The failing Manchu dynasty and the disintegration of the Chinese Empire had raised the specter of a central Asian power vacuum . Russia seemed eager to fill the power vacuum which Russia seemed to fill . The failing
 Sinkiang on Tibet’s northern border was a particularly tempting target for the Czar . The Czar was known for attacking Tibet's northern border with the Russians .
 If both Sinkiang and Tibet remained under the suzerainty of a weak China the subcontinent would be safe . But if both remained under a weak state of China it would not be safe for the Indian people .
 The expansion eastward of the Russian Empire and the rise of the British Raj in India did nothing to change Peking’s historical assumption that Tibet is part of China . Peking's historical assumption of Tibet is not to change .
 The Anglo-Chinese Treaty of 1906 and the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907 had paid proper lip service to Chinese supremacy in Tibet . Peking still sought to define more satisfactorily the ambiguous term “suzerainty” through Chao Erh-feng’s
 Chao’s ruthless campaigns had temporarily brought eastern Tibet under control . Chang Yin-tang, an aggressive Chinese Amban, had tried to re-establish Chinese authority in Lhasa .
 Chang blocked British trade into Tibet by forbidding English traders or their Indian agents to have contact with Tibetans . Chang also denied them the right to acquire property .
 He provoked the British by intriguing in Nepal and Bhutan . But, even worse, he provoked them by intriguing the British in Nepal .
 Communist China’s attitude toward Tibet and India is basically the same as that of the Imperial Manchus . The fact should have provided independent India with a body of experience with which to judge Chinese actions after 1950 .
 To describe the acts of Chang 78 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE Yin-tang more than fifty years ago is to describe Chinese Communist actions during the last several years . To describe Chang 78 is to . describe the actions of the Chinese Communist . Communist actions .
 British India's reaction to Chinese political action in Lhasa from 1906 to 1911 is strikingly similar to the reaction of Nehru’s India to Chinese actions between 1950 and 1954 . The reaction of British India to China's political action was similar to that of the Nehru's India
 In 1909 Peking had favored the return of the Dalai Lama after five years of exile in Mongolia . It had intended that he must henceforward remain under firm Chinese control and exercise his authority only with Chinese sufferance .
 Peking saw the importance of not interfering with the monastic structure of society and realized that the God-King was the indispensable keystone to this system . As was the case in 1950,
 Control over the Dalai Lama, of course, must be guaranteed by military force . The Dalai Lama's control of Tibet must be ensured by the use of military force, he says .
 When General Chao Erh-feng’s army moved toward Lhasa, the Dalai Lama asked Great Britain to intervene militarily and stop the Chinese advance . The Dalai Lama called on the British government to intervene .
 Just as in 1950, India would not go beyond protesting China’s actions . But these pleas went unheeded and just as in . 1950, it was not the first time India protested China's actions .
 A parallel can also be seen in the efforts of the Chinese to bring back the Thirteenth Dalai Lama from Indian exile following Chao Erh-feng’s entry into Lhasa in 1910 and their efforts to bring him back from Yatung on the Indian border following
 In 1910 the Chinese had first turned to the Panchen Lama to rule in the Dalai’s stead but this proved to be no solution . In 1910, the Chinese . had first . turned to Panchen . Lama to take over as Dalai's successor .
 The Panchen had had the wisdom to decline the offer, realizing that he could not hope to work with an antagonistic Tibetan National Assembly .
 In 1956 Peking realized that the Panchen Lama was no substitute for the Dalai Lama . Similarly in 1956, Peking also realized that . The Panchen . Lama was disdained as ‘Mao’s Panchen’
 Despite repeated Chinese violations of the 1904 Anglo-Tibetan Convention and the 1908 Trade Regulations, the British government had refused to intervene in 1910 .
 London’s reaction to the military occupation of Tibet was expressed by Lord Morley, Secretary of State for India, who rationalized that China was only trying to make effective its recognized suzerainty . India's response to the occupation was that it was trying to protect its recognized
 Great Britain’s need to clarify the status of Tibet in 1918 . Independent India’ need to reach agreement with China over Tibet in 1953 . Still another parallel exists between the two sides .
 The circumstances and objectives were totally different and here the parallel diverges . Yet the circumstances and . objectives of the . circumstances involved are totally different, and here .
 In 1913 China had been weakened by the Republican revolution and was harassed by Russian pressure in Mongolia . In 1913 the Chinese government was weakened by Russia's influence in Mongolian affairs .
 Tibet had regained its freedom from Peking’s control and found itself in a relatively strong position . Tibet is now in the middle of a difficult transition period in China .
 China enjoyed military supremacy on the Asian mainland in 1953 . In 1953, China was regenerated by an aggressive Communist regime and implicitly protected by the Soviet Union .
 Tibet had been overrun by Chinese forces and was forced to cede complete power in a bilateral agreement with China . Tibet was unable to attract either United Nations or Indian help .
 Independent India, still beset with a multitude of internal problems, faced on two frontiers with hostile Pakistan forces . Independent India was powerless to defend its northern neighbor .
 In 1913 British India had sought formal agreement to its de facto power position in the Himalayas . In 1913 the British India sought formal . agreement to . formal agreement .
 In 1953 India took the initiative to formalize the status of Tibet . Yet India’s relative power position had weakened radically from the days of the British Raj .
 It is difficult to see what India stood to gain by negotiating from weakness . It is not clear what India could gain from negotiating from weak .
 It is thus at this point that India swerved abruptly from the traditional Himalayan policy . India's policy was empirically tested by Britain .
 There was indeed nothing India could have done to save Tibet in 1950 and 1951 . Nothing could have been done by India in 1950s and 1951s .
 Other reasons must be found to explain India’s decision to press for a new treaty on Tibet . But other reasons must also be found for the decision .
 These reasons traceable to the ideology of the new Indian government, not to its geopolitical, power position . These reasons are traceable only to ideology .
 Nehru's advisers played in molding India’s policies and attitudes toward Red China are important though not definitive . Nehru was prime minister of India during the Second World War II .
 Ambassador to China Sardar Panikkar was among the first to justify Peking’s actions in Tibet . He was one of the first Indian diplomats to justify the actions of Peking to Tibet .
 Panikkar’s influence on Nehru in 1950 cannot be ignored . The exag80 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE gerated adulation of New China which shone through the dispatches from Peking .
 If Panikkar was intent on improving China-India relations, Krishna Menon was playing for larger and more meaningful stakes . Menon: "If you want to improve relations with China, you're not interested in improving relations with India"
 Krishna Menon saw Tibet as an irritant which could not be allowed to spoil India’s function as a bridge between West and East . As co-architect with Nehru of neutralism as a positive force in international affairs, Menon said . Menon: Tibet an
 India’s Governor General Rajagopalachari and Deputy Prime Minister Sardar Patel saw the Tibet crisis in a more realistic way . The Tibet crisis has been described as a humanitarian crisis .
 Panikkar confessed he was nervous lest his government “take some hasty step”® against China . Panikar said he feared his government would take a ‘hasty’ step’ against China.
 The Indian Ambassador had little cause for fear on this score, however, however. The Indian ambassador was not in danger, however .
 Many Indian intellectuals have held a somewhat idealized image of China . Nehru himself, probably Nehru, has held an idealized China image of the country .
 Much has been made of alleged alleged Chinese-Indian cultural affinity and common colonial experience . Much has also been said to be a common link between China and India .
 The two peoples are supposed to be bound together by the common heritage of Buddhism . The two nations should be united by their Buddhist heritage, says CNN.com .
 In 1944 Nehru wrote of the ‘commerce of scholars’ between the two countries during the Buddhist period . Nehru: The commerce of scholars was between India and the U.S.
 After being cut off from each other for many centuries, India and China were brought by some strange fate under the influence of the British East India Company . After centuries of isolation, the two countries were brought together by the British .
 In China the contact was brief, but even so, it brought opium and war . India had to endure this for long; in China it was brief . Even so, the contact brought opium, war .
 Tibet has played a key role in peacekeeping in Tibet . Tibet is the most forbidding geography in the world . Tibet has a role as a buffer in the Tibetan people .
 Nehru: In Nehru’s eyes the Communist revolution in China was an historically correct development . Nehru's view: The Communist revolution was an historical correct development in China .
 It was yet another stage in a long effort to be free from Western influence and the corrupt practices of a feudal system . The country has been trying to be a free of Western influence .
 Unseen were the true meanings and objectives of the ideological doctrine which China now preached. Unseen was the true meaning of the ideology which China preached. China's ideological doctrine now preached .
 Nehru always believed that the Communist overlay in China had not fundamentally changed the basic drives of Han nationalism or the influences of an ancient, deep-rooted culture . Nehru: The Communist overlay has not changed the fundamental drives of Chinese nationalism .
 There is much truth in this analysis, but he perhaps could not fully appreciate that the expansionist tendencies of international Communism were agpravated rather than muted by Han nationalism .
 Voices of dissent said that ‘Asianism’ had limitations and India’s political and cultural heritage was equally rooted in Western ideals and principles . Unheard were voices of dissent .
 India's leaders found too much comfort in the fact that China faced domestic problems as formidable as India's . India’s leaders find comfort in fact that Chinese leaders faced domestic issues as formidable .
 Both countries needed to devote all of their energies to solving terrible economic problems, to adjusting to rapid social change and to defending themselves from external enemies . Logically both countries should devote all the energy to solving economic problems .
 It was reasonable to assume that neither country in their common predicament could afford to be antagonistic toward each other . Neither country in common predicament can afford to antagonism toward the other .
 Nehru’s posture as arbitrator between East and West obscured the true dimensions of the Chinese threat . Nehru's role as champion of peace obscured the real dimensions of China's threat, writes Aradhama .
 New Delhi followed a super policy which can be briefly described as the effort to preserve world peace and to enhance India’s international prestige as a force for peace and for prestige . The super policy was aimed at preserving world peace .
 The role of international arbitrator for peace appealed to Nehru’s ego . Nehru's role as arbitrator appealed to the Indian ego and by extension to India's national ego .
 Nehru had an emotional rejection of the Western world which had so long been associated with colonialism . An attraction for the Utopian world of Fabian socialism made it difficult for Nehru to view the Communist world objectively .
 Nehru seemed to have sensed early the competitive complications of the two countries’ relations . Nehru was the prime minister of India in the 1950s .
 He realized that two entirely different economic systems were on trial . He said he realized that . Two entirely different . economic systems on trial. He said .
 The uncommitted countries of Asia were watching to see which system would prosper and which would fail . Asia was watching the system to see if it would prosper or fail .
 Nehru did not fully recognize that conflict is inherent in this kind of competition . Nehru was assassinated in the early 1900s . He was assassinated at the age of 16 in 1918 .
 He accepted at face value the Communist slogan ‘competitive co-existence’ and did not fully appreciate the purely tactical significance given it by China .
 There were unmistakable clues to Peking’s real policy and plans from the outset, but they are of course clearer in hindsight . Peking's real policy was clear in hindsight, but it was not always clear what was happening .
 India sought tirelessly to mediate between China and the United Nations forces in Korea . India sought to seat Communist China in the U.N. where it believed peace could be found through negotiation .
 India bought China's goodwill at the cost of opposing nearly all Western positions in the Far East . The imbalance in India’s neutrality became apparent during this period .
 India opposed the United. 83 Nations resolution branding China an aggressor in the Korean War . India also attacked the peace treaty with Japan because it had been negotiated by the United States without reference to China . India opposed a U.N. resolution branding .
 India was to be highly critical of U.S. policy and actions in Southeast Asia during the Indo-China War . It was to show sympathy for the Chinese-backed Vietminh forces .
 Only after the Korean truce talks began, Peking’s policies began to shift toward a more conciliatory line . Peking's policies begin to shift after the truce talks .
 This shift was not a response to India’s policy of conciliation toward China . But it was not the result of a shift in policy toward China, it was a result of India's conciliation .
 Instead it reflected a general shift in international Communist tactics, it was a shift in tactics . It reflected a change in tactics from the Communist Party, it said .
 Stalin's line called for ‘competitive co-existence’ gained its real momentum after Stalin’s death . This line, which called for . ‘Competitive . coexistence,” gained its . momentum after the death of Stalin, it was .
 Goodwill gestures such as the exchange of cultural delegations were useful as mood-setters, but only serious negotiations could resolve the differences between the two countries raised by the Tibet situation .
 The U.S. was planning to extend military assistance to Pakistan, according to New Delhi . New Delhi may have sought a treaty agreement with China .
 U.S.-India relations deteriorated in anticipation of the Pakistan military program . The latter was not formally announced until February 25, 1954 . From November 1953 India was ruled out of Pakistan .
 Since the Chinese occupation in 1950 traditional border trade had drastically fallen off . Traditional border trade has also fallen off in recent years .
 It was clear that Peking was determined to divert Tibet trade from India to China . Peking wanted to divert trade between India and China from India .
 New roads being built into Tibet would permit military equipment to be brought into Tibet . New roads would make overland trading between Tibet and China economically feasible .
 Lhasa-Chamdo road 84 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE goods could reach China within a matter of days rather than the customary five weeks which it usually took the caravans to reach Chamdo .
 Peking could and did impose currency restrictions and state trading methods which favored trade with China . Lhasa’s control of the administration was also a key factor .
 Before the Communists had extended their revolution to Sinkiang and forbidden Indian trade into that area, New Delhi had traditionally maintained a Consulate General in Kashgar . New Delhi has traditionally maintained an Indian Consulate .
 India hoped to reopen trade routes between Kashmir and Sinkiang through Ladakh . India had hoped to re-open trade routes from Kashmir .
 Nehru stated in Parliament that the Kashgar Consulate would not be on the agenda of the forthcoming negotiations with China because the latter considered Sinkiang a closed area . But on December 8, 1953 Nehru said in Parliament .
 China refused India permission to reopen its Kashgar office . China also demanded the right to open three new Chinese trade missions in India .
 Sino-Soviet competition for control of Sinkiang was again entering a dangerous phase and that this was an important reason to keep India out of the area . Only later would it become clear that traditional .
 No representative from the Ministry of Commerce and Industry was included in the negotiating group which India sent to Peking . It is significant that no representative from India's trade ministry was in the group .
 India would have had to relinquish many of the old treaty privileges enjoyed by the British . Not only was little likelihood that India could have regained its previous trade through negotiations .
 In sum, negotiations could result in compliance with the new status of Tibet imposed by China . In Tibet, negotiations may result in only one thing: compliance with China's new status .
 There was nothing of a material nature or nothing in India’s traditional self-interest to be gained, says Ravi Agrawal . Nothing of the material nature was gained, he says .
 Negotiations for a deal between the U.S. and Germany have been ongoing for four months . Although quick agreement was expected, the negotiations dragged on for more than a year .
 One point of contention was the number and location of Chinese trade agencies to be permitted in India . The number of trade agencies allowed in India was also a key issue .
 China insisted on matching India’s trade agencies in Gartok, Gyantse and Yatung . China also matched the existing one in Kalimpong, Kalimimong and Simla .
 India confined China to trade offices in New Delhi and Calcutta, where Chinese personnel could be better watched . But unwilling to see Chinese installations in these strategic western hill stations, India confined them to New Delhi .
 Foreshadowing the boundary dispute with India was an argument over the ownership of several border passes . Foreshadowed the dispute was a dispute over ownership of some of the passes .
 Vice-Foreign Minister Chang Han-fu, Chinese representative at the 1954 negotiations, is alleged to have told Indian Ambassador Raghavan that the Chinese did not wish to touch on the boundary question . The Indian ambassador was in talks with the Chinese at the time .
 It is likely that not only the specific issue of the border passes but the larger and more crucial problem of the boundary delimitation at least came up for discussion . Nevertheless, it is likely to be likely that the issue of border passes was discussed .
 China refused to incorporate into the agreement an acceptance of the Indian-claimed alignment . In fact, it was probably a point of contention that China .
 It took four months for agreement to be reached on April 29, 1954 . Nehru had to minimize the importance of the negotiations .
 The Eastern Economist of Bombay speculated that the signing of the accord was timed by the Chinese to coincide with the Colombo Conference in Ceylon . The Hindusthan Times linked the sudden conclusion of negotiations with the opening of the Geneva Conference on Indo-China .
 China could benefit from Indian goodwill and the euphoric atmosphere created by the accord . The Geneva Conference began at a moment when China could use it to boost its goodwill .
 The formal title of the Sino-Indian pact on Tibet is Agreement between the Republic of India and the People’s Republic of China on Trade and Intercourse between the Tibet Region of China and India .
 By acceding to this agreement India formally abandoned its traditional position that Tibet should be an autonomous buffer zone . The agreement is India's first attempt to establish a buffer zone between Tibet and Tibet .
 The most important feature of the agreement is its preamble, which enunciates the now well-known “five principles of coexistence, or Panch Sheela’, as they are called in the Hindi language . The agreement was signed by the Indian parliament in December
 Mutual respect for each other’s territorial integrity and sovereignty . 2. Mutual respect and sovereignty are key to the success of the two countries .
 Mutual non-interference in each other’s internal affairs 4, Equality and mutual benefit 5 . Equality, Equality, mutual benefit and mutual mutual benefit are key to success .
 Nehru pointed to the preamble as being of utmost significance . Nehru described the agreement in Parliament in Parliament, Nehru .
 Nehru's critics in Parliament were outspoken in condemnation of the agreement . Nehru’s critics in parliament were outspoken against the deal .
 Nehru was given credit by Amrita Bazar Patrika for “getting a tacit Chinese approval of the McMahon Line,”’s’’
 The wishful thinking of the Indian press bespoke the government’s official view . It was later to be revealed more directly during the 1960 Sino-Indian boundary discussions .
 Nehru replied in Parliament to one critic saying, “As to the treaties and maps which Dr. Dr. Nehru had made, Dr. Bhade was not happy to be compared to the 1914 Simla Convention, which had last fixed Sino-Indian relations .
 This was an unfortunate denigration of the maps upon which India must defend its boundary against Chinese claims and intrusions . This was the very maps that India must now defend its borders against China .
 Nehru failed to see then the importance of the 1914 Simla Convention in delimiting the eastern sector of the India-Tibet boundary . Since that treaty, the McMahon Line has been known since that treaty as the McMahon line . Nehru's failure to see the significance of the
 The Indian Prime Minister seemed to be intrigued by the spectacle of China on the move . What seemed to have intrigued the Indian PM was the awesome spectacle .
 His admiration for this phenomenon made it difficult for him to see the immediate threat to India, he said . He said it was difficult to see an immediate threat for India .
 China’s occupation of Tibet could thus be excused as part of the awakening process . China's occupation of the Tibet could therefore be excuse as a result of the process .
 Parliament ratified the Sino-Indian Agreement on June 3, 1954, but the public debate continued . The agreement was ratified by the Chinese government in 1954 .
 Chinese control over Tibet was a fact beyond India’s ability to change . Chinese control of Tibet is a fact that India cannot change, says Indian diplomat .
 The pact, together with an accompanying exchange of notes, eliminated extra-territoriality which India had enjoyed as inheritor of British treaty rights . The pact was part of an agreement between India and the Netherlands .
 The Indian telephone and telegraph link into Tibet was to be sold to China . Military escorts stationed at Yatung and Gyantse were no longer to be permitted .
 Treaty guarantees which protected Indian traders against Chinese trade monopolies could not be retained in the 1954 agreement . Treaty guarantees were not retained in 1954 .
 Most of the rights would have terminated unilaterally anyway by January 3, 1955 . Under the terms of the Anglo-Tibetan Trade Regulations of 1914, most of these rights were terminated anyway . Most of them would have been terminated anyway anyway .
 India was able to retain trade agencies at Yatung, Gyantse and Gartok in exchange for Chinese agencies at Kalimpong, Calcutta and New Delhi . This did not provide Indian traders with trade protection or favorable treatment .
 Nehru did not make clear why treaty formalization was required . Nothing significant seemed to have been gained for India by it, Nehru said in 1954 .
 China achieved formal recognition of its right to absorb Tibet . India gained no discernible quid pro quo . China achieved recognition of right to absorbed Tibet .
 The 1954 agreement was not a non-aggression pact . The platitudes contained in the Panch Sheela preamble are meaningless without clear agreement on the boundary of the boundary .
 Many Indians may have been heartened by the absence of Chinese comment on the boundaries . Many interpreted this as acquiescence to the Indian-claimed boundary . But subsequent events proved that this interpretation was wrong .
 1954 agreement had effect on other countries bordering China . What cannot be calculated accurately is the effect which the 1954 deal had on other nations bordering China had .
 Nepal, for example, must have been influenced by India’s posture toward China . Nepal-China relations doubtless reflect this influence . Nepal's relations with China are likely to reflect the influence of India .
 Burma too was affected, and its willingness to enter into boundary negotiations on Peking’s terms can probably be traced in part to the 1954 Sino-Indian Agreement . Burma also was affected by the agreement, and it entered into boundary talks with Peking .
 New Delhi’s rationale for this pact certainly included the belief that Panch Sheela was a major step forward in international morality and gained for India greater stature in the international community . New Delhi's rationale for the pact was that it was a good step forward .
 Peking’s words and actions consistently indicated that China had no intention of being contained, morally or otherwise . But Peking's words and . actions indicated that . China had . no intention to be contained, moral or otherwise, says Peking .
 Chinese claims and intrusions continued without interruption from this time until 1962 . The incidents escalated into a full-scale boundary war in 1962 . Chinese claims continued to be made without interruption until 1962 when the war began .
 There is no particular reason why we should be coaxed into pulling Peking’s chestnuts out of the fire for the doubtful benefit .
 The aggressive tactics of the Chinese in Korea and Tibet were followed by a series of provocative violations of Indian soil . This facet of Chinese policy was not then visible to the rest of the world . The Lucknow Pioneer, April 26, 1955 .
 Clearly evident, instead, were the meaningless rituals of Panch Sheela, particularly Chou En-lai's visit to New Delhi and Nehru’s return visit to Peking . The meaningless rituals were clearly evident, rather than were the visits of Nehru and En-L
 With the problem of Tibet apparently eliminated as an irritant in Chinese-India relations, there seemed no reason why Peking’s ‘peace offensive’ should not succeed in India .
 Peking’s adoption of peaceful co-existence was particularly welcome in New Delhi . It seemed to vindicate Nehru's stance of nonalignment and to rationalize India's sponsoring of China for membership in the UN .
 A peaceful China would provide the tranquillity necessary for India’s economic development . Above all a peaceful China is necessary for the country's economic development, says Ravi Agrawal .
 This theme as inspired by India was a noble dream, but used as an instrument of Chinese policy it was suspect . This theme was used as a useful tool for Chinese policy, but was suspect, says author .
 Nehru had always recognized that India and China’s political-economic systems were competitive in the sense that whichever proved most successful 91 92 HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE would be emulated by other Asian nations .
 China was a more direct rival for ideological and even political leadership of Asia . But during this period he must have begun to realize that China was more than a rival . He must have realized that China is a direct rival to ideological and political leadership .
 Chou En-lai had made a highly significant plea for solidarity in 1954 . While addressing the Geneva Conference on April 28, 1954, Chou Enlai called for solidarity . The Chinese leader made the call in a speech at a Geneva Conference .
 Nehru himself had earlier proposed a series of bilateral non-aggression pacts among non-aligned nations . Nehru was opposed to China’s concepts of solidarity .
 Lucknow Pioneer commented on the difference between India's belief in co-existence and China's broader ambition . India’s belief in the idea of coexistence is different from China's ambition, it said .
 A joint communiqué issued on June 28 at the conclusion of discussions in New Delhi between Nehru and Chou En-lai stressed the theme of peaceful co-existence . Nehru: Peaceful co-exist.
 Asian solidarity, in the sense of specific Asian collective action and cooperation, was omitted . Asian solidarity was pointedly omitted from the list of Asian solidarity .
 The rights of the people of each nation to national independence and self-determination must be respected, says the Bandung .
 The people of each nation should have the right to choose their own state system and way of life, without interference from other nations, says David Cameron . People of each country should be able to choose a state system, he says .
 It is inconceivable that peaceful co-existence can be achieved without a struggle . It's inconceivable it can't be achieved in peace without struggle, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "Peaceful coexistence can only be achieved by struggle"
 In reality they are substituting class collaboration for class struggle . They are advocating a fusion of the socialist and capitalist systems . In reality, they are replacing class collaboration with class struggle.
 This was unmistakable by 1959 when serious border incidents betrayed China’s fundamental hostility toward India . Not until 1963 when Peking formally uncovered its real doctrine, Peking .
 Nehru in 1954 to be a genuine pledge of peace and non-aggression was in reality an act of deception, says Nehru . Nehru's promise of non-violence was in fact a deception, he says .
 The statement was formally entitled “The Difference Between Comrade Togliatti and Us” and first appeared in the Peking People’s Daily on December 31, 1962 . Neither the Times of India nor Nehru then realized that despite pronouncements to the contrary Peking
 Nehru may not yet have realized that Chou En-lai’s definitions of “sovereignty” and “territorial integrity” were very different from his own . Nehru's definition of sovereignty and territorial integrity is very different than his own,
 Gorwala warned prophetically that the freedom of countries lies not in talk of peaceful co-existence but in having sufficient strength confronting the Communists to deter them from launching aggression .
 Geneva Conference is close to achieving agreement on peace terms for Indo-China . Geneva Conference was at the moment close to agreeing peace terms . The Geneva Conference will discuss peace terms between India and the West .
 Krishna Menon had committed New Delhi's prestige to underwriting China's faithful observance of the peace terms in the Southeast Asian crisis . Menon's prestige was committed behind the scenes in Geneva in Geneva .
 On July 18 delegates at Geneva agreed to name India chairman of an International Supervisory Commission made up of Indian, Canadian and Polish representatives . The commission will police the settlement in Indo-China .
 Nehru looked forward to acceptance of Panch Sheela by all nations in Asia and Africa and the resultant creation of a vast area of peace whose ideological center would be New Delhi . This was perhaps the highwater mark of New Delhi’s prestige and success .
 This would hopefully be accomplished at the forthcoming conference of Asian and African nations to be held in Bandung, Indonesia . The conference will take place in Indonesia .
 Nehru predicted that the conference would be a ‘striking example of co-existence” and described Panch Sheela as a guide for the conduct of nations . Nehru in an address to Parliament to Parliament predicted the conference .
 Bandung Nehru made a state visit to Peking, and he must have been increasingly concerned by areas of friction with China .
 Nehru’s Peking visit must be made to appear as another step toward Asian peace . The buildup for Bandung could not lose its momentum, says The BANDUNG SPIRIT .
 In September the Chinese Communists began heavy bombardment of the Nationalist-held offshore islands of Quemoy and Matsu and thus precipitated still a new crisis in the Far East . In reality peace was still a long way off .
 No complete record of Nehru’s visit to China in October 1954 has yet to be made public . Nehru visited China in 1954 .
 China’s cartographic claims against Indian territory have led to problems in the past . One such problem was certainly China's cartographic claim against India's territory .
 Since 1950 Nehru was troubled that the new Communist regime persisted in publishing official maps showing large areas of his country as belonging to China . Nehru had been troubled that .
 Similar alignment errors appeared in the depiction of the Chinese maps of the frontiers with the Soviet Union and Outer Mongolia . According to another official Indian record of the conversation which appeared in a 1960 report on Sino-Indian boundary discussions Chou stated that similar alignment errors also appeared on Chinese maps .
 Nehru was not left with the impression that China intended to press its cartographic claims . This argument did not appear until 1960 and it is likely that Nehru did not know about China's claims .
 There is also evidence that during their discussions in Peking Chou and Nehru again disagreed on the concept of collective action in Asia . The latter feared that China would dominate any organized Asian grouping .
 The Indian leader soon thereafter did in fact deny publicly any intention of creating a new military alliance .
 Nepal is still another point of contention which the two leaders discussed . Nepal was still another issue of contention between the two countries .
 Peking’s desire to establish a diplomatic mission in Nepal introduced a substantial element of friction . In public the Prime Minister would only admit that India's ‘special position’ in Nepal received attention .
 A Kathmandu announcement that Nepal intended to renegotiate its relationship with China was in itself enough to make Nehru publicly re-assert for Chou's benefit India’s claim in Nepal .
 Indian Prime Minister must have left with a feeling of apprehension . Despite well-staged mass rallies of welcome the Indian PM left feeling apprehensive .
 Chou’s proprietary approach to Asian solidarity labeled him a serious rival for Asian leadership . Not only were there probably nagging fears that China had designs on Indian territory and intended to usurp India's special position in Nepal, but there was also concern over China's claim to Nepal .
 The Bandung Conference would be a critical indication of Chou’s role in Asia . Chou is known for his work in China and the United States .
 In an effort to sell non-alignment and co-existence to Asia and Africa he was in effect sponsoring Chou En-lai at Bandung . In effect he was presenting Communist China as a peaceful member of the Asian community .
 The Asian-African Conference convened by the five “Colombo Powers’* brought twenty-nine nations together at Bandung, Indonesia .
 The announced purposes of the conference were to promote goodwill and cooperation . The conference was to consider social, economic and cultural problems of special interest to Asian and African peoples .
 He announced before the Indian Parliament, “Panch Sheela is the challenge of Asia to the rest of the world,” he said . He hoped “this question’s India, Burma, Indonesia, Pakistan and Ceylon.”
 Nehru’s dream of Afro-Asian cooperation perhaps begun in 1927 when he attended a meeting in Brussels of the Congress of Oppressed Nationalities . Nehru's dream of cooperation perhaps began in 1927 in Brussels .
 As the delegate representing the Indian National Congress he exchanged ideas with a variety of leftist and Communist political exiles from the colonial world .
 The Brussels congress was an early example of Latin America’s identification with the Afro-Asian anti-colonial cause . The Brussels conference was an example of the Latin American's identification with Africa's cause .
 He thereafter was a devout believer in the role of Indian leadership in Asia . He frequently took the initiative in organizing other conclaves devoted to the cause of Asian independence .
 His early sense of destiny—national and personal, has been justified by history, writes David Frum . He says he is proud of his achievements in Afghanistan . Frum: "I am proud of my country's progress in Afghanistan."
 Bandung Conference was a culmination of his efforts to create an Afro-Asian influence for peace in a troubled world .
 The delegates to Bandung from India, Egypt, Burma and Communist China had met in Rangoon en route to Indonesia .
 If the leaders were at Bandung to sell China to the rest of the Asian-African fraternity and the Western World, it was natural that they felt the need to caucus before the conference began .
 It tended to dramatize the rivalry between the non-aligned group which sponsored China and the other delega* Middle East delegations .
 Nehru must accept some of the blame himself, says Nehru . If the flood of general statements made by several leaders at the beginning of the conference raised ideological disputes with China, he says .
 Many delegates came to Bandung determined to prevent domination of the conference by either China or India . The conference will be held in Indonesia's capital city of Jakarta .
 Representatives from Turkey, Lebanon, Iraq, Iran, Thailand, Pakistan, Ceylon and the Philippine Islands were particularly outspoken and forceful in defending their positions . The representatives from the Philippines, Turkey, Iraq and Lebanon were particularly forceful .
 This group fought hard, for example, to have the Soviet satellite system specified as one type of colonialism opposed by the conference .
 The compromise phraseology in the final communique represented only a partial victory, but at least the issue had been aired . The final phraseology was called for opposition to “colonialism in all its manifestations” in the communique .
 The five principles as specifically phrased and itemized in Panch Sheela had come to symbolize Indian—and by extension neutralist—collaboration with Communist China . They were unacceptable to those who opposed Peking .
 Conference finally adopted a ten-point declaration which incorporated the points of Panch Sheela but avoided endorsement of an objectionable doctrine born of China and India on the occasion of Tibet’s loss of independence .
 Chou En-lai suggested the alternate slogan, “living together in peace,” which he had borrowed from the U.N. Charter . Ironically, his posture throughout the conference was characterized by reasonableness and moderation .
 The concept of collective defense became still another troublesome issue at the conference . The formula was finally found to meet the obviously divergent views of the delegates .
 Article 5 respects the right of each nation to “defend itself singly or collectively in conformity with the charter of the United Nations,” while Article 6A calls for abstention from the use of collective defense to serve the particular interests of any big powers . The BAND
 Nehru emphasized that the collective defense clauses were consistent with the provisions of the United Nations Charter . Nehru realized that the compromise was an expression of opposition to Indian and neutralist policy on this score .
 Bandung provided Asian and African countries with a forum for self-expression and made them more aware of their own emergence . Bandung was Bandung's first stage of a festival of international unity .
 It proved that the underdeveloped countries could exert an important influence on world affairs, says CNN's Peter Bergen . Bergen: The underdeveloped nations could exert influence in world affairs .
 Bandung Declaration was careful to recognize the position of the United Nations and the need to subordinate Afro-Asian consciousness to a consciousness of belonging to the world community of nations . It is significant that the Bandung declaration was careful .
 The countries represented at Bandung did find common cause on a variety of issues . But it was apparent that the areas of actual and potential disagreement were greater than areas of agreement .
 The pre-conference meeting in Rangoon with Chou En-lai, Nasser and U Nu was one . The meeting was one of many pre-conference meetings .
 He was trying to impose a conference agenda at a time when heads of several important delegations were absent . Another was his attempt to impose an agenda at the summit .
 His unsuccessful effort to prevent opening speeches by heads of delegations also antagonized many of them . He also provoked them to more aggressive opposition to India . India is the world's most populous country in South Africa .
 Nehru was frequently irritable and occasionally lost his temper, which only reduced his effectiveness even more . He was frequently frustrated by opposition and often lost temper .
 Chou En-lai by contrast was able to project a new and entirely favorable image of himself . He was the prime minister of China's first state-run state of China .
 Chou conveyed to the delegates China’s desire to cooperate with its Asian neighbors . Chou emphasized the theme of peace . Chou said China wants cooperation with its Asia neighbors .
 He was, for example, able to lay the groundwork for a new relationship with Nepal . He was able to . lay the . groundwork for the new relationship .
 The Chinese leader also took advantage of Bandung to reach agreement with Indonesia on the question of overseas Chinese .
 The most dramatic gesture of Chou’s peace offensive at Bandung was his offer to negotiate with the U.S. on relaxing tensions in the Taiwan area .
 Chou's announcement stole the spotlight from the concluding declaration of the conference . Chou earned for Chou the laurels of the hour as peacemaker .
 Nehru confided to Parliament that before Bandung he had held several conversations with Chou En-lai relating to the Formosan problem . Nehru said he had spoken to him about the problem before .
 Krishna Menon had, on Nehru’s instructions, held exploratory conversations in Peking, Washington, London and Ottawa in an effort to find a formula for easing Formosan crisis .
 Bandung provided another opportunity for backstage talks with Chou on this subject . Bandung provides another opportunity to see Chou on stage .
 Nehru had come to Bandung with certain suggestions on Formosa which had been discussed earlier in London between Krishna Menon and Britain’s Foreign Minister, Anthony Eden .
 Nehru found satisfaction in his and Krishna Menon’s behind-the-scenes role at Bandung . But there were others in India who were not so sure it was useful .
 Still another editorial which was accurate in its prediction of Peking’s independence of Moscow appeared in the Times of India . Still another was wrong in estimating China's devotion to peace with Russia .
 There were even then increasing signs of Chinese hostility toward India, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond: China showed itself militancy in the offshore island crisis .
 The signs were kept from the Indian people and Parliament until 1959 . That these signs were not kept from Indian people until 1959 makes them no less significant .
 In 1955, Chinese troops violated Indian territory in two places, Bara Hoti and Damzan, in the state of Uttar Pradesh . In 1955—the very year of Bandung—Chinese troops violated India territory . The incident occurred in the very same year as Bandung .
 In September 1958, Chinese soldiers arrested an Indian police patrol in the Aksai Chin corner of Northeastern Ladakh . The incident occurred in September 1958 .
 "The tone of this correspondence, which was certainly out of phase with the spirit of Bandung, grew steadily more hostile," says the Indonesian government .
 Peking's diplomacy in Nepal from 1954 onwards must have been disturbing to India’s leaders . India's leaders were also disturbed by the Peking diplomacy in the Himalayan region .
 1956 agreement with Kathmandu permitting China to open a consulate and three trade missions, as well as a subsequent Chinese aid agreement, seriously challenged India’s traditional supremacy in Nepal . The 1956 agreement was the first to allow China to establish a consulate in Nepal and trade missions .
 Tibet provided the issue on which India and China broke . Yet it was Tibet which provided the issues on which they broke .
 The anti-Chinese Tibetan underground and Khamba tribal insurgency in eastern Tibet had by 1958 reached dangerous proportions . Anti-Chinese Tibetans were fighting against Chinese rule in Tibet .
 Dalai Lama accepted invitation from Indian government to visit New Delhi for ceremonies . Dalai Lama was initially reluctant to accept the invitation, but Peking reluctantly permitted him to go . Peking went to considerable lengths to dissuade him from accepting the invitation .
 His arrival also focused Indian attention and sympathy once again on Tibetan situation .
 Sorely troubled by the growing opposition to China in Tibet, the Dalai Lama earnestly sought Nehru’s advice . Nehru sought the advice of the Tibetan Buddhist leader . The Dalai Lama is now in exile in Tibet .
 Tibet’s leader torn between a sense of duty which beckoned him back to Lhasa where his presence might avoid bloodshed . Tibetan exile leaders in India feared for his safety if he returned to Tibet . Tibet's leader was torn between returning to Tibet and returning to India where he
 Resistance leaders realized that if he returned the Chinese would exert intolerable pressure on him to use his influence against the resistance movement . Moreover, the resistance leaders realized he would be under intolerable pressure from the Chinese .
 Chou En-lai, who found it prudent to visit India at the same time, met with the Dalai Lama . He reassured him that their agreement would be honored .
 The Dalai recounted in his memoirs how Chou had described the deteriorating situation in Tibet . He said Chou had threatened forceful suppression of any popular uprising should it occur . The Dalai later recounted in memoirs that Chou had said the situation was deteriorating .
 His visit to India to honor the 2,500th anniversary of one of the world’s greatest disciples of peace had ignited sparks of conflict .
 His visit made Peking realize that he could not be relied upon to front for the Chinese subjection of Tibet . Peking realized that when the inevitable test of strength came, Indian sympathies would be on the side of the Tibetans .
 The “Bandung Spirit,” as hopefully expressed by Asians and Africans after their memorable conference, was wholly illusory . It was a product of Chinese deception. The Bandung Spirit was the product of China deception, he says .
 Following the fateful visit of the Dalai Lama to India, China’s collision course with India was charted . The Dalai Lama's visit to India was one of the fateful visits to the country .
 guerrilla resistance had been fought in southeast Tibet for more than five years with casualties estimated as high as 80,000 . Neither Peking nor New Delhi was prepared for the events which were to take place in Lhasa .
 Nehru hinted on March 17 that there were disturbances in Lhasa, but he had then minimized their importance . Nehru had said disturbances were disturbances but then minimized them importance .
 Khamba tribesmen from eastern Tibet entered Lhasa during the summer of 1958 . Estimates ran into the thousands of people .
 Some semi-organized guerrillas had secretly infiltrated Lhasa as part of the resistance strategy . Many had simply been displaced by the chronic fighting in their home area, but some were semi-organized .
 The Chinese were well aware of this activity and, in prudence, could not tolerate for long the tribesmen’s presence in Lhasa . The tribesmen were well-known to the Chinese, but the Chinese were not tolerant .
 The Chinese garrison had put considerable pressure on the Dalai Lama to denounce the resistance and order Tibetan army units to move against the Khambas . The Dalai Lama had been under pressure from the Chinese to denounce resistance .
 Peking hoped to break the militant aspects of the revolt without using military force . By thus pitting Tibetan against Tibetan and reviving the traditional antagonism between U and Kham provinces, Peking hopes to break militant aspects .
 The Dalai Lama steadfastly refused to move against his own people . This, of course, strengthened a growing Chinese realization that he would not serve as puppet .
 Before this decision could be implemented, Chinese garrisons had to be greatly increased . The decision was made by Chinese President Xi Jinping in 2012 .
 Peking knew direct rule would precipitate a showdown with the Tibetan people as well as with the Dalai Lama . Peking by then knew that direct rule was likely to precipitate showdown with Tibet .
 The Dalai Lama would have to be removed from the Tibetan capital if he was removed . The Chinese had become aware that their existing garrisons were inadequate to suppress the Khamba irregulars, much less .
 This time was bought by promises to live up to the 17-Point Agreement and leave the Tibetan way of life unchanged . This time, the Dalai Lama has promised to keep his way of living unchanged .
 The Dalai Lama's message was accompanied by an official assertion that troops were being withdrawn from Tibet . But in fact reinforcements were steadily coming in, the Dalai Lama says .
 The Dalai Lama was still the main obstacle to direct rule in Tibet . Peking could maintain military force but Dalai Lama's person was still main obstacle .
 The obvious and classic solution would have been to keep him under secure control in China where his sanction for Chinese rule in Tibet could be extracted under pressure . If necessary, he could be forged under pressure or forged .
 Since his return from India in early 1957 the occupation authorities in Lhasa had put pressure on him to pay another ‘visit’ to Peking . They specifically wanted him to attend the Chinese National Assembly to dramatize the solidarity of minority groups .
 He evaded Chinese “invitations’ by pleading special religious duties which demanded his presence in Lhasa . Fearing detention in China he evaded . Feared detention in . China by pleading religious duties .
 Tibet was becoming more difficult to stall and he found himself in the position of having to make an outright refusal to leave Tibet . But by January 1959 he had to make a decision to stay in Tibet . Tibet was the last place Tibet was considered a viable option for Tibet .
 The Dalai and his closest advisers finally concluded that the Chinese would force him to travel to Peking . The pressure was such such a pressure that the Dalai decided to travel .
 His Holiness would attend the National Assembly even though he had not given his consent . It had, in fact, been publicly announced that He was to attend the Assembly .
 The city was jammed with monks, who customarily flock to the capital from all over Tibet for the celebrations . There was still a large concentration of Khamba refugees, and there were still large numbers of refugees .
 Khamba partisans were reported to be active in the Yamdrok Lake area and by March they controlled the entire region from the Brahmaputra River southward to the Bhutan-Indian frontier east of Shigatse and Gyantse .
 Chinese authorities in Lhasa suddenly and curiously made plans for a “theatrical program” which it was seemingly important for the Dalai Lama to attend . This was the setting when the Chinese authorities decided to make plans for the program . The Dalai Lama was invited to attend the
 The formal invitation, issued the day before the performance, specifically excluded the ministers and the contingent of ceremonial bodyguards which customarily accompany the God-King .
 The Dalai Lama similarly stated that four high lamas had been invited to parties by Chinese military commanders and had never been seen again . Four lamas were invited to Chinese military parties by military commanders, he said .
 These mysterious disappearances were widely known throughout Tibet . Furthermore, these disappearances are widely known in Tibet .
 Rumors of a Chinese plot to seize the Dalai Lama at the “theatrical performance’s” could sweep through the city . It is thus understandable how rumors of a plot against him could sweep around the city quickly .
 On March 10 thousands of Lhasans surged toward the Norbulingka summer palace . The Lhasan capital is in the midst of a major political crisis .
 The crowds were in a state of turbulent excitement and in a fury against the Chinese . Crowds were in 'a state of turmoil' and 'a fury against China' Crowds in a 'state of turbulent' state of unrest .
 Dalai Lama announced that he no longer intended to go to the “theatrical performance,” the crowds would not be dispersed . The Dalai Lama has said he does not intend to attend the performance .
 Mass rallies were held that day throughout the city denouncing the 17-Point Agreement . Mass rallies called for a complete withdrawal of the Chinese from the country .
 The Dalai recalled in his memoirs that about seventy members of his government met within Norbulingka later that afternoon and endorsed the public declarations repudiating the 17-Point Agreement .
 On March 12 a mass meeting of thousands of Lhasans was held below the Potala to celebrate Tibet’s newly-declared total independence . A brave but futile performance was a brave and futile performance . Tibet has declared its independence .
 Independence Day was documented and a letter was sent by courier to the exile leaders in India requesting that the decision of the Tibetan people to declare themselves fully sovereign be announced to the world . The Tibetan people declared independence on Independence Day .
 An estimated five thousand Tibetan women marched to the Indian Consulate General to enlist India’s backing for Tibetan sovereignty . On the same day an estimated 5,000 Tibetan women protested against the Indian government .
 From here they marched on the Chinese Foreign Bureau where they screamed their demands . They marched on China's Foreign Bureau to demand more .
 First intimation that the Chinese meant to meet public opposition with all-out force came to the Dalai Lama in a letter from the Quisling Ngapo who had remained under Chinese protection throughout the disturbances .
 He asked him to inform General Tan Kuan-san® exactly which building he planned to occupy so that it would not be damaged by the Chinese . The Chinese general said he wanted to inform him about the building he was planning to occupy .
 Three mortar shells were initially fired, two of which were duds, but the third exploded very close to the palace walls . The incident occurred in the early hours of October 31, 2012 .
 All possibility of conciliation between the Dalai Lama and the Chinese has passed, says Dalai Lama . Dalai Lama: "All possibility of conciliation between the Chinese and the Dalal Lama has passed"
 Open warfare between Tibetan citizens and the alien occupiers was taking place in the streets of Lhasa . Khamba guerrillas were joined by Tibetan citizens .
 The Chinese version of the main outbreak which erupted on the 20th was given by Ngapo Ngawang Jigme in a speech at the National People's Congress in Peking on the 22nd .
 At 3:45 before dawn on March 20 the rebels launched armed attacks against the People’s Liberation Army units stationed in Lhasa and the offices of the central government agencies in Tibet .
 The People’s Liberation Army could not but begin to counterattack at 10:00. In order to safeguard the unification of the motherland and the security of the Tibetan people, the People's Liberation Army began the counterattack .
 Neighboring monasteries were attacked by the Chinese, particularly the famous monastery of Sera, which was badly damaged, and the Sera Medical College was razed . The Chinese attacked Sera's Medical College, which had been razed, and Sera Monastery .
 Peking estimated that two thousand Tibetans were killed, but is likely that, in an effort to minimize the extent of their brutality, they underestimated the casualties just as they did the number of participants in the revolt .
 It was Nehru’s March 23 statement in Parliament which provided India and the world with the first apparently accurate and relatively full statement of events in Lhasa . Nehru's statement was made in Parliament in March 23 .
 Thirteen days had elapsed between the time disturbances first began in Lhasa on March 10 and Nehru’s official announcement on the subject on March 14 .
 Tight Chinese control conspired to keep all news of Tibet from the world press from Tibet . India had been cautious about making statements before it had all the necessary facts . The government of India had made statements before making statements .
 New Delhi had information from Lhasa within hours after the first signs of trouble on March 10 . Indian Consul General Chibber maintains uninterrupted wireless contact with his government . Lhasasa had been able to maintain uninterrupted wireless communication with the Indian government .
 Neither Chibber nor New Delhi could evaluate immediately the extent and significance of the uprising or decide when it had become an uprising .
 It also wanted to have the benefit of Peking’s official attitude toward the uprising before announcing its own . Peking wanted to get the benefit from the official attitude .
 It is likely that he felt an emotional response to the plight of the Tibetans which he had not felt with the same intensity in the case of Hungary .
 Tibet, as India’s northern neighbor along a 2,500mile frontier, brought reality closer than ever before . Tibet is India's northern neighbor to Tibet .
 China officially claimed considerable areas of India’s northern territory and had total control of a militarized Tibet . China presented India with a very serious threat .
 Nehru’s first major statement on the Lhasa crisis—on March 23— was made one day after receiving Peking's note . Nehru made the statement on March 23, a day after he received the letter .
 It is to his credit that he made a public announcement before Chou En-lai took the initiative to do so . It is also to thank him for making the announcement in advance .
 Nehru made no direct mention of Peking’s belligerent note nor of the extent of his own very grave concern . Nehru kept news of its chronic dispute with China from its own people as well as from the world in general .
 The Speaker of the House ruled the motion out on the grounds that it was improper to discuss the internal affairs of a “friendly” state . The Speaker ruled out the motion .
 An angry parliament did not consider China’s actions friendly and felt the pressure of public sympathy for Tibet and public outrage . This was soon to be ignored by an angry parliament .
 The right of the Indian Parliament to discuss anything it pleased was to become a principle which Nehru, himself, was soon to support publicly . In fact, the right to discuss such matters was to be supported by Nehru .
 This was broadcast over the NCNA domestic and international services as well as the Peking home service . The NCNA broadcast was broadcast by NCNA international and domestic services . This is the first time NCNA has aired a live broadcast from China .
 Broadcast at the same time over the same services was the text of a document called “State Council Order,” which officially abolished the Tibet government . The Tibet government was officially abolished by the Tibetan government .
 A proclamation issued by the Chinese “People’s Liberation Army,”""° calling on Tibetans to assist in the suppression of “reactionary” Tibetan resistance and warning those who didn’t .
 These first statements by Peking to the world provided the basis for Peking’s subsequent propaganda barrage . The first statements were made by the world .
 Tibetan language transmissions beamed at Lhasa broke silence on March 29 . They carried in full the People’s Liberation Army proclamation and the State Council Order .
 No signals of any type had been sent from the Chinesecontrolled Lhasa broadcasting station between March 19 and March 27 . No signals were sent from any type of signal from the station .
 The phrasing of this message was such as to indicate that the Dalai Lama was not in Chinese hands . Dalai Lama is believed to be in the Himalayan state of Tibet .
 The world was provided with its first clue that the God-King was in flight and still safe from capture .
 The shelling of the Dalai Lama’s residence on March 17 convinced the Tibetan Cabinet that the only alternative to flight was imprisonment by the Chinese . The only alternative was to flee to China, Tibetan Cabinet said .
 Cabinet was convinced that it was necessary for the God-King to leave quickly if his escape were to be successful . Cabinet was also convinced that . It was necessary that it . needed quickly if he was successful, Cabinet said .
 As the Dalai recounted, there was no certainty that escape was physically possible . The Dalai later recounted: "There were no guarantees that escape would be physically possible"
 The Dalai Lama certainly recognized the gravity of his decision to leave the Dalai Lama . Dalai Lama's decision to step down from Dalai Lama was a major decision .
 His refusal to accept exile on two previous occasions is proof enough that he considered flight a last resort . Tibet has seen the danger implicit in his remaining in Tibet is proof .
 The Dalai Lama with his mother, sister and younger brother slipped out of Norbulingka Palace on March 17 . Disguised as a humble Lhasan, the Dalai Lama had slipped out with his family in Lhasa .
 The members of the family cautiously picked their way through Chinese lines and forded the Kyi Chi River, where they were met by an armed escort of loyal Tibetan troops .
 Chinese finally convinced that the God-King had slipped through their hands . Only after interrogating and torturing remaining attendants of the Dalai Lama were the Chinese convinced that he had slipped away .
 The Chinese did not know which route the escape party had taken they could assume that his destination was India . The escape party escaped to India .
 The Dalai left instructions with a trusted official to inform Indian Consul General Chibber of his escape and through him to request asylum from the Government of India .
 Dalai Lama and his party reach Lhuntse Dzong, a village near the Indian border, after a week of hard traveling . The Dalai Lama's party reached Lhunse Ddzong after a long week of traveling . Dalai Lama: "I'm not afraid to go
 This stop had significance since it was here that a free Tibetan government was formally established . This stop was the first Tibetan government to formally establish a government .
 This government's existence in Tibet --brief as it was --had symbolic value to the Tibetan resistance . It assured the people that their God-King had not abandoned his countrymen. This government in Tibet had symbolic value .
 Dalai Lama's party crossed into Indian territory on March 81 at an obscure location just south of the Tibetan village of Mangmang . Dalai Lama’s party left behind its armed bodyguards and crossed into India territory . The Dalai Lama had received Indian permission to enter as a political exile
 China was the first to announce the Dalai's entry into India . The Indian press credited this scoop to the efficiency of Peking’s espionage . Peking's espionage was credited with the success of the Indian press .
 The Indian government's tardiness was generally attributed to a conscientious effort to protect the security of the escape party . The government's failure to arrive at the time of the rescue party was blamed for the delay .
 On April 6 the Dalai Lama was welcomed by the monks of Towang Monastery, the largest monastery outside of Tibet . The relics of the mother of the Sixth Dalai Lama are enshrined in the monastery . The Dalai Lama is currently living in a monastery in Tibet .
 No official Indian spokesman directly took note of the fact that the party traveled for 19 days through Indian territory south of the McMahon Line which is claimed by China .
 The drama and excitement of the God-King’s entry into India obscured the political risks implicit in his pursuit by Red troops through territory claimed by Peking . Peking was still claimed by the Chinese .
 Tezpur, an obscure and sleepy tea planters’ town in Assam, suddenly became host to a platoon of high Indian officials and nearly two hundred newsmen . The town is now host to more than 200 newsmen and officials .
 Aside from two small official rest houses given over to the visiting bureaucrats, hotels were non-existent .
 Tezpur Station Club opened its doors to as many visitors as could be packed into its club rooms . The club was once the private reserve of British tea planters, once a private reserve .
 Newsmen were obliged to curl up on chairs, sofas and billiard tables to catch fitful rest . Newsmen relied on food stocks of hospitable local planters and missionaries to survive .
 An engraving of Napoleon’s surrender to Britain hung over the bar, by all odds, it was the most popular spot in town . The bar was the only place to watch Napoleon surrender .
 During the several-day wait for the Dalai Lama's arrival newsmen passed the time filing stories of local color and jockeying for position at Tezpur’s telegraph facilities . The Dalai Lama is expected to arrive in the next few days .
 Abortive efforts were made to charter aircraft with which to overfly Dalai Lama’s party as it traveled down from the last pass before Tezpur .
 Tezpur’s only two taxis were hired on standby at exorbitant rates by the first two newsmen to discover their existence . Tezur's only two taxi drivers were hired by exorbitated rates by first two reporters .
 The Dalai Lama entered Tezpur on April 25, climaxing the drama begun weeks before . He stole out of Lhasa weeks before when he stole from the capital . Dalai Lama's arrest is the first time he has been in the country since 2008 .
 The exodus of Tibet’s God-King had the stuff of a religious epic as well as being politically momentous . Tibet's exodus of its God King was the biggest of all its kind of religious epic .
 No more dramatic way of bringing SinoIndian tensions to a head or announcing the bankruptcy of Panch Sheela can be imagined . The bankruptcy of Sheela could be imagined.
 Tezpur in its one moment of glory had a carnival air about it, yet throughout India there was a sense of impending disaster . Tezur in its glory had been the one of India's one moments of glory .
 Rumors had been heard that thousands of Tibetan guerrillas, whose ranks had swollen by monks from Lhasa’s beleaguered monasteries, were being pushed toward India’�s borders .
 With the escape to India of the Dalai Lama the cold war of words began in earnest . The Dalai Lama's escape from India began to be the focus of the Cold War .
 China's first communiqué of March 28 revealed careful drafting intended to establish the basis for its case on Tibet and provide the line for its subsequent propaganda . China’s first communique was intended to set the foundation for its response to the Dalai Lama .
 It absolved the Dalai Lama of guilt, portraying him instead as a prisoner of the “upper strata reactionary clique” henceforward the official Chinese euphemism for Tibetan resistance leaders in Communist semantics .
 China dissolved the Tibet local government and placed the Panchen Lama in charge of the Preparatory Committee . China issued the Order of the State Council on the same day as the communiqué .
 Tibet had enjoyed autonomy under Chinese rule . This officially ended whatever semblance of autonomy Tibet enjoyed under China . Tibet has been ruled out of Tibet by the Chinese government .
 The third official document was a proclamation of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army, dated March 20 .
 It announced that the army was charged with putting down the rebellion . The army announced that it had been tasked with putting the rebellion down .
 The People’s Liberation Army release was clearly intended for Tibetan and domestic consumption .
 The People's Liberation Army proclamation was omitted from radio transmissions in the Asian languages . It is understandable that the People’s Liberation Army .
 Peking realized public opinion would react adversely to news revealing widespread military action against unarmed Tibetan people . Peking certainly realized that public opinion in the Buddhist countries of Southeast Asia would react .
 A stern object lesson was necessary for the Chinese People's Republic . But for the peoples of the Chinese people’s Republic, particularly the minority groups, it was necessary, he says .
 The pivotal figure throughout the Tibetan crisis had been the Dalai Lama . The Dalai Lama was a key figure in the crisis in Tibet .
 It was his presence in Tibet which required the Chinese to work cautiously through the monastic system . His exalted image prevented them from ignoring his wishes or bypassing his authority .
 His escape created for the Chinese an internal security crisis not only in Tibet but among all minority and nationality groups in China . The escape of Tibet's Dalai Lama has created a security crisis for all minority groups in the country .
 The propaganda theme that the Dalai Lama had been abducted appeared ridiculous to the outside world once he had safely reached India . The Dalai Lama's safe arrival in India made the propaganda theme seem ridiculous .
 The line had to be defended by Peking if a total upheaval in Tibet was to be prevented and if serious unrest in adjacent areas of China, particularly Sinkiang were to be avoided .
 Peking’s March 29 release of the alleged exchange of correspondence between the Dalai Lama and General Tan Kuan-san was meant to provide proof and substance to Peking's charge that His Holiness had been abducted by resistance leaders .
 The Dalai implied that he had not been able to carry out Chinese instructions because of obstruction by his Tibetan advisers . In the letters the Dalai sounded a conciliatory note .
 The refugee Dalai used the refugee Dalai as his source, the Indian leader acknowledged that the letters were authentic . The Indian leader said the letters are authentic .
 The Dalai Lama’s own straightforward explanation of the letters, given in his memoirs My Land and My People, is more enlightening .
 Dalai Lama was able to escape only because he had the benefit of complete secrecy . As it happened, the Dalai Lama escaped only because of the benefits of the protection of secrecy . The Dalai Lama is now living in a stateless state .
 Dalai Lama's unfettered presence in India was proof that he was not abducted or spirited away to India against his will . The Dalai Lama was not spirited away from India, but his presence was visible to all who would behold him .
 China had to be shown guilty of conspiring with reactionary Tibetans to cause the Tibetan revolt and abduct the Dalai Lama . Not only was China concerned about internal reaction to internal reaction but for the sake of plans not yet revealed, it also had to show India had been conspiring with the Tibetans
 India had to be proved guilty of violating Panch Sheela, the five pillars of co-existence . India had been proved guilty by proving it had violated Panch sheela .
 This homely parable refers to alleged interference by a “reactionary” India in the internal affairs of China . The parable, quoted by a Chinese spokesman in April 1959, refers to an alleged interference .
 The Dalai Lama's flight of the Dalai Lama to India created the problem created by Peking to meet the problem . Peking is fed the propaganda line fed to Asia by the Chinese government . It summarizes in a phrase the . phrase the propaganda .
 A line was clearly meant to brand India the aggressor and portray China as victim . It was a line meant to portray India as aggressor . The line was meant to imply that China was victim .
 The United States and Nationalist China, normally Communist China’s prime enemies in the Far Eastern cold war, were lesser accessories to the crime . The U.S. and China were normally enemies of Communist China .
 This left the door open for his return and provided a means for him to save face if he did . This left him open for a return to the country .
 The epithet ‘expansionist’ was invented by Chinese propagandists perhaps because no other term quite applied to the Indian case . It was invented as a term for expansionistists in India .
 To use ‘imperialist’ would be stretching credulity because of Nehru’s image as champion of colonized countries . Nehru's image of being an imperialist has been stretched by his image of India as a hero of colonialists .
 The new term also had to support the subsequent charge that China’s frontier had been violated, a charge which was later to prove so important . The term had to be supported by the charge which later proved so important to prove .
 No epithet in Communist semantics adequately described the special crime for which India had to be condemned and found guilty . India's crime was a special crime in Communist India, the country had to condemn and find guilty .
 In this case the initial momentum was generated by pre-independence British imperialism . The initial momentum for independence was generated in the UK .
 According to Peking’s reasoning, an expansionist India, however innocent as prime mover, was guilty of not arresting the imperialist momentum set in motion by the British Raj . Peking's reasoning: An expansionist Indian was guilty .
 In Communist semantics “expansionism’s” describes a fault which can be cured by policy change, while “imperialism” connotes a fundamental ideology which cannot be changed without proletariat revolution . ‘imperialist’ connotes an ideology which
 Peking perhaps did not yet consider Nehru to be among the incurables, but it sternly put him on notice that he must take the cure . Peking placed Nehru on notice to take the action .
 By April 1959 the specifics of China’s approach to the Tibetan crisis were clear . China's approach to Tibet was clear by April 1959 .
 The Lhasa uprising and the Dalai Lama’s flight to India inspired five major charges by China against India of violating these principles . The Sino-Indian Agreement of 1954 on Tibet on Tibet had inspired the five principles of peaceful co-existence .
 Peking’s propaganda campaign to neutralize the damaging effects of the Dalai Lama's escape and his condemnation of China . The first four provided the basis of Peking's propaganda campaign .
 The Dalai Lama was abducted and held under duress by reactionary Tibetan elements acting in collaboration with India . He was abducted by reactionary forces acting in cooperation with India, says Dalai Lama .
 The Indian government was interfering in the internal affairs of China by allowing widespread press comment and public demstrations against China . It also allowed anti-Chinese criticism in its parliament, according to the report .
 By aiding and sympathizing with the reactionary, feudal resistance elements in Tibet, the Indian government revealed its own reactionary nature . The Indian government reveals its own reaction to the Tibetan uprising, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The fifth charge, which did not emerge until August 1959, brought into the open China’s longstanding boundary dispute with India . The charge was the first to emerge in 1959, but it was released in 1959 .
 To accuse India publicly in 1959 of aggressive acts against China was to engage in propaganda . No hint of such accusations had been contained in the 1958 exchange of notes or in the 1956 informal Nehru-Chou En-lai talks .
 India reacted fiercely to Peking’s charge that India was responsible for harboring the Tibetan resistance command center . The Indian press and Parliament were, in April 1959, as yet unaware of the exchange .
 It was during the spring of 1959 that Indian public disapproval of the alien-directed Communist government of Kerala was beginning to erupt in angry public demonstrations throughout that state .
 The President of India was to dismiss Kerala’s government within a few weeks and call for new elections because of the Communists’ inability to maintain order in the face of widespread popular opposition . Kerala was to be dismissed as a result of widespread public opposition .
 Indians could understandably wonder about the location of the command center for Kerala’s Communists .
 Nehru criticized Communists for their implicit disloyalty to India . Nehru himself criticized Indian Communists for being disloyal to India. Nehru later criticized them for their loyalty to the country .
 Dalai Lama's dramatic arrival in India occurred the week before he had been scheduled to participate in the Second National People’s Congress in Peking . The Dalai Lama had been due to attend the congress in China . He was scheduled to travel to India for a week .
 China apparently felt that it had license to use the People's Congress to reciprocate . Having attacked the Indian Parliament for using its floor to make statements hostile to China and thus “interfering in Chinese affairs,” China now feels that it has license to do so .
 Chou En-lai expressed his “deep concern’s over the Dalai Lama . In the keynote speech he expressed his "deep concern" over the Tibetan leader . The Dalai Lama is a controversial figure in China .
 The God-King describes the growing resistance to the Chinese by the Tibetan people . Deplored the Chinese failure to live up to the terms of the 17-Point Agreement .
 He unequivocally denied Chinese charges of abduction and stated categorically that he had left Lhasa and Tibet and come to India of his own free will . He said he had not been abducted by China and that he was not abducted .
 The definitive Chinese criticism of Nehru and India was reserved for an editorial appearing in the May 12, 1949 edition of the Peking Review . The editorial was published in the April 12 of the same month .
 The article summed up Peking’s propaganda case against India in general and against Nehru in particular . The article, entitled “The Revolution in Tibet and Nehru's Philosophy,” was authored by the editorial department of the People's Daily . Peking's propaganda case
 Nehru’s detailed statement on Tibet given before Parliament on April 27 . Nehru explained how India had, by its reaction to events in Tibet, interfered in internal Chinese affairs .
 The editorial specifically attacked Nehru, blaming him personally for India’s attitude . Nehru was the prime minister of India in the 1930s .
 China believed India had not yet rid itself of a British colonial attitude toward Tibet . It also made clear that India had yet to rid itself from a colonial attitude .
 The conviction that New Delhi was still dominated by Western ‘imperialism was at the heart of China’s fear . China placed more understandable the importance China placed on defining its minority doctrine for Tibet .
 Tibet is not a province but an autonomous region of the People’s Republic of China . The big bourgeoisie of India maintains innumerable links with imperialism and is dependent on foreign capital . Tibet is definitely no protectorate .
 By its class nature, the big bourgeoisie has a certain urge for outward expansion . Moreover, by its class . The big . bourgeoisie has an urge for . outward expansion, he says .
 This is why, while it opposes the imperialists’ policy of intervention, it more or less reflects consciously or unconsciously certain influences of imperialist policy . This is because of the influence of the imperialist’s policies, it reflects conscious or unconsciously .
 Peking accused India of adopting a hostile attitude contrary to the spirit of Panch Sheela . But it was parliamentary reaction to the Tibetan crisis that provoked Peking to accuse India of hostile attitude .
 A March 30 speech before Parliament describing his government’s attitude toward granting political asylum to the Dalai Lama had been full of vague circumlocutions . The Dalai Lama has been granted political asylum in Tibet .
 He tried on one hand to appease an angry parliament and on the other to avoid provoking an angry China . He tried to appease the parliament and avoid provoking China .
 The previous Government of India took an expedition to Lhasa under Colonel Younghusband fifty-five years ago . The previous government of India had a visit to the Himalayan state of Tibet .
 With variations we inherited these special . . . privileges when India became independent . We inherited these privileges when we became independent from India .
 "We could not do anything in Tibet either in law, constitutionally or practically," he said . "What I am venturing to say is that the policy we adopted toward Tibet would have been adopted regardless of what China did"
 Had Nehru been there his presence would have exerted a pacifying influence, but he was out of New Delhi that day . Parliament indulged itself in a rare orgy of emotion, but Nehru was not there .
 An adjournment motion criticized the Chinese Embassy for distributing copies of an offensive editorial from the People’s Daily accusing India of harboring the Tibetan resistance headquarters . The motion was frequently used to attack the government .
 Lakshmi Menon, Deputy Minister of External Affairs, spoke for the Indian government in the absence of Nehru . Nehru was assassinated in 1953 .
 A memorandum denying the charge had been sent to Peking on August 2, she said . She added that a memorandum denied the charge was sent to the Chinese capital .
 Parliament's first intimation that the Indian government and the Chinese People’s Republic had officially corresponded on this subject eight months before . This, incidently, was the first hint that the two countries had corresponded over the issue .
 Parliament made clear that India would tolerate neither Peking’s charges nor Chinese aggression against India . The deeper significance of the debate was that Parliament made it clear that . India will tolerate either Peking's charges or Chinese aggression .
 Parliament's expression gave Nehru a clear mandate to take a strong stand against the Chinese . Parliament’s expression also gave him a strong mandate, he said .
 Peking's cold war language had succeeded in arousing India's people and legislators . Peking’s cold war . language had . succeeded in . arousing Indian people, legislators .
 The positions of the antagonists were clear, the battle lines were drawn . The positions were clear; the battlelines were drawn. The battle lines had been drawn .
 The months ahead would see a different kind of cold war -- one which only incidentally involved the EastWest issue . The months would see the months ahead of the war .
 It would be a cold war between the founding partners of Panch Sheela, who had so long hidden their serious and inevitable incompatibility . The two sides would be the first time they had openly clashed .
 The war of words was but an angry accompaniment to more sinister harassment of India, which began soon after the Dalai Lama’s flight from Lhasa . The Dalai Lama was the prime minister of India's ruling state of India .
 China’s first objective was to eliminate Indian rights in Tibet which had been guaranteed by the 1954 Agreement on Trade and Intercourse . The 1954 agreement on trade and intercourse was signed by China and India .
 India and China wanted to promote trade and cultural intercourse between Tibet and India . The agreement, incorporating the famous five principles of peaceful co-existence, had ostensibly been reached .
 New Delhi also complained that transport facilities were denied and unfair restrictions were placed on the movement of Indian Trade Agency personnel . New Delhi has also complained of transport facilities being denied and restrictions placed on Indian Trade agency personnel .
 In July 1959, the Chinese imposed new currency regulations in Tibet which made illegal the traditional acceptance of Indian currency and pegged the value of Tibetan currency 25 percent lower than it had been .
 This was a mortal blow to Indo-Tibetan trade, and overnight many Indian traders were ruined . The loss of trade to the region was a major blow to the Indian trade .
 Many Indians, long resident in Tibet, have a problem of citizenship for many . There also arose a problem for many Indians who have lived in Tibet .
 After the 1959 Lhasa uprising such expatriates were anxious to register as Indians and gain some measure of protection from the hostile Chinese administration . After the uprising, such expats registered as Indians in China .
 They were, however, not even allowed to see the Indian Consul in Lhasa . Extreme pressure was exerted on them to renounce their Indian citizenship .
 Harassment of Indian trade and traders caused Indo-Tibet commerce to wither and die . Harassment forced Indo-tibet traders to stop trade in India .
 The formal name of this office is Alien Affairs Bureau of the Tibet Autonomous Region Preparatory Committee . But more serious were subsequent acts of aggression which destroyed the whole concept of co-existence in the 1954 agreement .
 Panch Sheela called for “mutual respect for each other’s territorial integrity and sovereignty,” but a series of Chinese-instigated border incidents created a crescendo of tension . In the end made a sorry shambles of this doctrine .
 These incidents brought down the whole flimsy facade which had hidden so long two incompatible ideologies . Two irreconcilable points of view, and a fierce rivalry for Asian leadership, were revealed .
 The Indian government had been puzzled and annoyed by Communist China’s publication of maps showing large areas of Indian territory within China . The maps were published by the Communist China .
 Nehru had been assured personally by Chou En-lai in 1954 that these were simply reproductions of old maps which had not yet been revised . Peking’s motives were clearly suspect, Peking's motives were suspect .
 More disquieting had been the Bara Hoti incidents which culminated in Chinese forces establishing a camp on Indian territory in Uttar Pradesh . The Khurnak Fort incident in July 1958 heralded a succession of Chinese intrusions in Kashmir .
 On July 28, 1959 an Indian police detachment carrying out border reconnaissance near Spanggur in the western Pangong Lake area of Ladakh, encountered a force of 25 Chinese soldiers within Indian territory .
 Chinese Foreign Office accused the Indians of intruding into Chinese territory . Claimed the patrol refused to heed warnings to withdraw from the area .
 India officially claimed knowledge of this road in October 1958"" but probably knew of it earlier . India claimed to have known of the road in 1958 but probably did not know of it .
 Clearly implicit in all incidents were major Chinese claims to Indian territory . Clearly implicit were major claims to India territory .
 The Lhasa revolt and the flight of the Dalai Lama to India had introduced a new and dynamic element into Sino-Indian relations . Dalai Lama's flight to India has brought a new dynamic element to the bilateral relations .
 Boundary incidents and cartographic claims must henceforward be viewed by New Delhi in a more serious context, says New Delhi . New Delhi must now consider its claims in a serious context .
 These were the questions which confronted Indian leaders in August 1959, when trouble struck at the opposite end of the border .
 A strong detachment of Chinese troops crossed into India on August 25, at a spot south of Migyitun in the border region of India’s Northeast Frontier Agency .
 According to India, the Chinese force fired without notice on an Indian picket . India says the incident occurred without notice . According to the Indian government, the incident took place without notice of the incident .
 The Chinese detachment then probed deeper and attacked an outpost at Longiju, two miles south of the boundary line . The outpost was attacked by a Chinese detachment two miles from the border .
 The Indian defenders were forced to abandon their outpost in the face of a stronger Chinese force . By the following day the Indian defenders had been forced to leave their outpost .
 This incident provoked Nehru to admit to his people for the first time that China had violated Indian territory . This incident was significant, not only because the first blood was shed in defense of Indian soil, but also because it provoked him to admit it to India .
 ‘fuss and shouting’ ruled out for the moment, but so was parliamentary debate . Parliamentary debate was also ruled out in the wake of the incident .
 India's official policy toward China was nevertheless hardening behind the scenes . India’s official policy towards China was nonetheless hardening .
 In view of the Migyitun-Longju incident and lesser incidents at Khinzemane, located at the western end of the Northeast boundary, the entire Northeast Frontier Agency was placed under military rule . The incident was the first time military rule was imposed on the Northeast Frontier
 Previously it had been administered by the Ministry of External Affairs and policed by the Assam Rifles . Previously, the ministry was not the army, but the army .
 He made clear his country’s view that the Sino-Indian boundary had never been formally delimited, he said . He described China's position on the different sectors of the boundary in dispute .
 "The full significance of nearly ten years of cartographic aggression and five years of sporadic border violations became clear," says the author .
 China is claiming thousands of square miles of territory long considered part of India . China would clearly not hesitate to occupy key parts of its claim by force .
 Chou’s letter not only made claim to Indian soil but by strong implication questioned India's treaty rights and position in Sikkim and Bhutan . Chou also questioned India’Sikkim, Bhutan and Siktim as part of the Bhutanese kingdom .
 China hints that China questions legitimacy of India’s treaty relationships with these two stra128 border states . But this hint that China questioned the legitimacy of these treaty relationships is adequate warning .
 Nehru felt it was necessary to establish that the subject of Sikkim and Bhutan did very much fall within the scope of future discussions . Nehru said Sikkims and Bhutts were "a very important part of the conversation"
 The Bari Hoti border incident of 1954 re-awakened fears which may have been momentarily stilled by the Panch Sheela agreement on Tibet .
 The events following the Lhasa uprising and the flight of the Dalai Lama placed SinoIndian relations on trial . Unmistakably, the events followed the Lhaasa uprising placed China's relations with the Tibetan people on trial. The Dalai Lama fled Tibet in 2009 .
 Chou En-lai’s words, contained in his September 8 letter, marked the end of Panch Sheela or ‘peaceful co-existence’ as a basis for Sino-Indian relations .
 Nehru's estimate of China must have crystallized in Nehru’s mind, Nehru says . It was probably at this point, if not before, that a more realistic estimate of the country must have been made . Nehru: "It was probably the most realistic estimate
 Chou’s message struck an apparent note of conciliation, but words are cheap and his message had no such significance . Chou's message struck conciliatory, but his words were cheap and had no significance .
 Karam Singh, an Indian officer of the Tibet Border Force, and a party of constables on border patrol near Kongka Pass in Ladakh became witnesses and victims of Chinese aggression against India .
 A reconstruction of a serious incident in which they took part shows the very low extent to which China “valued India’s friendship” and explains why the already aroused Indian public reacted as violently as it did . The reconstruction of the incident shows the low extent of China ‘
 Nehru’s remarks were made on September 12, 1959 in reply to a debate on India-China relations in the Lok Sabha . The Kongka Pass incident provides a further glimpse of Communist China's cold war techniques, says Nehru .
 Kongka Pass lies forty to fifty miles within Indian territory . It is at the southern end of the disputed Aksai Chin bulge of Ladakh which China claims . China had earlier constructed a motorable road through it .
 A force of about sixty constables, commanded by Karam Singh and belonging to the India-Tibet Border Force, set out on October 21, 1959 to investigate the disappearance of a patrol which had been reported missing .
 Karam Singh and a detachment of twenty men followed them while the main party remained behind . The horses were believed to be the horses of Chinese intruders . The main party was left behind .
 Suddenly a Chinese soldier was spotted on a hill above the party signaling the group to surrender . The group was surrounded by a group of Chinese soldiers . The party was forced to surrender by the Chinese soldier .
 Shouts of protest from Karam Singh were met by a volley of fire, forcing the patrol to scramble for cover and fire in self-defense . The incident occurred in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Ali Raza, one of the Indian constables, made good his escape and notified the main force left behind . The incident happened in the early hours of the morning . The Indian constable was shot dead in the head .
 Karam Singh surrendered to the Chinese rather than risk further casualties . Toward evening heavier Chinese fire killed some of the beleaguered Indians .
 Five of us were made to carry the dead body of a Chinese soldier who had been killed . Five of them carried the body of the dead soldier .
 From this place I and Constable Rudra Man were made to carry heavy loads . "From this place, I and Constance Rudra man were made for carrying heavy loads," said the author of the book .
 We were exhausted and were finding it difficult to walk with this heavy load . But we were repeatedly prodded by rifle butts to move on . We were forced to carry on with the heavy load but we were eventually forced to walk .
 "We reached the Chinese Kongka La post at about 2:00 A.M., on the 22nd of October 1959," says the crew .
 We were all put together in a pit six feet deep, seven feet wide and fifteen feet long, normally used for storing vegetables . The pit was six-feet deep and seven-feet wide and 15 feet long .
 It was covered with a tarpaulin which left several openings through which ice-cold breezes penetrated . Ice-cold air can be seen through the gaps in the air in the Arctic Circle .
 "The intensity of the cold and our conditions of living were more than sufficient torture to demoralize us," she says . The intensity of cold and living conditions were "more than sufficient ... torture," she adds .
 By then I and three constables were suffering from frostbite and our repeated requests for medical attention and hot water were disregarded . By then we had been left with frostbite . We repeatedly requested medical attention, hot water and medical attention .
 On October 24 Karam Singh was shown the corpses of the nine Indian constables killed by Chinese fire . He was asked to identify the bodies of the constables .
 On the following day the Chinese began a twelve-day course of intensive interrogation in an effort to make him admit that the Indians had fired first and provoked the incident . The Chinese began to interrogate him for 12 days before he was released .
 As soon as I came to the point that firing was opened by the Chinese, their senior officer present became wild and shouted back that it was incorrect and that I must confess that the Indians fired first . The senior officer at the scene of the incident became wild .
 I refused to accept this despite repeated and constant threats that I would be shot dead. "I refused to . accept this. despite repeated . repeated threats that . would be . shot dead," he said. "Despite repeated . constant threats"
 "They made me say that I could not judge as to who fired first," she said . "I could not be able to judge whether or not they fired first"
 The Chinese tried to make Singh and others among the Indian prisoners admit they had known before the incident took place that they had intruded into Chinese territory . The Chinese also tried to get Singh and other prisoners to say they knew they had invaded Chinese territory before the attack .
 The Patrol Leader was then pressured to acknowledge that the Indian Border Force had never before patrolled this particular area . The Border Force was then forced to admit it had never patrolled the area .
 China attempted to prove its ownership of the disputed area by showing that India had never patrolled nor otherwise exercised authority in it . This later became more understandable when, during the 1960 SinoIndian boundary discussions, China tried to prove that India hadn't patrolled it .
 Karam Singh reported that during the interrogation “the Chinese officer lost his temper and threatened to take out his pistol and shoot ” for refusing to admit that the gesticulating Chinese soldier had tried to warn the Indian party to leave during the first encounter .
 The Chinese were anxious to frame the testimony in such a way as to make it appear that the Indians, not the Chinese, had provoked the incident . The testimony was framed in such an attempt to make the incident appear to have been provoked .
 "By this time I was almost frozen and mentally and physically exhausted because of cold, persistent interrogation, intimidation, threats, angry shoutings and lack of sleep," says the author .
 "In this condition I was compelled to sign the statement recorded by the Chinese. In this condition, I was forced to sign a statement," he said . The statement was recorded by China and was recorded in Beijing .
 At the end of this interrogation the Chinese then brought all the other captured personnel before me and read out the statement and several photographs were taken . Several photographs were then taken .
 The interrogation continued on October 27 and 28 when the Chinese extracted order of battle information concerning the Indian border forces . The interrogations continued to be carried out in India .
 On October 28 all of the Indian prisoners were taken to the Chang Chenmo River where photos were taken by their captors as they washed the bodies of dead colleagues in accordance with Indian custom .
 Photos were taken also of prisoners being issued with warm clothing, padded in the Chinese style . The prisoners were given warm clothing .
 Karam Singh stated that on the 29th he and others among the prisoners were taken to the original scene of the incident and there forced to re-enact the events which had taken place .
 The incident was staged according to the Chinese version of events while photographs were taken which could be used as evidence in support of the Chinese allegations that the Indian patrol provoked the incident .
 A capsule summation of India’s ideological errors was included in an indoctrination lecture delivered to the Indian prisoners on November 7 .
 This little talk, delivered in the biting cold of the high Karakorums to a huddle of miserable Indian policemen, speaks volumes for Peking's attitude toward India .
 Peking has totally rejected India’s bona fides as a neutral . Western world has fretted over Indian neutralism with its occasional bias in favor of Communist positions . Peking is blinded by a rigid and doctrinaire ideology .
 China branded India a “running dog of Anglo-American imperialism” It was expressing a real conviction, not simply mouthing propaganda to shame India into drawing closer to its orbit .
 Constable Makhan Lal was last seen by Karam Singh in Chinese custody lying wounded on the banks of the Chang Chenmo River . Lal was never returned nor accounted for . Lal's body was never found .
 China rejected India’s strong and carefully documented protests on the Kongka Pass episode . China rejected the strong protests against the move . The episode was filmed in China and India .
 Red China had the evidence it needed to prove that India, not China, was guilty of scrapping Panch Sheela . Producing the forced and fabricated confessions of the captured Indians, the Chinese People’s Liberation Army has a tradition of treating prisoners magnanimously,’
 The Kongka Pass incident brought Indian fury and frustration to a new pitch of intensity . Chou En-lai is the prime minister of China's ruling regime .
 China’s callous disregard for Indian life at Kongka Pass aroused the people to a greater extent than the more ominous political significance of the act ever could have . The people were outraged by the callous disrespect of Indian life .
 The frustration of being helpless to oppose China’s aggression was vented in increased press attacks against Nehru and Defense Minister Krishna Menon . The frustration was increased in press attacks on Nehru .
 Certain Indian leaders suggested breaking relations with China . Rajagopalachari, India’s respected elder statesman, was among those urging outright alignment with the West .
 Nehru was forced to defend his government's policy . Confronted with strong public, press and parliamentary criticism, Nehru defended his government .
 He found vindication of peaceful co-existence in a momentary lessening of international tensions .
 The U-2 incident was soon to occur and be used by Khrushchev to wreck the Paris conference . Unfortunately the incident would make Nehru’s optimism premature .
 On October 23, the two countries had reached final agreement on a long-pending boundary dispute in East Pakistan . Nehru mentioned that Pakistan’s new President, Ayub Khan, had expressed a desire to find peaceful solutions to as many disagreements as possible .
 Ayub Khan’s opinion it would simply mean defending their respective frontiers and the frontiers of each other in the case of aggression . Khan: In his opinion, defending their frontiers would mean defending each other .
 Even with the new stimulus of Chinese belligerency, the two countries could not find common cause . The two countries failed to find a common cause in the Middle East .
 Realistically, no common defense agreement could be reached until India and Pakistan solve Kashmir dispute . Kashmir dispute has been a major stumbling block for the two countries .
 Ayub Khan admitted in October that joint defense would have application against Afghanistan and the USSR as well as China . Joint defense would apply to Afghanistan, USSR and China, he said .
 New Delhi’s need for Soviet friendship as a protection from China, this would obviously be unacceptable, but the problem was even more basic . New Delhi needs to have a strong ally with the Soviet Union to protect itself from China .
 Nehru could not join in a military alliance with Pakistan or any other country without repudiating his ideological opposition to collective security . Nehru: "Nehru's ideological opposition was that he would not join any military alliance"
 Prime Minister was not yet ready to accept a doctrine to which he was so totally opposed . The Prime Minister said he was 'totally opposed' to such a doctrine .
 Nehru still hoped that China would withdraw and negotiate an honorable settlement on terms acceptable to India . Nehru: "I hope that China will withdraw" Nehru hoped that it would be an honorable and honorable settlement .
 He believed that Khrushchev would ultimately bring pressure on China to abandon its aggressive policy toward the subcontinent .
 Nehru found solace in continuing Soviet cordiality and could rationalize from it that Panch Sheela was still a valid policy toward the Communist world despite Peking's performance .
 Chinese activities on our border have nothing to do with world strategy of communism or communism itself or Chinese Communism . China's activities on its border are not related to the world strategy or communism .
 Nehru believed China was simply a periodically delinquent nation and not currently the product of a compelling ideology . Nehru thus believed China to be simply a delinquent nation . He said China is not currently a product of ideology .
 Moscow's embarrassment was nine days before the Kongka Pass incident was mentioned in the Russian press . Moscow was embarrassed by the delay of nine days .
 On October 29, Tass finally broke the story, printing side-by-side the Indian and Chinese versions without comment .
 Khrushchev, speaking before the Soviet Parliament, called for a peaceful solution . Two days later Soviet Premier Khrushche called for the peaceful solution.
 China helped secure the vital route from western Tibet to Sinkiang . While it may have had little strategic value, it was enormously valuable for China .
 China's relationship with China in Sinkiang was still unsteady . For this reason, if no other, it should also have been of considerable interest to the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union was still at the heart of China's relations with China .
 Moscow volunteered neutral commentary on a situation involving another Communist country . There had been previous occasions when the Soviet Union showed displeasure with Chinese actions by a lack of comment and support .
 A Soviet diplomat in Switzerland was more explicit in a news interview on December 18 . The diplomat said the move was a violation of the law in Switzerland .
 He referred to Chinese activity along the Indian boundary as “more than just untimely” and added that the Soviet government was not very happy about the situation . He said the Soviet Union was not happy with the situation in the region .
 Nehru counted on the Soviet Union to exercise influence on China in India’s favor, he says . Nehru ignored the possibility of just the opposite occurring .
 Peking was resentful that Khrushchev planned to meet President Eisenhower at Camp David in October . Peking may have been determined to deprive the Soviet leader of any mandate to discuss Far Eastern affairs .
 The Soviet leader’s objective in seeing Eisenhower had been to lessen East-West tensions aggravated by the highly charged Berlin crisis . Eisenhower's objective was to lessen tensions .
 Khrushchev's retreat on Berlin at Camp David was more alarming to Peking than the doctrinal heresy implicit in his retreat . Peking feared that the Soviet leader and the American President had made important decisions pertaining to Far Eastern problems without prior reference to the Chinese .
 Khrushchev sought Chinese acceptance of the ‘two China’ thesis and the removal of Taiwan as a point of East-West tension . China was later to complain that Khruschev had unashamedly sought Chinese accept of the 'two China' thesis .
 The Soviet Union abrogated its nuclear assistance treaty with China soon after the Camp David talks . Even more provocative was the Soviet Union’s unilateral abrogation of its nuclear aid treaty with the China .
 Khrushchev’s policy of reducing tensions was a reduction of Chinese power . Peking could reason that the price of the policy was to reduce Chinese power, says Peking .
 President Eisenhower’s genuine concern for India must have iven Nehru comfort in this time of crisis . Eisenhower's sympathetic reaction to India's need for massive economic assistance must have been sympathetic . President Eisenhower's genuine concern  for India .
 China suddenly came forward with a plan for easing the tension which it had created . China has a plan to ease tension with the US .
 Chou En-lai proposed that the armed forces of China and India each withdraw twenty kilometers from the McMahon Line in the east and from the line “up to which each side exercises actual control” in the west .
 Peking signaled a shift of tactics by Peking, Peking says . Pretense of conciliation and negotiation would replace border intimidation, she says . This signals a shift in tactics, she adds .
 It was to be negotiation from strength from strength and negotiation with the benefit of possession . But it was not to be negotiated from strength, it was negotiation from a position of possession with the advantage of possession.
 Nehru recognized and commented informally that the proposal by Peking for demilitarizing the Indian-Chinese frontier would not be advantageous to India . Nehru noted that Peking's proposal would not benefit India .
 Chou's formula would have made India’s defense of Ladakh more difficult and would have ceded the strategic area of Aksai Chin to China . In fact, it would have led to the loss of strategic area in the region .
 The Indian Prime Minister proposed a suspension of border patrols by both sides . In the Northeast the Indian PM has proposed a suspended border patrols .
 The Indian Prime Minister also rejected Chou’s suggestion that they meet together to discuss their differences . Chou also rejected the idea of meeting with Chou to discuss differences .
 China began talks with Nepal, Burma and later with Pakistan aimed at settling by negotiation long-standing boundary disputes with these countries . As part of its new tactic, China has also begun talks with Burma, Burma, Pakistan .
 Peking’s actions were to isolate India from its neighbors and portray it as the only neighboring country unwilling to negotiate its differences . An important reason for Peking's actions and the particular timing of them was to isolate India, say experts .
 Agreement was reached with Nepal to negotiate its boundary of more than five hundred miles on October 28 . Nepal’s Minister of Development, Dr. Dr. Bhadeade, said the Nepal-Nepalese border agreement was reached . Nepal is the largest country in the world and
 Tulsi Giri obtained as sweetener promises of further economic assistance for Nepal . Giri promised to provide more economic assistance to Nepal . Tulsi has been Nepal's prime minister since 2008 .
 Burma signed a treaty of non-aggression as well as a boundary agreement . Burma reversed an earlier refusal to sign a treaty with the West . Burma signed the treaty three months after it was signed .
 The Chinese exerted strong pressure for agreements which neither country could indefinitely resist . In the case both of Nepal and of Burma, the Chinese had exerted strong pressures .
 Burma, two years earlier, had suffered major incursions by China not unlike those which took place on Indian soil in 1959 . Like India, Burma, both countries had long been victims of border incidents .
 Peking saw in its new pact with Burma “a stunning blow to the United States” Peking may also have believed that the agreement helped to counteract the effects in Asia of the American-Japanese Mutual Security Pact .
 China saw in its treaty with Burma as a means of encouraging India to negotiate . But more importantly, China saw it as a way to encourage India to talk with Burma .
 Marshal Voroshilov was heading a high-ranking Soviet delegation to participate in India’s Tenth Anniversary celebration . The arrival in New Delhi on January 20, 1960, introduced an impressive and significant Soviet presence at this critical time .
 Nehru hailed the Soviet Union’s “striving for peace,” certainly found the visit helpful and timely . Nehru, who pointedly hailed the visit, said the visit was timely and helpful .
 Khrushchev made informal visit to India three weeks later . But of much greater significance was the visit by the Soviet Union's Premier Khrushchell .
 This was interpreted by most Indians as a direct reaction to Chinese pressure on India . It was widely hoped and expected that the Soviet Premier would exercise a moderating influence on Chou .
 Nehru: "I see no bridge between the Chinese position and ours" Nehru said in Parliament in Parliament on February 12 . Khrushchev: "No bridge between China and India. I see no bridges"
 Indian Prime Minister denied that there had been a reversal of his stand against negotiating India’s boundary .
 Nehru’s differentiation between a “meeting’ with Chou and “negotiations” with him was difficult to accept . Nehru: “Meeting” was a ‘meeting with Chou’ and ‘negotiation�
 The government denied emphatically that Khrushchev had anything to do with Nehru’s change of mind . The government denies emphatically that the government denied it .
 Nehru wanted the letter handed personally to Chou by the Indian Ambassador to China . Letter inviting Chou was drafted and signed six days before the Soviet Premier had arrived . Delivery and thus the announcement was delayed until after Khrushchev’s departure .
 Despite this nimble explanation, there is still a temptation to conclude that—far from being used by Nehru to exert pressure on Peking—Khrushchev was used by Chou .
 Nehru could ill afford to resist Khrushchev’s entreaties to negotiate . Nehru still believed the Soviet leader to be his main lever against Peking .
 A summit conference would serve as a propaganda forum for China to posture in a falsely conciliatory light . Regardless of fine distinctions between “meetings” and “negotiations,” Chou had won his objective .
 Chou En-lai’s visit had been set by recently concluded Chinese boundary agreements with Burma and Nepal . The stage was set for the visit after recently concluded boundary agreements .
 The implications to India were clear; by reaching pacts with India’s neighbors China could more easily place on India the onus of intransigence . The implications of the pacts to India are clear, say experts .
 Peking's prerequisites for negotiations were unacceptable and prejudiced India’s case from the start, but this could be obscured by Red propaganda . Chou could proceed with the summit gesture in an aura of right and reasonableness .
 China had everything to gain and nothing to lose by the forthcoming New Delhi talks . China had nothing to gain from the forthcoming talks . The talks will be held in New Delhi, New Delhi .
 At the time of the Nehru-Chou meeting Peking set forth definitively and with clarity its true doctrinal position on peaceful coexistence . Peking .
 This made a mockery of any Chinese effort to talk out its differences with India . This made an attempt to deal with India's differences with China, it said .
 In a series of newspaper articles, Communist China served notice that it would support and foster revolutions throughout the world by armed uprisings where necessary .
 The public atmosphere in New Delhi was as chilling as Peking’s doctrinal pronouncement . ‘The public atmosphere’ in Delhi is chilling as it is chilling,’ says Peking .
 An estimated five thousand Indians, chanting in parody “Chou En-lai—hai, hai,”* marched to Nehru’s residence to protest the imminent meeting .
 At a mass rally organized by the political opposition Nehru was warned to be firm in his discussions with Chou . The press still railed at the Government for going ahead with talks before China relinquished its territory .
 Neither side would modify its stand to a point acceptable to the other . Neither side of the two would modify their stand .
 It is also a parody of the earlier slogan “Hindi-Chini, bai, ba, bi, baa,” which means ‘Chinese and Indians are brothers,’ a slogan used during the period of good relations between India and China
 The resulting boundary discussions of 1960 represented an effort to find firm enough ground on which to begin serious negotiations toward a settlement . In 1960, the boundary discussions were a push for a settlement with the United States .
 It was an act of good faith even though India never had much hope that it would succeed . It was a good act of faith, even though it was never expected to succeed . India had little hope that India would succeed, but it did succeed .
 India’s pessimism was justified; firm ground was not found . As it turned out, India's pessimism is justified, says Ravi Agrawal .
 Bilateral discussion in the hands of China is but another propaganda technique, a cynical tactic in its cold war with India . But, more discouragingly, the boundary discussions and the sum of diplomatic correspondence which preceded them revealed that bilateral discussions are but propaganda techniques .
 The discussions provided China with still another medium by which to publicize its spurious case .
 China gained all too much legitimacy for irrelevant, pseudo-legal or completely fallacious arguments in support of its claims . China gained the legitimacy for its claims in the 1960s, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Peking had its reasons for claiming more than 50,000 square miles of Indian territory . Peking claimed more than half of the Indian territory in China .
 The case is based partly on Communist doctrine and partly on more traditional Han expansionist tendencies . But the reasons bear little relationship to the pseudo-legal case argued with India .
 Only a small part could serve as a legitimate basis for meaningful boundary negotiations with India . Only small part of India's land could be used as a basis for negotiations with Pakistan .
 Chinese negotiators tried to influence the structure of debate so as to favor its side . Chinese negotiators try to influence structure of the debate to favor their side .
 Talks were framed in such a way that the burden of proof fell on India . Recognizing that its own claimed alignment could not be supported, the discussions were framed as such as India .
 China sought to prove that no valid boundary delimitation exists, India was made to prove its boundary alignment, inch by inch . Whereas China sought principally to prove no valid boundaries exists .
 Peking's logic seemed to insist that until India was willing to negotiate a settlement formally delimiting a common boundary, it would have to respect China’s unilaterally determined boundary . The logic was distorted and wholly inequitable .
 A serious disagreement took place between the Chinese and Indian representatives in determining which sectors of the boundary should be discussed . A serious and very significant disagreement was also discussed .
 Bhutan asked India to represent Bhutan on matters pertaining to its interests in Tibet . But China refused to acknowledge the competence of the officials to discuss it .
 This area is beyond India’s de facto jurisdiction since it falls within Pakistan-held territory north of the Pakistan-Indian cease-fire line in Kashmir . The area is currently beyond the de facto Indian jurisdiction . This area has fallen within Pakistan held by India and is within the Pakistan
 For China to have discussed it with India would have been to acknowledge the latter's claim as the more valid one in the chronic India-Pakistan dispute over Kashmir . For India to acknowledge its claim is more valid than that of Pakistan .
 China did not want to do this lest it lose its option to use the Kashmir dispute for its own purposes in its quarrel with India . Clearly China wanted to avoid losing its option of using Kashmir dispute in its own interests .
 Nepal, Bhutan, Sikkhim, Ladakh and the Northeast Frontier Agency of Assam are the five fingers . Nepal and Bhutan are Nepal . Bhutan is Bhutan and Sikkim are Nepal and Ladakh . The five fingers of Nepal are Nepal.
 Now that the palm has been restored to China, the fingers should go with it . The fingers should also go along with the palm of the palm .
 Communist China has sought to exploit Nepal as a weapon against India . Using alternately pressure and largess, the Chinese government has exploited the country .
 Traditionally a shield of protection against intrusion from the north, Nepal has become a vulnerable flank . Nepal has instead become a vulnerability flank. Traditionally, Nepal is now vulnerable to the north .
 Tibet is an irredentist territory, one of the “five fingers” which should be attached to the Tibet “palm” according to Chinese propaganda . Tibet is one of China's five fingers, according to the country's propaganda .
 Should Nepal fall under Chinese control the entire Gangetic plain of India would be exposed . What little meaning the Himalayan barrier has left in the jet age would be lost if Nepal falls under China .
 Nepal's precarious existence between two giants is once again threatened, but this time by a modern colossus whose compelling ideology is aggression . There is no counterbalancing power strong enough to protect it, unhappily, according to the author .
 A century of safety in the protective shadow of Great Britain came to an end with Indian independence . India became independent from the shadow of the British Empire .
 India inherited from Britain the same need for a buffer area along the southern slopes of the Himalayas . However, it did not inherit the circumstances permitting continued control of Nepal's external affairs . India inherited the need for an area of buffer area from Britain .
 As a result there exists a weak but independent country, chronically resentful of Indian half-measures to influence it . China is unable to resist indefinitely full measures which will certainly take to do so .
 Nepal's history is that of a secluded, inaccessible kingdom . Until recently, Nepal has enjoyed the luxury of isolation . Nepal is now the most isolated kingdom in the world .
 Nehru addresses Indian troops during the 1962 Chinese invasion of India . Nehru was the prime minister of India during the Chinese invasion .
 Nothing in its little-known history would have prepared it for this experience, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 He is said to have massacred fifty-five nobles on a single occasion to eliminate opposition . Ruthless in his drive for power, he was said to be ruthless .
 Several attempts were made on his life, but his uncanny sense of survival saved him in each instance .
 According to one story he had the foresight to stuff mattresses in the village well so when henchmen of the royal heir sought to murder him in the traditional way by throwing him down it, he landed softly .
 By 1846 Jang Bahadur had consolidated his power in Nepal and had begun a new dynasty of hereditary ‘Rana’ prime ministers . The royal line of kings remained in the background as powerless figureheads .
 NepaleseBritish relations had been bad since the rise of the Gurkha dynasty under Prithvi Narayan Shah in the 1760’s . Realizing the necessity of being on friendly terms with his powerful southern neighbor, Jang Bahadur sought to improve Nepales
 As a peace gesture he offered the British six regiments of Gurkha troops for use against the Sikhs who had been harassing them both . The British offered the Gurkhas to use against Sikhs .
 The offer was declined, and a period of close Nepal-India relations began . Although the offer was refused, his gesture accomplished its purpose . Nepal and India are now close allies .
 In 1854 Gurkha soldiers from Nepal—always warlike and aggressive—again attacked Tibet . In Tibet, Tibet was attacked by the Gurkhas of Nepal .
 Peace was restored with a treaty signed in 1856, which provided the basis of Tibet-Nepal relations for the next century . Peace was finally restored with the treaty signed .
 Tibet was required to pay annual tribute to Kathmandu . According to the terms of this agreement, Tibet was needed to pay an annual tribute . Tibet has been in talks with Nepal since 2008 .
 As recently as 1908 the Chinese Amban in Lhasa reasserted China’s claim of suzerainty over Nepal on the basis of the preamble . As recently . 1908, the Chinese . Amban . in L.hasa . reasserts China
 If a true state of suzerainty existed at all, it had no practical validity after 1912, by which time Chinese troops had been driven from Tibet . China had driven its troops from Tibet in 1912 .
 Nepal viewed its special relationship as a phenomenon relating only to the Manchu emperors—not to China . Like Tibet, Nepal viewed the relationship as an issue relating to the Chinese emperors . Tibet viewed its relationship with China as a matter of history .
 Nepal’s leadership has been Hindu—not Buddhist—never felt the same religious link with the Manchus nor had a patronpriest relationship . For a while, Nepal recognized a Manchu suzerain on the basis of political expediency .
 It found the Chinese Emperor to be a useful control on British domination . The Chinese Emperor was a valuable control of the British Empire .
 Nepal's status and that of Tibet was close enough to make the government in Kathmandu apprehensive when it found a strong and modern Chinese army permanently encamped along its northern border .
 India and Nepal hurriedly concluded two new pacts in order to discourage Chinese aggression and to forestall Peking’s claims, India said .
 The first treaty of friendship was signed on July 31, 1950, in Nepal . The first was a treaty of sovereignty guaranteeing Nepal’s sovereignty and calling for consultations in the event either country was threatened .
 Trade agreement with India guaranteed free transit through India of goods whose destination was Nepal . The second was a trade agreement concluded in October which guaranteed free trade through India .
 Autocratic rule of the hereditary Rana prime ministers in Kathmandu had become an anachronism in the subcontinent . With the introduction of freedom and democracy in India, the autocratic rule was an out-of-control .
 The anti-feudal propaganda seeped through the passes from Tibet further nourished the discontent of the Nepalese . Tibet was a major source of discontent in Nepal .
 New Delhi had become convinced that the continuance of reactionary Rana rule made Nepal dangerously vulnerable to Chinese Communist influence . But, perhaps most important of all, New Delhi was convinced that it made Nepal vulnerable to China .
 If it does not come, forces that will ultimately disrupt freedom itself will be created and encouraged . If it doesn't come, they will be creating and encouraged, says President Obama .
 He found sanctuary in the Indian Embassy in Kathmandu until he could be safely evacuated to New Delhi by air . He was evacuated by air by air and found sanctuary at the Indian embassy .
 The Rana government was forced to relinquish power and negotiate a peace deal . Pressed hard by the insurgents, the government forced to hand over power .
 The Government of India, which clearly favored the insurgents, acted as mediator . The King's backing of the King had been obvious .
 King Tribhuvan returned to Kathmandu on February 15, 1950 to preside over a Council of Ministers of his choosing . With the full blessing of the Indian government, he was able to return to the country .
 New Delhi could rationalize its only slightly disguised intervention in Nepalese affairs by its compelling need to deny Nepal to the Chinese . New Delhi needs to deny the Chinese access to the country, says New Delhi .
 Singh refused to abandon his insurrection and with a group of armed followers continued to defy the new government in Kathmandu . Singh was finally subdued with the help of Indian troops in Nepal . Singh claimed that Nepal’s revolution had been betrayed .
 During this very brief interlude Singh became something of a legendary figure in Nepal . Singh was a popular musician in Nepal during his early days .
 He captured the imagination of a newly liberated people hungry for heroes . His heroics were captured in the hands of a new generation of people .
 His nationalist fervor—real or feigned, found response in a people who disliked Indian paternalism as much as Rana autocracy . His personality was dynamic and his nationalism found response .
 Singh was not forgotten when he escaped into Tibet with his band of followers and found political asylum in Red China . Singh was thus not forgotten in Tibet when he fled into Tibet .
 The Indian Panch Sheela agreement with China on Tibet concluded in 1954 made Nepal’s need to renegotiate its own relationship with China more urgent . The Indian agreement with Tibet on Tibet was concluded in 1953 .
 Until 1912 Nepal had considered Tibet as being under Chinese suzerainty . Even after 1912 the treaty negotiated under Chinese auspices still regulated Nepal’s relationships with Tibet .
 Chou En-lai reportedly agreed to continued Indian paramountcy in Nepal . But made clear China's intention to establish diplomatic relations with Kathmandu .
 Koirala certainly had the full benefit of Nehru’s private as well as public views on this question . Nehru met with the Indian Prime Minister both before and after the latter's trip to Peking .
 Direct discussions were held in Kathmandu between Nepalese and Chinese government representatives during July 1955 .
 This was but a few months after Tribhuvan had died and was succeeded by his son, Mahendra Bir Bikram Shah Dev .
 On August 1, 1955, an agreement was signed providing for the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and Nepal . The agreement was based on Panch Sheela—the five principles of co-existence . The treaty would be negotiated based on the five principles Panch sheela .
 It is likely India played the mediator's role in arranging for the return of Nepal’s ‘hero’ rather than to see him exposed to continuing Chinese influence in Peking or exploited by the Chinese .
 Indian observers could not be sure of the extent of China’s secret backing . But he was still an enigma to Indian observers, who could not know the extent .
 The appointment of Tanka Prasad Acharya as Prime Minister in 1956 ushered in a period characterized by a highly defensive attitude toward India . The appointment ushered in an era characterized by an extremely defensive attitude to India .
 Acharya’s party newspaper Samaj, for example, ran a series of editorials critical of India . Acharya's party party Samaj ran editorials that criticised India .
 Another went so far as to impugn India’s allegiance to peaceful co-existence, claiming that India at least did not practice this doctrine in its relationship with Nepal . Another claimed that India did not do this in Nepal .
 The specter of Chinese representation throughout Nepal was a disturbing one . The need for Nepal and China to determine anew their relationship in Tibet was recognized as a logical corollary of the Sino-Indian agreement of 1954 .
 Direct telegraphic communications would be established between Kathmandu and Lhasa . The agreement also specified that direct telegraphy communications would also be established .
 New Delhi need not serve as way station in the conduct of Nepal-China relations . This meant that, henceforward, New Delhi would not be a way station . New Delhi must not be the way station for Nepal and China relations, it said .
 Prime Minister Tanka Prasad Acharya returned from a visit to China in October 1956 with a promise of substantial aid . Acharya was prime minister of India in 1956 .
 Nepal was to receive 60,000,000 rupees in budgetary assistance and machinery with ‘no strings” attached . New Delhi’s consternation Nepal was due to receive about $12,000k in assistance . Nepal was also to receive $12k in budgetary
 With Nepal’s first national elections scheduled to be held in less than a year, the cash grant (approximately one-third of the total) particularly disturbed the Indian officials . They feared that the funds might be used for strictly party purposes to perpetuate a regime antagonistic to India .
 New Delhi reacted by sending President Rajendra Prasad on a state visit to Kathmandu in October . New Delhi has sent a prime minister to Nepal on a visit to Nepal in October.
 Singh’s visit to New Delhi and the surprisingly cordial reception given him there . Singh was greeted with a warm welcome in New Delhi . Singh is the first Indian premier minister to visit the Indian capital since 2009 .
 Singh arrived while Prime Minister Tanka Prasad Acharya was still negotiating in Peking . The timing of Singh's arrival was also significant since he arrived in China while the PM was negotiating with China .
 There was much speculation in New Delhi as to the meaning of highly partisan political speeches critical of Acharya given by Singh . Singh's private talks with high Indian government officials are thought to have been behind the speeches .
 In a public address he declared that Nepal’s role was that of a neutral which should help tie the bonds of friendship between India and China . In a speech, he said that Nepal should be a neutral neutral in the world .
 This was a euphemistic way of saying that Nepal would profit by China’s new propinquity and use it to lessen Indian influence . This was an attempt to make it easier for Nepal to profit from China's move to Nepal .
 Chou En-lai visited Nepal during the last week in January 1957 . He was conscious of the importance of the timing of the visit .
 He called the Nepalese “blood brothers’ of the Chinese’s . He called them ‘blood brothers,’ a reference to the fact that many of the Nepalalese are racially akin to the Tibetans .
 This could be interpreted as a pointed reminder to India that friendship and forbearance toward China was the wisest policy . This could also be interpreted by India as a reminder that friendship is the best policy .
 Chou’s emphasis on Afro-Asian solidarity could also have been calculated to deprecate the U.S. aid efforts in Nepal . Chou: ‘Afro-Asia solidarity’ is a sign of solidarity with Afro Asia .
 The United States aid mission was first sent to Nepal in 1951 . The U.S. aid mission brought the American presence to China’s border .
 It is likely that Peking took advantage of this program to justify its own program and rationalize for India's benefit China’s economic penetration .
 He disapproved of the recently concluded SinoNepalese agreement on Tibet . He gave his blessing to the continued recruitment of Gurkha soldiers in Nepal by both the Indian and British armies .
 Chinese influence continued to infiltrate across the long common border . China is one of the most populous countries in the world, with the majority of the population .
 Many of the Nepalese in the frontier areas found access to Tibetan market places easier than those in Nepal . In certain of the more remote areas the authority of the central government had traditionally been weak .
 The Raja of Mustang revolt in May 1957 was symptomatic of the control problems faced in Kathmandu . Episodes such as the revolt by the Raja were symptomatic of the problems faced .
 Tibetan uprising in 1959 created a situation dangerous to Nepal as well as to India . The Tibetan uprising created a dangerous situation for Nepal and India . Tibetans were killed by the uprising .
 Widespread press reports that China was massing troops along the Nepal border may have been exaggerated in the confusion of the times . But they increased the tension in both Kathmandu and New Delhi .
 On November 27, 1959, Nehru climaxed a long foreign policy debate in Parliament by a dramatic pledge to defend Nepal against aggression . Nehru concluded the debate by pledging to defend his country against aggression in a dramatic speech .
 Singh as Prime Minister, asserted that Nepal would seek help from the United Nations rather than from India in the event of an attack by China . Singh as PM, he said, that the country would seek U.N. help in event of attack .
 Koirala described India and China as both good friends of his country . Ignoring reports of Chinese border violations, he described them as 'good friends of India and friends'
 In midDecember a Nepalese parliamentary delegation toured India as a goodwill gesture, and a month later Prime Minister Koirala himself visited New Delhi at Nehru’s invitation .
 The joint communiqué issued at the conclusion of the visit was significantly devoid of any reference to joint defense . Despite his refusal to side with India in the latter’s dispute with China, Koirala received from India at this time 180,000,000 rupees .
 Chinese officials assured him that China had only the friendliest intentions toward Nepal . Chinese officials told him that Nepal has only the best intentions toward China .
 Two agreements called for a scientific demarcation of the China-Nepal boundary . Of more substance than such platitudes, the agreements were two agreements .
 Peking assured Nepal that the latter’s traditional border would not be disturbed . Peking: Peking has assured Nepal the latter's traditional border won’t be disturbed.
 In this agreement both parties also promised to keep armed personnel out of a frontier zone extending twelve and a half miles on each side of the traditional boundary .
 China's motive in reaching agreement to delimit its boundary with Nepal on eve of Chou En-lai’s ‘summit’ meeting with Nehru on the Sino-Indian boundary question was clearly to keep the pressure on India to negotiate .
 This sum is nearly as much as that which which India granted Nepal two and a half months earlier . India also granted Nepal the same amount of money as India did two years ago . Nepal has been granted $1.5 billion by India .
 Koirala’s spring tours had been very profitable and for the moment at least neutralism seemed to pay . For the moment, it seems to pay for neutralism .
 Koirala stopped short of signing a non-aggression pact despite China's efforts to promote one . Koiral stopped short on signing an agreement despite Chinese efforts to sign one .
 The Sino-Nepal treaty of 1956 included ‘mutual non-aggression” as one of the five points of co-existence . Such an agreement would have been redundant in view of the 1956 treaty of Sino and Nepal .
 The principal reason behind Koirala’s refusal to sign a new non-aggression pact was a disagreement over the ownership of Mount Everest . But the principal reason for the refusal was a dispute over Mount Everest's ownership of the mountain .
 By claiming the world’s highest peak, Chou generated a highly emotion-charged reaction in Kathmandu . Chou claimed the world's highest peak in Nepal .
 He was flown to a remote palace in the Pokhara Valley where public hostility was not visible . Soon thereafter he was flown out of the country .
 A Chinese-Soviet mountaineering expedition reached the top of Everest by way of the difficult north slope . Peking’s claim to half the summit was announced on May 19 .
 Reports in June 1960 that one border patrol officer had been killed and fifteen soldiers captured by the Chinese in the troublesome Mustang border area .
 Kathmandu sent a strongly worded protest to Peking demanding release of the captured Nepalese and withdrawal of Chinese troops to the agreed-upon distance from the border . Peking has also demanded the release of a captured Nepalese and withdrawal from China .
 China was simultaneously exhibiting an equally aggressive attitude toward Bhutan . China was also exhibiting a similar attitude to Bhutan, Bhutanese .
 This too may have been provoked by lingering Tibetan resistance fighting which the Chinese were finding difficult to mop up .
 Peking soon disclosed that it had serious claims to Bhutan’s territory just as it had to Indian territory . Peking also claimed to have serious claims in Bhutan's territory .
 China reportedly used cultural, religious and economic ties between Tibet and Bhutan as an excuse to serve an ultimatum demanding that Bhutan break its special treaty ties with India . China was reported to have used the cultural ties between the two countries as a reason to demand Bhutan to break
 A Nepalese spokesman assumed that it must incline southward toward Nepal since this was the direction from which it had always been climbed . A spokesman said it would incline toward Nepal, since this is the direction of the climb .
 This was played up by Chinese propaganda as being in contrast to India’s attitude of intransigence, blamed for the impasse in the China-India boundary dispute . China's attitude of intolerance was played up as being a contrast to that of India's attitude
 By this agreement Nepal gained Chinese acceptance of its traditional boundary . Nepal gained China acceptance of Nepal's traditional boundary with China .
 The troublesome issue of Mount Everest was resolved to the satisfaction of both parties by vague wording . The wording simply included Everest as one of the Himalayan mountains through which the boundary runs .
 The only comfort which New Delhi could find in the new treaty was that it tended to uphold the ‘watershed principle” which has provided an important basis for India’s own boundary case . New Delhi can only find comfort in the treaty .
 China has made a direct assault on India's primacy in Nepal . But this was small compensation for an otherwise direct assault by China on Indian primacy .
 It called for Chinese help in constructing and financing a road from the Tibetan border to Kathmandu . The road would link Nepal’s capital with Lhasa .
 Nepal's trade from India to China is diverting Nepal’s trade to China . Equally obvious is its significance in diverting Nepalese's trade away from India . Nepal's economic dependence on India is dependent on China's trade .
 China upheld the rights of small nations in a joint communiqué signed by King Mahendra and Chou En-lai . China promised not to assume an attitude of ‘great nation chauvinism” toward Nepal .
 Mahendra and some of his principle advisers believed with bitterness that the Indian government had done nothing to stop Nepalese rebel action and might have encouraged it .
 He was unhappy with the scale of military assistance provided by India . He was also dissatisfied with the size of the military assistance given to him .
 The Nepalese government bought military equipment from the USSR in early 1962 . It also accepted three single-engine transport planes .
 Later Nepal acquired more significant quantities of military aid from the United Kingdom and the United States . Nepal acquired significant amounts of military assistance from the UK and the U.S.
 Upon his return to Kathmandu the King did in fact reshuffle his ministers in what appeared to be an effort to jettison those who were particularly objectionable to India .
 Nepal made no compromise with his policy of ‘neutrality’ between India and China . But Nepal's policy of 'neutrality' between China and India is not a compromise .
 Its leaders meant to oppose India's paternalism and continue to encourage Chinese assistance as a counterbalance .
 The future danger for Russia from this empire of 400,000,000 is beyond all doubt . Russia's future danger is beyond doubt, says Vladimir Putin .
 The ‘Pamir Knot’ is a jumble of high peaks which tower over the junction of Chinese Sinkiang, Soviet Kirghizistan, Afghanistan and Kashmir . It has long been an area of critical importance in Asia .
 Three major territorial disputes between India and Pakistan, India and China, and China and the USSR—-overlap, one with another, to create and compound serious tensions . Today it is still an uneasy area .
 The Soviet Union and Communist China are the most significant of these disputes from a global point of view . Russia and China have been the two most powerful countries in the world .
 Communist Central Asia has split the Communist world into two antagonistic camps . The bitter territorial quarrel provides a geopolitical rationale for the ideological crisis .
 Less obvious has been the impact of SovietChinese tensions—particularly in Sinkiang—on China-India relations . Less obvious is the impact on the relationship between China and India .
 Pamir peaks and tributary ranges nearby now create a cockpit of conflict . During most of the nineteenth century the Pamirs provided British India a certain illusion of security .
 It was not until the last decade of the nineteenth century that Britain fully awoke to the Russian threat in the Pamirs .
 Russian flirtation in 1890 with Safar Ali, the Mir of a sliver-like frontier principality known as Hunza, led to a bloody showdown between Imperial Britain and the Mir . The Mir of Hunza was the Russian ruler of the sliver of a frontier kingdom known as
 Safar Ali was forced to flee, but the Hunza sector of India’s frontier with Sinkiang remained unsettled . The Hunza area of India's frontier with the Chinese remained at the end of the century .
 The Great Game of Secret reconnaissance and tribal intrigue by both Britain and Russia kept the area in chronic ferment . The area was the focus of the Great Game .
 Russian officials in Sinkiang to protest British maps which showed the Aksai Chin plateau as part of British-held Ladakh . In 1896 Russia was alert for an opportunity to win points against Britain in the Great Game .
 The British did not make an issue out of the protest, fearing that to do so might provoke a Russian invasion of Kashgaria . The British didn't make a fuss over the protest .
 This would upset the delicate balance of power which required Sinkiang, like Tibet, to remain a nominal vassal of a harmless China . Tibet is like Tibet to be a nominal state of China, but China is not interested in it .
 The Chinese Revolution in 1911 and the weakening of the Empire held all the ingredients for renewed competition between Britain and Russia in Sinkiang .
 General Kuropatkin, Russian Governor General of Russian Turkestan in 1916, had the foresight to point out a more basic fear . The fear has become progressively more serious through the decades .
 The future danger for Russia from this empire of 400,000,000 people is beyond all doubt, writes Alexander Nekrassov . "The future danger is beyond doubt," he says .
 Russia made a serious bid for Sinkiang after World War I and the Russian Revolution . But it was not until after the revolution and the fall of World War II that Russia bid for the island .
 Two nationalist revolts were suppressed only after much bloodshed by Soviet troops garrisoned in Sinkiang . One in 1936 and another in 1937 were suppressed by Soviet forces .
 Moscow's bid for primacy in Sinkiang came during the rule of Sheng Shih-ts’ai, a Chinese warlord who held power through force of arms .
 In the thirties and forties Sheng encouraged increasing Soviet economic and political penetration of the province . His policies bred frequent clashes with Sinkiang nationalist groups and encouraged competitive .
 A meeting in Moscow between Sheng and Stalin in August 1938 provided a rare glimpse of pre-World War II power competition in Sinkiang . Sheng's visit to Moscow in 1938 was the first meeting of Stalin's regime in China .
 In Sheng’s account of his audience with Stalin the latter seemed greatly concerned by revolts in this remote region and the foreign influences behind them .
 Marshal Voroshilov joined the discussion of the defense of Sinkiang against the Japanese . Moscow is concerned with the military dimensions of the problem .
 At a second meeting Sheng pressed Stalin to speed deliveries of goods needed under his country’s Three-Year Economic Plan . At a meeting sheng pressed him to speed delivery of goods under the Three-year Economic Plan.
 Sheng posed the knotty problem of his own relationship with the Chinese Communist insurgents holding Yunan Province . Sheng then posed the problem with the Communist insurgents .
 Stalin volunteered the opinion that it was easier to deal with imperialists than fascists . Stalin volunteered that it would be easier for imperialists to fight fascism than fascistists .
 During the war against Japan, Sinkiang’s position is vital . . . to guard the International communication line for attack for attack . During the . war against . Japan, during the war .
 The present war situation is unfavorable to China but Japan will not be able to conquer China alone . China will be unable to conquer the country alone, says China's president .
 If China can get help from allied countries Japanese forces will be ousted . China can help oust Japanese forces if it gets help from allies .
 A considerable period of ‘peaceful co-existence’ between the Chinese Communists and Nationalists will follow their victory over Japan, says historian . The Chinese Communist Party and the Nationalist Party will follow .
 WWII drew off most of the Soviet Union’s energies and resources to the German front . World War II caused a power vacuum in Sinkiang, China .
 Sheng, by then disillusioned with Communism and Moscow’s methods, broke with Stalin . This enabled Sheng to break with Stalin, which led to his split with the Communist Party .
 Mao Tse-min was arrested and executed in China for plotting to kill Mao's brother . Mao believed Sheng was plotting against him . Sheng believed Mao was plotting to overthrow his brother, Mao's Mao's sister .
 Sheng took advantage of Moscow’s preoccupation with the war, had demanded the withdrawal of Soviet military and technical personnel from Sinkiang . Sheng later described a “dreary record of plots and uprisings” against him by the Russians by the
 Chiang Kai-shek gained temporary control of the area for the first time since the early thirties . Sheng was able to replace Sheng with a governor of his own choosing .
 With defeat of Nazi Germany in 1944, the Soviet Union could again turn its attention to the Central Asian problem . Chiang could not oppose a reassertion of Soviet influence in Sinkiang’s capital .
 Soviet domination of Sinkiang inevitably came to an end following the victory of Communist forces in China . Moscow did seem to make one last attempt to hold the province, according to Allen S Whiting .
 Stalin placed great importance on retaining Sinkiang in the face of Communist victory on the China mainland . If Whiting's and Sheng’s evidence can be accepted as an accurate reflection of Soviet policy .
 Just as in the case of Tibet, it was inconceivable for any Chinese regime, however weak, to deed away the destiny of China . Just as with Tibet, the Chinese regime would not have been able to do so .
 Chinese Nationalist Governor declared Sinkiang part of the new Communist state of China in 1949 .
 China and the Soviet Union signed an agreement in March 1960 calling for joint exploration of mineral resources . Less than a month later Red Chinese army units occupied the province, and China ostensibly began a new era of amity and cooperation .
 The traditional rivalry in the border lands was essentially unchanged . Yet, in fact, the traditional rivalry between the two countries remained unchanged . The two countries are still engaged in a fierce rivalry .
 Soviet experts helped China explore new oil fields, build pipelines and erect refineries . Soviet experts built refineries in China and helped build new oil facilities .
 During the next five years a steel plant, a thorium factory and hydroelectric facilities were constructed . A steel plant was constructed in the 1950s .
 A rail line to the Soviet border was also begun . Significant new coal discoveries were made in the area . New coal discoveries led to significant coal discoveries .
 Communist China was well on the way to industrializing the province . With Soviet assistance, Communist China is now industrializing it .
 Peking was distrustful of Moscow’s intentions and nervous about continuing Soviet influence in Sinkiang . Still Peking remained wary of Moscow's intentions .
 Like Tibet and all other regions peopled by non-Han nationalities, Sinkiang was vulnerable to antiChinese agitation . Like Tibet, all non-Chinese nationalities are vulnerable to agitation against China .
 Through education, propaganda and the importation of Chinese laborers Peking sought to place the Chinese stamp on the region . The Sinkiang-Uighur Autonomous Region is now known as the Sinkang Uighur Region .
 There was more concrete evidence of Sino-Soviet tension in Sinkiang by 1955 . There was also more concrete .
 The Sino-Soviet joint companies, for example, were taken over entirely by the Chinese . The Chinese took over the Soviet-Chinese joint companies in the 1980s .
 Other efforts to Sinocize the province stirred up rebellion among the native Uighurs . Other efforts at Sinocizing the province stirs up rebellion .
 Serious outbreaks of violence were reported in June 1957 at the time of the ‘100 Flowers’ episode and again in 1958 when Mandarin Chinese replaced the Uighur language in higher schools . Violence was reported during the period of the episode .
 1959 and 1960 brought serious deterioration in Sino-Soviet relations . Although firm evidence is lacking, there are many indications that the Soviet hand was behind the rebellion .
 Beginning in 1959, Moscow had made serious overtures of peaceful co-existence to the United States . Moscow had offered peace talks to the U.S. in 1959 .
 Kremlin policy sought closer relations with both India and Indonesia . Kremlin policy also sought closer ties with Indonesia and India .
 Khrushchev’s orgy of personal diplomacy in South and Southeast Asia was viewed with anger in Peking . Coming on the heels of China's crisis with India over Tibet, the crisis with Tibet .
 Mao openly challenged the Soviet Union as the leader of Communism and the guardian of doctrinal orthodoxy . Peking fired an ideological shot at Moscow in 1960, entitled “Long Live Leninism”
 This led to an escalation of the doctrinal war with added emphasis provided by a withdrawal of a large number of Soviet technicians from China .
 A massive Chinese purge of pro-Soviet elements in Sinkiang also took place in 1960 . The purge was also part of a massive purge in 1960s .
 Soviet consulates in Urumchi and Kuldja remained open, although most of the Soviet technicians were withdrawn that year . Most of the USSR technicians were pulled from the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 Satyanarayan Sinha claimed to have had early information of Soviet-Chinese tensions in Sinkiang . Sinha is an outspoken critic of China’s Himalayan policy .
 A shadowy Kazakh called Askaroff alleges that the Soviet Union foiled Chinese plans to invade India from Tibet in the spring of 1960 . Sinha's book The Chinese Aggression, by Sinha, was published by the same author .
 Askaroff supposedly played a major role for the Soviets in instigating antiChinese revolts in the Altai region of Sinkiang in March 1960 . Sinha told Sinha that Soviet intelligence had come upon the Chinese plan for the invasion of India .
 A major technique of the Soviets has been to lure across the border into Soviet Kazakhstan as many people as possible . Playing on ethnic abhorrence of Han domination in Sinkiang, the Soviets have been trying to lure over the border to Soviet Kazakhstan .
 A Kuldja refugee provided details of Soviet agitation in Sinkiang in 1961 in which thousands of Soviet passports were clandestinely distributed to dissident dissidents . The passports allowed them to emigrate to Soviet territory .
 Some 50,000 escaped Chinese rule in this way until Peking took steps to stop the flow in the spring of 1962 . Peking stopped the flow of refugees from escaping Chinese rule .
 This could only have had an inflammatory effect on Peking and helped shape China’s decision to expel Soviet consular officials believed to be implicated in the riots .
 China was alarmed and greatly influenced by Soviet subversion in Sinkiang during the spring of 1962 . Peking’s definitive statement on SinoSoviet tensions which appeared September 6, 1963 .
 Moscow’s counteraccusation that more than five thousand Chinese border violations against the Soviet Union occurred in 1962"" may have been an exaggeration, but it adds to the evidence that the Sino-Soviet borders were no less troubled than those of India . India .
 October crisis in relationships set off by China's invasion of India and Soviet brinkmanship in Cuba . These issues created growing tensions during the summer of 1962 and led to the October crisis .
 Both Peking and Moscow continued to take actions which drove them further apart . Despite outward appearance of relative calm in early 1962, both countries continued to act against each other .
 The price for rapprochement would be impossibly high for both countries . Discussions held by Chinese and Soviet representatives made it apparent to both countries that the price would be high .
 Khrushchev, for example, could not come to terms with Albania and still win back Yugoslavia . "Krushchev's inability to agree terms would not stop Yugoslavia from winning back Yugoslavia."
 He could not agree to accept and institutionalize China’s separate formula for Communist revolution and repudiate peaceful co-existence as a basis for his relationship with the United States. Nor could he agree to . He could repudiate the . U.S. relationship with China as a
 Khrushchev’s efforts to reach rapprochement with Tito and use Yugoslavia as a center for creating a pro-Soviet “socialist camp” was provocative and totally unacceptable to Peking . Peking. Similarly, Tito. was trying to use Yugoslavia
 Tito needled Peking on its India policy, thereby advertising the growing identity of views between Moscow and Belgrade . Belgrade is hardening of opposition to Peking’s belligerency in Himalayas .
 Khrushchev’s decision to send Soviet President Brezhnev on a state visit to Belgrade in September was unforgivable . The decision was made to send the Soviet leader on a visit to Serbia .
 Peking was also seriously concerned by Moscow’s promise to equip the Indian air force with jet fighter aircraft . Moscow has also promised to equip India with fighter jets .
 The gap dividing the two Communist capitals became wider with each salvo of vituperation . The gap between Washington and Beijing became wider .
 Attacks provoked counterattacks, and substantive charges became entwined with doctrinal dispute . Attacks provoke counterattacks and counterattacks; substantive charges become entwining .
 The war of editorials waged by Moscow and Peking was matched by secret discussions in which more damaging charges were made . Yugoslavia and Albania were at the center of the war .
 The Soviet leader was later to deny that he had been forewarned, but if the Chinese account of his acquiescence is in fact true, it is understandable that he was being cautious about his relations with the Chinese .
 Chinese troops in Tibet attacked India . Simultaneously, as if to show contempt for Moscow's doctrinally impure world of peaceful co-existence, Chinese troops attacked India.
 Twenty thousand Red Chinese troops poured into India over snowbound Thagla Ridge at dawn on October 20, 1962 . Jawaharlal Nehru was the prime minister of India in 1962 .
 The Dhola outpost, which straddles the ridge three miles high, was the first to fall . It straddled the ridge, straddling the ridge 3 miles high . The outpost is the first outpost to fall in recent years .
 The final destruction of India’s dream of peace and co-existence thus occurred in a place unknown to most of the world . India, Bhutan and Tibet come together in a knot of Himalayan peaks .
 The nearby outposts of Khinzemane and Tsangle also bore the brunt of China’s first wave . The outposts were hastily abandoned for more defensible positions five miles to the rear .
 Khinzemane had been the site of a serious border incident three years earlier . It had recently again come under Chinese harassment again .
 Both China and India initially described the incident as a border conflict . But this was no incident nor was it only a “border conflict” as initially described by both the Chinese Communist and Indian governments . This was not only a "border conflict" as described by the Chinese .
 It was a full-scale and obviously well-planned attack, launched skillfully across the world’s highest mountain range . It was an attack on the highest mountain ranges in the world .
 The northernmost strike was aimed at Daulat Beg Oldi, an Indian post guarding the Karakorum approaches from Chinese Sinkiang, and the Chip Chap River valley west of the disputed Aksai Chin bulge .
 Eleven posts in this sector were simultaneously assaulted during the first few hours of fighting . Eleven posts were simultaneously attacked during the fighting .
 Four of the posts were overrun immediately while troops of the remaining posts fell back to less exposed positions . The remaining posts were attacked by Chinese troops in the face of withering Chinese firepower .
 In this salient the Chinese drove to within seven miles of the important Indian garrison at Chushul . The Chinese drive to within 7 miles of Indian troops in the area .
 On the second day of undeclared war China opened a third front, attacking Kibitoo post in the Lohit Valley near the Burmese border .
 Five Indian outposts in this area had fallen to the Chinese . Within twenty-four hours five Indian outpost fell to China .
 Tanks were used in this salient also, giving some indication of the logistical preparations which must have been made before the Red offensive .
 China accused India of preparing a “massive invasion” of Chinese territory . India accused of preparing ‘massive invasion’ of China’s territory .
 China has pushed deep into Indian territory by four days of steady Chinese advance . The terms of the terms were obviously not acceptable to New Delhi .
 India rejected China's demands that it withdraws from positions held before September 8 . India rejected them and insisted that negotiations could not be held unless China withdrew to positions held earlier this month . India said it would not be allowed to negotiate with China until September 8.
 Despite the mauling which Indian forces had endured, New Delhi looked for help, not terms . New Delhi sought help, especially not terms of capitulation offered by China . India looked to China for help not terms offered by Beijing .
 India’s leaders had cherished the illusion that friendship with the Soviet Union was insurance against Chinese hostility .
 According to this reasoning, the Soviet Union would never allow China to make war on India . The Soviet Union never allowed China to war against India .
 Khrushchev wrote Nehru on the very day of China’s assault, urging him to enter into negotiations with Peking . The Soviet leader wrote to Nehru the day of the assault .
 Krishna Menon could not foresee the eruption of the Cuban crisis which brought the U.S. and the USSR to the brink of war . The Cuban crisis brought the United States and the Soviet Union on the brink .
 The USSR was forced to side initially with China lest it alienate a needed ally in its moment of danger . Coinciding as it did with the Chinese invasion of India, this critical situation forced the USSR to side with China .
 The Chinese allege Khrushchev had promised Chou En-lai that the USSR would remain neutral in the Sino-Indian dispute . The Chinese were later to allege that the Chinese invasion was only a few days before the invasion .
 The Soviet leader probably knew by then that he would need Chinese support for the Cuban crisis which loomed . The crisis actually broke out only one week later .
 Chou needed Soviet support for the crisis he knew would be created by China’s imminent invasion of India . Similarly Chou needed the support of the Soviet Union for his plans to invade India .
 Moscow caught in embarrassing dilemma as a result of ChinaIndia hostilities . Moscow became suddenly ambiguous about an earlier promise to provide India with MIG-2] jet fighter aircraft .
 At this stage of Sino-Soviet relations the USSR could not rush in with aircraft or arms with which Indians would kill Chinese . The USSR would not rush into with weapons or arms that could kill Chinese, the author says .
 India looked for moral, if not material, support from the nonaligned countries . India was looking for moral support from nonaligned nations .
 Only a year earlier the principal uncommitted nations had met in Belgrade and pledged mutual solidarity . Only one year earlier, Serbia and Montenegro had pledged solidarity .
 New Delhi found to its dismay that non-alignment could apply to the Sino-Indian hot war as well as to the East-West cold war . But New Delhi finds to his dismay it could apply .
 Even Tito Tito, long an antagonist of China, reacted to India’s suffering with weeks of deafening silence .
 Nehru wrote to most of the governments of the world explaining India’s position and asking for sympathy . Six days after the invasion Nehru asked for sympathy from the world .
 Later New Delhi sent two missions to plead India’s case throughout Africa and Asia . New Delhi also sent two teams to plead for India's case throughout Asia and Africa . India is one of the world's most populous countries .
 The most useful response came from the West, the U.S., Great Britain and Canada . The West promised material aid as well as sympathy . The United States, Canada and U.K. pledged material aid .
 The capture of this important post would knock out a vital airstrip . It would put the Chinese on the road to Ladakh’s capital of Leh, one hundred miles to the east .
 Towang, 17 miles south of Thagla Ridge on the northeast frontier, had fallen to the Chinese one day before the cutting off of an entire Indian brigade . Towang was one of the last Indian brigade to be cut off by the Chinese forces .
 This placed the Chinese astride a jeepable track leading to the important Assam railhead and military headquarters at Tezpur, just two hundred miles away . The Chinese placed the track on its way to an important railhead .
 The Dalai Lama had traveled in his flight from the Chinese in March 1959 . It was this very route that he had traveled on the route to China .
 The declaration of national emergency coincided with Indian efforts to have China admitted to the U.N. Ironically, the declaration coincided with India's efforts to be admitted to China .
 India had found disillusioning the slow response of the Afro-Asian nations to its call for support . Yet many of these countries must have found such a rationale difficult to understand at this particular moment .
 On October 29, the Indian government first announced casualty statistics . The Indian government announced the statistics on October 29 .
 The Indian people were appalled to learn that between 2,000 and 2,500 soldiers had been killed during the first week of fighting . The Indian nation was appalled to hear that 2,200 soldiers had died during the fighting .
 The United States responded immediately with a promise of supplies on a “no strings” basis . The U.S. responded immediately .
 New Delhi would not yet expose the unwillingness of the Soviet Union to respond to India’s pleas for help . The Soviet Union did not respond to the Indian request for help in the 1980s .
 These developments were nevertheless having a profound effect on the Indian government . The Indian government is still grappling with the situation .
 Non-alignment was personified in India’s controversial Defense Minister . He had outraged the Western world by his all too consistent support of Communist bloc policies .
 Krishna Menon theorized that the Soviet Union would protect India from Chinese invasion . It was inevitable that his star must fall when the policy he was identified was repudiated by events .
 Never popular in India, he now became the whipping boy for the Indian public . Indian public felt that incompetence and negligence lay behind the rout of Indian forces .
 As Minister of Defense he had neither foreseen nor prepared Indian forces for a major campaign in the Himalayan passes .
 Krishna Menon was assailed for being the architect of a national policy which had been proven tragically inadequate . Menon's policy made military unpreparedness inevitable, a policy which made it inevitable .
 Nehru tried to defend his Defense Minister, but by October 31 the pressure was more than even the Prime Minister could resist . Nehru: "By October 31, the pressure—public and private, was more . than even even even the PM could resist."
 Krishna Menon remained for a few days in the newly created post of Minister of Defense Production, an ironic assignment considering his failure in this field . Menon was deprived of the important Defense portfolio, but remained in the post .
 Prime Minister’s own advisers demanded his removal from the Cabinet altogether . But soon the Prime Minister's own advisers called for his removal altogether . The Prime Minister was forced to step down as a Cabinet minister .
 On November 8 China offered a new cease-fire plan which called for both sides to withdraw their troops twelve and a half miles behind the positions held on November 7, 1959 . The plan calls for withdrawal of troops from the positions they held .
 Timed to coincide with this announcement was a renewed offensive aimed at Walong in the westernmost corner of Assam . The offensive was launched in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 If this heavily defended post were overcome, Chinese troops could romp through the Lohit valley to the vital Digboi oil fields in Assam . If this is overcome, China troops could capture the vital oil fields .
 Also apparent was an ominous Chinese buildup near Chushul, the key defense post in Ladakh . The Chinese buildup was also apparent in the region .
 Beginning November 3, the United States Air Force began airlifting military supplies to New Delhi .
 The Indian government could not expect new Soviet military assistance, but for psychological as well as political reasons it was vitally important to India for India for the USSR to make good its earlier commitment to sell the Indian Air Force MIG-21 fighter aircraft .
 Nehru clung to the hope that some such gesture from the Soviet Union would force the Chinese to halt an alarmingly rapid offensive . No Indian military buildup could be completed, regardless of how fast western arms arrived .
 On November 10 Nehru was able to announce that the Soviet Union had promised to stand by an agreement to sell MIG-21’s to India .
 Nehru’s statement struck by the note of relief and triumph struck by Nehru's statement is understandable . Nehru: ‘The Indian people’ should be proud of their achievements in India .
 The events of October suggested that China’s objective in India was total conquest of the subcontinent . The events in October had indeed suggested that . China's objective in . India was to take over the whole of the Subcontinent.
 After nearly one month of fighting the Chinese army broke through on three fronts . The Chinese army has now broken through three fronts in eastern China .
 The Indian stronghold of Walong fell on November 18, trapping an entire battalion . An entire battalion was trapped by the fall .
 Those Indian soldiers able to retreat could not find another line to hold for eighty miles . The Indian soldiers were able to hold on to their ground .
 The Chinese simultaneously outflanked the Indian 4th Division on the 14,000-foot Se pass near Jang in a major offensive aimed at Tezpur . The Chinese also outflank the Indian . 4th . Division .
 The Indian supply base at Bomdi La was captured, which signaled a hasty evacuation of the army headquarters from Tezpur . The base was captured and signaled the evacuation of army headquarters .
 India’s entire defense strategy in the Northeast Frontier area had to be revised since it then looked doubtful if Assam could be held . India's defense strategy was revised after the Assam was not able to be held in Assam .
 Chou En-lai had warned twenty Afro-Asian heads of state that U.S. aid to India would enlarge the area of conflict . Chou Enlai, in fact, had warned that aid will enlarge the conflict .
 The Communists announced a unilateral cease-fire along the entire Indian border on November 21 . They promised to begin pulling back troops on December 1 .
 If adopted it would leave China in possession of the Aksai Chin area including the strategic road linking Sinkiang and Tibet . China finds it so important to the defense and control of Tibet .
 In return, India would gain only clear title to the McMahon Line in the northeast . It considered a fixed and legal boundary anyway .
 The Chinese announcement added that if the Indian government agreed to take corresponding measures, they could meet to discuss troop withdrawal . Indian and Chinese officials could meet in India to discuss withdrawing troops .
 The world could conclude that, for the time being, China's objectives in India were limited ones . With monumental relief, the world can conclude that . China's objective in India was limited .
 The SinoIndian war has had far-reaching effects inside India and in the world at large . But the momentary relaxation of tensions could not long obscure the far reaching effects .
 The rapidity with which Chinese forces could knife into India over mountains once thought impregnable was frightening was frightening . It was frightening to see the rapidity of Chinese forces in India .
 China had succeeded in occupying an area in India equal in size to England . The area is equal to the size of England .
 Act dwarfed in significance by the changes which it caused and the forces which it set in motion . But it is dwarfed by the significance of the act itself and its role in shaping the world .
 The October crisis had an immediate and dramatic impact on the Indian people . It was the first time a crisis had occurred in India since the fall of October 2012 .
 Those in the large cities felt. an excitement which for the moment lifted them out of daily routine . Those . in the . large cities . felt an excitement that lifted them from the slough of daily . routine .
 Even the great mass of rural dwellers, whose timeless existence is remote from the world beyond their village limits, must have felt some of the tension of the national emergency .
 Indians found common cause during October and November 1962 . Indians were divided and subdivided into a maze of mutually antagonistic groups based on caste, color and cultural, cultural, communal, linguistic and sectional differences . Indians are divided into two groups based upon caste and color .
 The immediacy of the Chinese threat evoked a spirit of national sacrifice rarely seen in India . India's response to the threat of China evoked national sacrifice, says CNN.com .
 There were stories of Calcutta ricksha coolies volunteering for military duty . New Delhi housewives offering their gold dowry bangles to the government . Retired maharajahs contributing jewel collections to finance India’s defense effort .
 They were manifestations of the mass adrenaline flow caused by war’s stimulus . The adrenaline flow was created by war's stimulus . They were manifested in the form of adrenaline .
 After the initial excitement wears off, a nation begins to feel the real consequences of war and search for a way to accommodate itself to the new world it finds . A nation is forced to adapt itself to a new world .
 "At least cause must be established before consequences can be fully understood and intelligently faced," says the author of the book . At least cause needs to be established in order to deal with consequences .
 The world situation might appear to be relaxed, but in reality the struggle would become more violent . Perhaps the world situation was relaxed, however, it would become even more violent, says CNN.com .
 International crime, like any crime, usually has a motive . The Chinese People's Liberation Army has no motive for the attack .
 Chinese violation of Indian soil was not judged against background of Chinese history . If, at first glance, it was an act which made a mockery of peaceful co-existence, it seemed inconsistent or irrational . It was because it was judged against the background of China's history .
 The underlying motive for Red China’s hostility toward India derived from a national psychology based on an ancient heritage . Red China's hostility to India is based on its ancient heritage, says the author .
 The Great Wall of China is a symbol of the Chinese people's struggle against an outer world presumed to be hostile . The wall is the symbol of a struggle against a hostile world .
 The “Middle Kingdom” which is bounded by the Wall is, in the egocentric world of the Chinese people, the core of civilization . The Middle Kingdom’s "Middle Kingdom" is the "core of civilization" in China .
 The guardians of this civilization have alternately been the harassed and the harassers of the “barbarians” beyond the pale . The guardian of this society has been harassed by the ‘barbarian”
 Those neighboring peoples which accepted Chinese suzerainty could enjoy to a limited extent the fruits of its culture . The Chinese people were able to enjoy some of their culture .
 Those which did not were to be conquered if possible or otherwise ignored . Those which didn't were not to be ignored .
 During periods of weakness China would be forced to admit its conquerors, but they would eventually be assimilated by a vastly more numerous people and absorbed by the quicksand of a superior culture . China would eventually assimilate by the vastly more populous people .
 The cycle would begin when a strong military leader emerged, unified the country and in so doing created a new ruling dynasty . The cycle of the dynasty would begin with strong military leaders uniting and uniting the country .
 Inevitably there followed a period of territorial expansion through vigorous military action, then an era of enforced peace . The result of this was followed by an enforced peace period in the Middle Ages .
 It was during these periods of relative tranquillity that culture flowered . Culture flowered during these times of calm, quiet periods of peace .
 The conservative policies of a dynasty intent upon preserving the status quo discouraged new enterprises and initiative . The conservative . policies of the . dynasty discouraged new . enterprises and . initiative .
 As culture and intellect prospeered, military strength and civil administration decayed . As culture, intellect and culture prospered, civil government decayed. As culture grew, government failed to cope .
 Eventually the dynasty would crumble as the “mandate of heaven,” which the Chinese believed was responsible for a prosperous regime, was withdrawn . The Chinese believed that the ‘mandate . of heaven’ would be responsible for prosperous . regime .
 The last phase of the cycle would be the fragmentation of China and sometimes the domination of all or part of it by an alien ruler . The final phase of this cycle would see the fragmentation and domination of China .
 Before the nineteenth century the historical cycles revolved on the same foundation, and the fundamental social order and economy remained unchanged . Before the . nineteenth century, the historical . economic . order and social order remained unchanged.
 The Chinese people stayed close to the familiar earth of the “Middle Kingdom,” whether the tides of conquest were high or receding . The Chinese are now living in the Middle Kingdom, China's first state of sovereignty .
 The nineteenth century brought totally new ‘barbarians’ to China’s frontiers . Seaborne seaborne invaders from Europe and America. But the 19th century brought .
 Interested mainly in trade, they brought industry and technology which set in motion changes destined to revolutionize the traditional structure of society . Interested in trade and technology, the group brought industry into society .
 A new Chinese aristocracy arose, made rich and powerful by its willingness to seek accommodation with Western enterprisers . China's new aristocracy arose by seeking accommodation with the West .
 This aristocracy was a mutation of the traditional, privileged mandarin class . The aristocracy was the original aristocracy of the Chinese aristocracy .
 The mandarins retained control of the land, clung to the machinery of power and resisted Western influence . While the new class formed an urban bourgeoisie, the mandarinists retained control over the land .
 Since the old mandarinate could not exert control over the Western traders along the coast, it pushed its influence in the direction of the more familiar “barbarians” beyond the Wall . The old “mandarinate’s” influence was pushed in the
 Warlords waged petty campaigns against nonChinese peoples of the interior . As the Manchu Dynasty lay dying, Manchu was wracked by its own corruption and the virus of social change .
 The products of Western industry—particularly the railroad—accelerated the dispersal of population and made possible its movement . Western industry, particularly the railroad, made possible movement of population .
 As China’s population outgrew the ‘Middle Kingdom,’ it overflowed first into Manchuria . As China's population grew, the "Middle Kingdom" overflowed .
 The subsequent population shifts toward Mongolia and Central Asia were on a much smaller scale since these areas were less attractive and access to them was more difficult . The population shifts were on the smaller scale, with population shifts on a smaller scale .
 There was some movement of permanent settlers into these areas which had until then seen only Chinese military conquerors . Yet there were some permanent settlers in these areas until now .
 The present Communist dynasty in China, in the tradition of its predecessors, came to power through strong military leadership and conquest .
 Communists dedicated to uniting China and expanding its frontiers to include all irredentist areas . But by the time they had gained control of mainland China there were clearly fixed limits beyond which they could not expand without colliding with the Soviet Union .
 The power of the U.S. simultaneously blocked expansion seaward . The U.N. blocked expansion of the Gulf of Mexico .
 China’s exploding population needed new lands, says historian . But there now existed a reason for expansion more compelling than the historical, cyclical urges of a waxing new dynasty .
 In November 1954 a Peking announcement revealed that China’s mainland population was approximately 583,000,000 . The announcement was made in November 1954 .
 Communist government census conducted in 1953 provided the basis for Peking’s economic planning . Statistics reached after a countrywide census conducted by the Communist government .
 Birth control is one method of solving the obvious problem of too many mouths and too little production . Planers experimented with birth control as one way to solve the problem .
 Before 1953 the concept of birth control was considered to be a product of capitalist, ‘neo-Malthusian” thinking, thus doctrinally sinful . Birth control is no longer considered a form of sin .
 According to orthodox Marxism, there can be no such thing as overpopulation in a properly planned socialist society, but in view of the shocking statistics revealed by the 1953 census, Peking flew in the face of doctrine and encouraged birth control .
 By 1957 there were clinics for this purpose throughout China, and the total figure given was 602,000,000 persons . This included LOO Chinese in Formosa and 11,700,000 overseas Chinese in other areas .
 Communist China began its “great leap forward” toward industrialization in 1958 . In 1958 Communist China started its ‘great leap’ to industrialization . China is now one of the world's largest economies .
 One apparent casualty of the new program was the Malthusian approach to population . The new program aims to reduce the need for population control .
 Mao Tse-tung announced suddenly that “China’s big population is a good thing”; more labor meant faster industrialization . More labor would have led to faster industrializing, he said .
 The people had been more irritated than influenced by the blatant birth control propaganda, which in most cases was phrased in overgraphic and offending language .
 The second FiveYear Plan was failing, and China faced the possibility of mass starvation . The second five-year plan was failing and China was at risk of starvation . China faced a possible mass starvation, and the country was in danger .
 Peking justified birth control on the grounds that it was in the interest of public health, encouraged better parental care and made possible greater educational opportunity . In an effort to play down the inconsistency of this policy with Marxist doctrine, Peking tried to play it down .
 The fact that a runaway population was outstripping production was glossed over . "The fact that the fact that . the fact . that . was glossing over. the . fact that  the fact that. was . outstripped production . "A runaway population . was
 The food crisis of 1961 and 1962 was more serious than the outside world imagined . Food crisis was 'more serious than world imagined' than they imagined . But the food crisis was far worse than the world imagined in the 1960s and 1961 .
 It was a dramatic warning to Chinese planners that there were too many mouths to feed . It was also a warning that there was too many people to feed in China .
 It proved that there was no shortcut to industrialization and that extreme agrarian regimentation, typified by the dreaded ‘communes, was not a practical solution . The end of the Soviet Union was the end to the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 In June 1963 a mass birth control campaign was launched in Shanghai with an emphasis on male sterilization . China introduced the birth control pill later in the 1970s .
 Despite the doctrinaire mentality of Chinese leaders, it must be clear that economic planning and population control alone will not achieve a socialist heaven in time to satisfy the demands of a chronically hungry population .
 If China cannot stem the population growth, the inevitable results will be accelerated colonization and the development of the more sparsely populated border areas . China's population growth continues to outstrip production .
 Tibet has been viewed by Peking as an area into which Chinese population can expand . Tibet is viewed as a potential area for China to expand into a larger area .
 Britain’s withdrawal from the subcontinent after World War II made colonization possible . Britain withdrew from India after the war, but colonization was possible .
 Only lacking was roads into Tibet over which settlers as well as military supplies could travel . Only lacking were roads to Tibet that would allow settlers and military supplies .
 These were built with the aid of forced Tibetan labor in a remarkably short time . Western observers had thought that could be possible, but it was more quickly than thought possible .
 By 1954 the completion of two motorable roads from China to Lhasa made Chinese immigration into Tibet practical . Peking announced its intention to settle a large number of Chinese farmers in Tibet .
 Communist China views India in terms of the latter’s relationships with them . Ringed by two hostile powers, the Soviet Union landward and the United States seaward .
 By direct aggression, insurgency or subversion China has fought U.S. influence in the Far East . South Asia poses security problems no less importance to Peking .
 This conclusion must be accepted if the motives for Communist China’s India policy are to be fully understood . The conclusion must also be accepted .
 U.S. accustomed to considering India an imbalanced “neutralist’s” U.N. voting record and sometimes unnecessary judgments on world issues have frequently favored the Communist point of view . It is not easy for an American to see the logic in China’
 Only by making allowances for the historical distortions of doctrinaire Communism is there any logic to it . And only by making allowance for the distortion of Communism, there is logic to this .
 Peking is convinced that the Indian independence movement fell under the control of the Indian bourgeoisie and landlord class . Peking believes that the independence movement was controlled by the Indian bourgeois .
 Both classes, described by Red China as having a “blood relationship with the British bourgeoisie’, compromised the movement in the interest of protecting their economic positions . Red China described as having ‘blood relationship’ with British bourgeoisie .
 An analysis of India’s economy since 1948, as distorted by Peking, proves that India has not freed itself from bondage . Peking's analysis of the country's economic history is distorted by its distorted by China .
 Peking called attention to a sevenfold increase in U.S. investments in India from 1948 to 1959 . Peking calls attention to the increase in United States investments .
 India's economy has had to rely progressively more on U.S. aid . But what seems to have impressed Peking the most is that India’s economy has relied more on United States aid .
 The consequence of India’s economic “dependency” on the U.S. is, in China's distorted perspective, New Delhi's alignment with American ‘imperialist” political policies . New Delhi is aligned with American "imperialists’ political
 Communist China’s charges against India have, of course, been intensified since 1959 and can to some extent be discounted as propaganda . Peking has reviled India as an accomplice of ‘imperialism” and the media in which these charges have been printed strongly indicates
 Peking will probably continue to consider India part of the ‘imperialist’ camp regardless of expedient or even strategic collaboration with the USSR . China’s policies and actions accordingly .
 King Faisal of Iraq was assassinated on July 14, 1958 by a military junta led by Abdul Karim Qassem . China’s leaders reason (not reason) why they want to kill him, he says .
 By humiliating India, the validity of this doctrine is subjected to doubt . The validity of the doctrine of non-alignment is now under doubt .
 Communist China's actions are the quest for world power . Another basic motive underlying Communist China is the quest to world power, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 China's first objective in the pursuit of its destiny is to become undisputed leader of Asia . China’s first objective is to be the undisputed head of Asia, says President Xi Xi Jinping .
 This requires the besting and eventual elimination of its prime rivals—the USSR, the U.S.A., and India—as power rivals in Asia . This must be achieved by eliminating the USSR, U.K.A. and India as power rivals .
 The U.S. can't be attacked through its Asian friends and allies, CNN.com's John Sutter says . The United States can be attacked by its Asian allies, he says .
 India represents simultaneously a rival to China of major proportions and a very vulnerable target of opportunity . But it is India which represents both a rival and a vulnerability to China . It is India's vulnerability to opportunity .
 India and China stand for two fundamentally opposed systems of government . They are guided by radically different political and economic philosophies . The two countries have very different political systems .
 Both countries have been conscious that other newly independent nations of Asia have been watching them closely to determine which has the better system to emulate .
 Since the Bandung Conference of Afro-Asian nations in 1955, the Indian government has recognized Communist China’s ambition to dominate Asia . Peking has seen in India as a competitor for Asia's soul, if not its body .
 India has realized that a failure of its democratic system could not only spell national catastrophe, but would deprive the Asian-African world of a prototype for workable democracy in underdeveloped countries .
 Red China was still recovering from the folly of its ‘great leap’ effort to industrialize too rapidly and collectivize too radically . Red China, by contrast, was recovering from its "great leap" effort . China is still recovering after failing to take advantage of the folly
 From 1959 to 1962 serious food shortages, which sent thousands fleeing to Hong Kong, also gave evidence that Communist planning was far from infallible . Thousands of Chinese fled the country to escape the food shortages .
 A restoration of limited private incentive for farmers in 1960-1961 was proof that pure Communism would not work . The restoration of private incentives for farmers was proof of Communism not working .
 The purges of 1958, which followed Mao Tse-tung’s shortlived political liberalization, gave testimony that Communism and individual freedom were incompatible . Furthermore, the purges . gave testimony . that Communism . and individual . freedom was incompatible .
 Peking found it tempting to take action which would both distract the Chinese people and impede India’s progress . Finding itself faltering in the race with India and recognizing that there existed much dissatisfaction within China .
 Peking must also have seen merit in action calculated to discredit the ‘Pied Piper’ of Panch Sheela, she says . And recognizing the ideological appeal of co-existence, Peking has seen merit .
 The invasion of India forced New Delhi to devote a much larger proportion of its already inadequate resources to military defense needs and thus has impeded economic progress . New Delhi has been forced to devote much more resources to defense needs than previously .
 It has provoked India to seek large-scale military cooperation and assistance, thereby compromising Panch Sheela . It has also provoked India .
 Peking’s Indian policy, characterized by attitude of hostility and aggression, is a logical corollary to its Tibet and Himalayan policies . Peking's Indian policy is characterized by an attitude of aggression and aggression . The Chinese government has been criticized for its policies in Tibet and
 Peking’s assumption that India is fundamentally in the ‘imperialist’ camp, however willing it may be to arrange pacts with the Soviet Union or pretend non-alignment .
 Dalai Lama in 1956 to seek Indian assistance against China and the Lhasa revolt in 1959 proved to Peking that China could not rule Tibet indirectly through its indigenous theocracy . Peking refused to accept the Dalai Lama's request for Indian assistance .
 It had to be controlled through military force and Han-controlled civil administration . The Han had to control the situation through military forces and civil authorities .
 By December 1964 even the puppet Panchen Lama was denounced and stripped of power to make way in September 1965 for a purely lay regime in Tibet Autonomous Region of China . In September 1965, the puppet government of Tibet was abolished in Tibet .
 Tibet's culture and religion were incompatible with Communism and hostile to the Han . Tibet's religion and culture had to be eradicated, and an environment was created to encourage large-scale Chinese settlement in the high plateau .
 China accused of aiding Tibetan insurgents . India has been made painfully aware of the seriousness with which Peking views its Himalayan security .
 China's determination to reach a settlement on its own terms has been a constant factor underlying its Tibet and Himalayan policy . The 1959 Tibet revolt precipitated Peking’s decision to press more strongly its boundary claims against India .
 Peking pressed to early completion of a road network linking Lhasa and China . To facilitate control of the region, Peking wanted early completion .
 From Lhasa roads have been built southward to Yatung near the Sikkim frontier and westward to Gartok and Rudok near the Ladakh frontier . Roads have also been built in the region of Tibet .
 The Gartok road is met by a road leading into western Tibet from Kashgar and Yehcheng in Chinese Sinkiang . The road is also met by the road leading to western Tibet .
 It is the latter road, secretly constructed on Indian territory in the Aksai Chin region, which provides the most important strategic reason behind China’s boundary dispute with India .
 Western Tibet could be made secure only if Chinese military forces and supplies could quickly reach the area by road . Western Tibet is only if it is secured only by Chinese military and supplies .
 The only feasible western route from China is through Aksai Chin . Because of the terrain the only feasible west route is through aksai .
 Peking built the since-disputed road and established military outposts along it before agreeing to negotiate the ownership of the area . The road was built by Peking, which has since been disputed .
 China did not want to take the chance that India would interfere with the road’s construction; nor would Peking accept agreement with India which denied to China this vital link . Peking would not take the risk of India interfering with the construction .
 Peking continued to suggest this sort of settlement after the March 1959 crisis . Peking had suggested this kind of settlement in March 1959 .
 In correspondence leading up to Chou En-lai’s meeting with Nehru in April 1960, the Chinese left the door open for such an agreement, but India was in no mood to negotiate a compromise . India was not interested in such a deal .
 If Peking wanted a settlement, stronger persuasion was clearly necessary . It is likely that China’s invasion of India was intended to provide that .
 The ceasefire proposal was carried out unilaterally after its sudden withdrawal on November 21, 1942 . It called for a no-man’sland twelve and a half miles on each side of what China claimed was the actual line of control on November 7, 1959 .
 The fact that this line runs along the Indian-claimed McMahon Line in the east and along the boundary line which China claims in the Ladakh sector certainly suggests that the latter boundary, including the Aksai Chin road, was China's main concern .
 Peking may still be willing to bargain away its claims south of the McMahon Line . However, it has clearly discernible intentions to project its influence beyond the Himalayan watershed by other means .
 China believes it must gain enough control of the border states to eliminate all Indian political influence and create Chinese-controlled buffer zones . To protect the Tibetan highlands, China wants to gain control of border states .
 China believes it needs the Himalayan border states as buffers for Tibet . Imperial Britain believed that it needed Tibet as a buffer zone for India . Tibet is now a key part of China's policy .
 For the time being, Peking’s techniques will probably be political, diplomatic and subversive, but military action can be mounted at any time if necessary . Peking's threat to attack India border installations in Sikkim in September 1965 was shown by Peking .
 China’s policies toward the border states to date are clearly aggressive and suggest only too clearly the nature of things to come . China's policies to date have been clearly aggressive, say experts .
 China has excused its acts of hostility toward India on grounds of self-defense . But India has consistently been portrayed as the aggressor .
 Peking was genuinely concerned by India’s ‘forward’ policy along the border . Peking could reason that New Delhi would eventually attempt to retake territory which Chinese forces had occupied .
 Peking faced with the necessity to defend its newly occupied border outposts one by one . The Indian army had, in fact, made several moves in Ladakh to outflank Chinese positions .
 Only after decisive defeat would the Indian army abandon its offensive posture along the border and return to a purely defensive stance . The Indian army would only return to an offensive posture after a decisive defeat, say experts .
 It is clear that a mistake had been made in attempting to regain lost boundary positions without adequate military means to do so . However justified India’s actions may have been, it was clear that it was a mistake to try and regain lost positions .
 To conclude that India started it all and that Communist China was justified in defending itself is to fall victim to Peking’s propaganda. But to conclude that . India started all is to be taken to task by the Communist China, it says .
 China's October attack was designed to put an end to Indian hopes that it could find a solution to the boundary problem through military action . India hopes it could force India to negotiate the boundary on China's terms .
 At stake in Communist China’s ideological war with the Soviet Union is the content of Communist doctrine and the leadership of the Communist world . China is at stake in the ideological war between the two countries .
 China’s actions must be analyzed in the context of this struggle . For that reason, China's actions must also be analyzed .
 Lenin said that it is possible for the socialist countries to practice peaceful co-existence with the capitalist countries . Lenin, who originally formulated the doctrine, said it was possible to practice peace with the capitalists .
 In its policy toward India, China has acted out its contempt for peaceful co-existence, writes CNN.com's John Defterios . "In its policy towards India, and particularly in its hostile actions," he says .
 Peking’s reference to “heaven” is curiously un-Marxist . In the attack it was asked, “Is it possible that the only way that China could prove itself ‘reasonable’ and not ‘absurd’ was to submit
 It is tempting to theorize that it reveals the lasting power of the historical concept of the “mandate from heaven” which successful Chinese dynasties were believed to have received . Successful Chinese dynasts believed to receive the "mandate" from heaven .
 Moscow chose to meet rather than avoid the challenge posed by the Chinese . That Moscow chose the former is a measure of the importance which it places on its doctrine and the need to meet the Chinese.
 The keynote of the Soviet attitude was enunciated as early as January 15, 1963 by East German Communist leader Walter Ulbricht .
 He castigated Peking for not abiding by the principle of settlement through negotiations which is a basic tenet of peaceful co-existence . Peking has been accused of not abiding on the principle that negotiations through negotiations are necessary .
 There is one theory that China’s attack on India was calculated to force the Soviet Union to repudiate peaceful co-existence and abandon its neutral stance in the Sino-Indian dispute .
 Whatever merits this theory has, the attack did not accomplish either objective . The attack on the U.S. was not successful .
 It is probably not true that China’s India action was designed to cause the Soviet Union to abandon peaceful co-existence or its neutral posture on the Sino-Indian boundary dispute . Peking must have known that this was not possible .
 China’s invasion of India as a means of pressing its territorial claims must also have been intended as a warning to the Soviet Union, with which China also shares a long, disputed frontier . The invasion was also intended to be a warning .
 The point that China was willing to go to war in order to retake irredentist land could not have been lost on Moscow . Moscow would not have lost the point that the point was lost on Russia .
 Sovietprovoked uprisings in Sinkiang could have been intended to force China to withdraw from India . They could also have served the defensive purpose of preventing similar Chinese moves into Soviet territory adjacent to the Soviet territory .
 It brands as bourgeois ‘illusion’ the hope that there can be a world without weapons, without armed forces and without wars . It brands . as bourgeois . “illusion”
 Peking seeks not only to pit class against class, the colonized against the colonizer but race against race . Peking is one of the world's most populous cities .
 The Chinese are dedicated to propagating an ideology of world revolution in which war remains an acceptable instrument . The Chinese believe war is an acceptable weapon in which it is acceptable to use .
 With the power of this ideology, with a nuclear capability and with a vast population which can absorb the mass annihilation of nuclear warfare, Communist China has set forth militantly to dominate the world . With a . vast population, the vast population can absorb . the mass . annihilation of . nuclear
 Han versus “barbarian” has characterized Chinese history and Chinese psychology . But it is consistent with the eternal struggle of Han versus "barbararian" which has characterized China's psychology .
 History has seen fit to make India the battleground for a three-way ideological war between Western Democracy, Soviet Communism and MaoMarxist hostile co-existence . India will inevitably find itself continuously involved in a struggle more complex than the East-West cold war which it has so carefully sought to
 In event of war with India, Pakistan would not be alone . Pakistan would be joined by India’s other nations .
 An early Sanskrit history discovered by Akbar the Great when he invaded Srinagar in 1588, alleged that Kashmir in the beginning was a great lake ringed by towering mountains . The Chronicle of Kings, an early . Sanskrit history, was discovered by the Akbar . Great .
 Mythological saga credits Kasyapa, grandson of the Hindu God Brahma, with creating the rich valley by trenching Baramulla Pass so that the waters of the lake flowed into the sea .
 Kasyapa thus provided his descendants with a sanctuary of indescribable splendor . The sanctuary of his descendants was a sanctuary for his descendants .
 The conquering Moghuls in more recent times also saw the Vale as a place of inspiring beauty and called it Behesht, or paradise . The conquerors of the Vale also saw it as a paradise .
 Kashmir's tragic history since partition of the subcontinent has been scarred by the conflicting desires of Indians, Pakistanis and the Kashmiri people themselves . Kashmiri has a tragic history of its own people .
 The Hindu Maharajah of the predominantly Moslem state hastily joined India in 1948 rather than see it overrun by Moslem tribesmen from Pakistan . Since then, the Hindu state of India has frequently threatened the peace of the subcontinent .
 The two newly born nations were born in 1948 . The fighting was stopped by a cease-fire agreement negotiated through the United Nations .
 Most of Kashmir, including the coveted Vale and the capital of Srinagar, remained on the Indian side of the cease-fire line . The two sides accepted a United Nations proposal for a plebiscite to determine the state’s permanent status .
 Since then this troubled state has remained divided, with heavy concentrations of troops on both sides facing each other in a state of perpetual alert . Since then, the troubled state remains divided .
 An uneasy truce, monitored by U.N. observers, has all too often been broken by premeditated fire . The uneasy truce has been monitored by UN observers .
 Repeated efforts to bring India and Pakistan to the conference table have brought the Kashmir dispute no closer to solution . Kashmir dispute has been a source of tension for decades .
 India has used the intervening years to solidify its position, while Pakistan has sought unsuccessfully to have the United Nations plebescite resolution fairly implemented . India and Pakistan have been at odds for years over the resolution .
 New Delhi's reluctance to hold a plebescite has been based on the fear that the Moslem majority would choose Pakistan . New Delhi fears the majority of Moslem Muslims would vote for Pakistan .
 Pakistan accepted U.S. military assistance to defend itself against Communist aggression . This fear became even more pronounced in February 1954, when Pakistan accepted United States military assistance . Pakistan accepted military assistance in 1954 .
 Recognizing the danger of a strengthened Pakistan astride India’s northern passes, New Delhi backed off from its plebescite commitment . New Delhi backs off its promise of a stronger Pakistan in the region .
 Kashmir Constituent Assembly ratified without reference to Pakistan the state’s original accession to India . Pakistan accepted U.S. military assistance from the United States .
 India-Pakistan dispute over Kashmir was inexorably connected with the India-China boundary dispute . China’s 1962 invasion of Ladakh in Eastern Kashmir was a dramatic reminder of the India and Pakistan dispute . The 1962 Ladakh invasion was a reminder that the India, Pakistan dispute over
 The situation has been further complicated by Chinese-Soviet tensions, which are the opposite positions on Kashmir taken by the two Communist nations .
 Moscow’s motive at that time in backing India's position on Kashmir is understandable . No less so was Peking's decision to take Pakistan's side . Moscow's motive for backing India in Kashmir was also understandable .
 Red China had been incensed by Pakistan’s affiliation with the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization . It became apparent that the threat was more theoretical than real .
 In the long term it is probably the Soviet Union which China considers its main antagonist . The Soviet Union is China's main antagonist in the world .
 It is the deep-rooted tensions in the borderlands where these two land giants meet that will likely ignite conflict one day .
 China must fear linkage between the USSR and India in the Pamirs, as this would dangerously flank both Sinkiang and Tibet . China must thus fear linkage with the USSR .
 Since China must prevent Soviet-India physical contiguity, it has been in Peking’s interest to recognize Pakistan's right to claim and occupy northern Kashmir . Since then China must therefore prevent . India .
 The frontier strip runs for about two hundred miles in a northwesterly direction from the Karakorum Pass through the principality of Gilgit to the trijunction of Sinkiang, Pakistan and Afghanistan . Of specific importance is the frontier strip which runs for two hundred . miles
 Gilgit had been awarded to the Maharajah of Kashmir by the British Indian government shortly before the partition of the subcontinent into independent India and Pakistan . Gilgit was awarded by the Maharaja of Kashmir shortly before partition of Pakistan .
 Gilgit became involved in the contest between the two countries for control of Kashmir . Being part of the Maharajah’s domain, Gilgit also became involved . The two countries are currently fighting for Kashmir .
 The Hindu Maharajah elected to join India at the time of partition . Moslem Gilgit, seized by local military forces, elected to go to Pakistan .
 Hunza and Nagir—two princely states within the Gilgit Agency near the Sinkiang border—were in no position to protest accession to Pakistan and so also came under Karachi’s control . Hunza, Nagir, were in no way of protesting accession
 Pakistan has directly administered the former Gilgit Agency area rather than join it to the Azad Kashmir puppet regime created to administer the rest of Pakistan-held Kashmir . Since then Pakistan has administered the area directly .
 Armed Chinese patrols raided into Hunza as early as 1954, probably to discourage herdsmen from grazing on Chinese-claimed land west of Shimshal Pass on the ill-defined Sinkiang border .
 The controversy, which became acute in 1955, was settled for the moment by local negotiations . But these incidents served to remind Karachi that the boundary could be a source of continuing friction with China .
 China began pressing its territorial claims against India and occupying many of the areas in dispute . Pakistan became concerned following the 1959 Tibet crisis when China occupied many of those in dispute with India .
 By 1961 the shoe was on the other foot; it was Pakistan which declared its intention to negotiate a boundary with China in disputed Kashmir . By 1961, Pakistan had declared its intentions to negotiate with China .
 Less than a month after India and China had concluded their unsuccessful border talks, Pakistan Foreign Minister Qadir announced that Peking was willing in principle to have its “border” with Pakistan demarcated .
 Pakistan was quick to see the advantages of reaching boundary agreement in Kashmir . This would simultaneously eliminate a source of potential friction with China and counterbalance Soviet sympathy with India on the Kashmir issue .
 China's underlying concern was a strategic one, but a boundary agreement with Pakistan must also have seemed useful to underscore India's obduracy in not being willing to negotiate . China’s underlying concern is a strategic .
 Peking’s willingness to negotiate with Pakistan implied rejection of Indian position on Kashmir . There may have been an element of spite and retaliation in China's action . Peking's willingness to negotiate with Pakistan implies rejection of the Indian position .
 Peking wanted as much time as possible to exert pressure on India . Still, it was more than a year until actual negotiations began, and it was likely that Peking .
 Only when it was clear that New Delhi would not give in and was building up its military forces in Ladakh, did China proceed to negotiate . New Delhi refused to give in because it was not prepared to negotiate with China .
 He could recall Peking’s reluctance to discuss that section of the boundary during the 1960s SinoIndian boundary discussions .
 The Chinese representative had then stated that it was not appropriate for the officials of the two countries to discuss the boundary alignment west of the Karakorum Pass .
 China's refusal in 1960 made it seem to prefer Pakistan's side of Kashmir dispute . Peking’s decision to demarcate the boundary with Pakistan removed any doubt about it .
 By championing Pakistan, China placed itself in direct opposition to the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union then sided with India in the Kashmir dispute . China then sided in Kashmir dispute with India .
 Soviet U.N. delegate Malik launched a scathing attack against the United States and the United Kingdom . Malik accused the U.S. and the UK of trying to convert the Kashmir region into a military base . Malik was a Soviet delegate .
 Chinese Communist boundary policy began to emerge in 1954 with Peking’s publication of new maps . The maps were the first maps to be issued by the Communist regime in China .
 Russia, whose border with China was questioned in these maps, could find common complaint with India . Russia's border with India was also questioned in the maps .
 1954 Chinese maps showed certain areas of Soviet Asia as Chinese territory . The 1954 maps showed part of the boundary as still “indefinite,” sounded a sour note in Sino-Soviet relations .
 Chou En-lai made passing reference to ‘errors’ on Chinese maps depicting India’s boundary with China and that of the Soviet Union . Nehru met with En-Lai in October 1954, 1954 .
 Red China was deadly serious in its territorial claims and aspirations . Khrushchev was unlikely to be put off by Mao as easily as Nehru was . But, as subsequent events have shown, it is unlikely he was put off .
 The offending maps first appeared in a new Chinese history book . They show China’s boundaries as they were claimed by China in 1840 .
 The 1954 maps incorporate within China parts of Hunza, Gilgit and Ladakh as well as Indian border territory . Peking believes British ‘imperialist’ treaties took away from China .
 Chinese-Pakistan relations strained during Suhrawardy government . Relations strained as a result of Karachi’s close ties with Washington .
 This was typical of the Pakistani official attitude, which lasted through the Lhasa uprising and flight of the Dalai Lama in the spring of 1959 . The Pakistani government's attitude to Tibet is typical of Pakistani official attitudes .
 President Ayub Khan’s proposal of a joint defense policy with India in April 1959 was perhaps the low point in China-Pakistan relations . Ayub's proposal was perhaps a low point of the relationship .
 Ayub’s offer had set in motion a very basic shift of attitudes in South Asia which would bring Pakistan and China closer to each other . But the very events which prompted Ayub's offer .
 India’s trials with China, which then took the form of more frequent and more serious border clashes, brought a correspondingly closer relationship between the U.S. and India .
 Pakistani suspicions that U.S. policy in South Asia was veering away from reliance on SEATO to contain the Communist threat to South Asia and turning toward India as a new ally against China . This, in turn, has excited Pakistani suspicions .
 Pakistan began gradually to re-evaluate its policy toward the United States and seek closer ties with Peking . As a result Pakistan began to reevaluate its policies toward the U.S.
 Following Secretary of State Dulles’ death in the summer of 1959, it was particularly tempting for Pakistanis to leap to the conclusion that SEATO would wither away without the personal patronage of its architect .
 Many voices urged Ayub to exploit India’s anguish and settle accounts in Kashmir . While the government of Pakistan carefully avoided any action which could be considered hostile by India, the average Pakistani was less charitable .
 Both countries agreed in late November 1962 to try once again to reach a settlement on Kashmir . It soon became apparent that the exhortations of the United States and the United Kingdom, rather than recognition of mutual self-interest, was behind the new effort .
 Pakistan permitted Peking to announce Sinkiang-Azad Kashmir boundary agreement just as Kashmir talks were being held with India . Something less than a sincere determination to reach accord was shown by Pakistan .
 Nehru's dismay turned to fury when Pakistan’s Foreign Minister, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, flew to Peking on March 2 to sign the border agreement and be feted with calculated cordiality . Nehru was furious when Pakistan's Foreign Minister Zulf
 Pakistan was not interested in finding a compromise solution on Kashmir so long as the United States and the U.K. armed India . Pakistan did not want to reach a compromise agreement on Kashmir . The U.S. and the UK armed India in Kashmir, Pakistan says .
 No amount of logic or reason could convince the Pakistanis that India genuinely needed a greatly increased defense machine to withstand Chinese pressures . Pakistanis believe India needs a much increased defense system to withstand China's pressure .
 Foreign Minister Bhutto stated flatly that India was not augmenting its military strength because of China but because it sought to threaten Pakistan . Pakistan's foreign minister said in a speech in 1963 that India's military strength was not being increased because of the threat posed by China .
 Kashmir dispute could be solved only if Western powers made settlement of it a condition for giving arms to India, he said . He cautioned that the Kashmir dispute would be a major sticking point .
 Peking, while clearly sympathetic to Pakistan, had remained technically correct in insisting that the Kashmir problem be mutually settled by India and Pakistan .
 Chou En-lai secured Pakistan’s support for a second Bandung conference . He also secured the support of a second conference in Indonesia .
 Pakistan, like China, had been excluded from the Belgrade non-aligned nations meeting . India and Yugoslavia played the leading roles in the meeting . Pakistan was excluded .
 Ayub followed Chou’s path toward a new Bandung . Thus, it was not difficult for Ayub to follow Chou's path .
 In December 1963 a single strand of the Prophet Mohammed’s hair was stolen from a mosque in Srinagar, Kashmir . The relic was taken from the mosque in December 1963 .
 This touched off anti-Indian riots in Kashmir’s capital, which soon incited similar communal disturbances in India and Pakistan . Anti-Indian rioting in Kashmir's capital, followed by similar riots in Pakistan and India .
 Kashmir’s nationalist hero and onetime leader, Sheikh Abdullah, was released from long Indian detention . New Delhi's deep concern that communal unrest might jeopardize India's hold on Kashmir became obvious in April 1964 when Kashmir's nationalist hero Sheikh Abdullah was released .
 It is hoped that this gesture would appease the aroused Kashmiri Moslems . It was hoped that it would appease them .
 Hopes for a settlement rose slightly when Nehru agreed to meet once again with Ayub Khan . Hopes of a settlement increased slightly after Nehru said he would meet with Khan again .
 There were many who felt that settlement would be easier with Nehru’s passing . Nehru's emotional attachment to the land of his ancestors had aggravated the problem . It was commonly believed that the Prime Minister's attachment to his ancestors aggravated the issue .
 Despite initial optimism, Lal Bahadur Shastri could not control Indian extremists, who forced through several constitutional moves which tied Kashmir all the more closely to India . Despite initial hopes, it soon became evident that his successor could not .
 In December 1964, for example, India proclaimed Kashmir to be an integral part of the Indian state . India has declared Kashmir to a state of Kashmir .
 Sheikh Abdullah ably appealed publicly for Kashmiri self-determination . Sheikh Abdullah went to Pakistan after his release and predict a HOSTILE CO-EXISTENCE .
 Adding to New Delhi’s uneasiness was a meeting in March 1965 between Sheikh Abdullah and Chou En-lai in Algiers . The meeting took place in March 1964 .
 Sheikh Abdullah was again taken into custody when he returned to Kashmir in May . The Chinese Premier promised the Kashmir leader his support and invited him to Peking, For his short-lived .
 His detention in South India set off angry demonstrations in Srinagar . It served once again to remind India that the feelings of Kashmiris themselves had to be taken into consideration before a lasting solution could be found .
 Pakistan’s Foreign Minister to rattle the saber . It also provided a cue for Pakistan's Foreign Minister .
 Bhutto’s remark had added significance in view of the serious fighting which had broken out in April between Indian and Pakistani forces in the long-disputed border area known as Rann of Kutch .
 This region is a marshy flat on the coast of the Arabian Sea . It is through which the India-Pakistan border runs . The border is between India and Pakistan .
 Rawalpindi disputed India’s contention that the border line should follow the northern rim of the periodically flooded marshland . The border line was believed to run through the middle of the marshland and the northern part of the border .
 Fighting began when Pakistan tried to fortify Kanjarkot, which India considered to be on its side of the line . India considered the area on its way to the border, but Pakistan wanted it on its line .
 Because of the intrinsic unimportance of the Rann, the skirmishes were more a symptom than a cause of tensions . The Rann skirmishes are more of an unimportant issue than an issue of tension .
 Pakistan and China first began their rapprochement in 2008 . New Delhi has been wary of the heightened hostility felt by New Delhi since .
 The Kutch episode, while minor in terms of the military forces committed to it, was of considerable significance to New Delhi . New Delhi was in the grip of the Kutch region when the incident occurred .
 Before the Kutch hostilities India's leaders had been extremely uneasy and bitter about Pakistan’s military establishment but had, at least, found some solace in Washington .
 The Kutch incident, in which India captured U.S. equipment, proved to New Delhi’s satisfaction that such guarantees could be difficult to enforce . India captured United States equipment while overrunning Pakistani positions .
 The more militant faction of the Indian government could and did use the Kutch experience to support its position that Pakistan was an enemy with whom no peaceful accommodation was possible . Pakistan is Pakistan, India's most powerful ally, says the historian .
 By then tempers were raw, and the war psychology had gripped both peoples . By then, tempers had been raw .
 Sometime during the first week of August 1965—most probably August 5, when Indian patrols killed six Azad Kashmiris within Indian lines and found on them what New Delhi considered compromising literature and equipment .
 Large numbers of armed Kashmiri Moslems from the Pakistan puppet state of Azad Kashmir were infiltrating the Vale of Kashmir .
 India claimed that they were an organized, irregular force under Pakistan army orders . India claimed they were instructed to perform sabotage and other acts of terrorism in Kashmir .
 The angry crowd demanded that Shastri take strong action in retaliation against Pakistan . Angry crowd called for strong action from India .
 Indians saw in the Azad Kashmiris as a guerrilla force intent upon harassing Indian authority in the Vale and inciting a Moslem uprising . Indians saw them as an attempt to harass Indian authority and incite an uprising .
 It was tempting to compare the new tactics in Kashmir with Mao’s doctrine of guerrilla warfare . It was tempted to conclude that direct Peking influence was involved in the Kashmir insurgency .
 Close consultation between Rawalpindi and Peking must at least be credited with giving Pakistan greater self-confidence . This was not the case, but the increasingly close consultation between the two sides must be credited .
 In April Avub Khan had negotiated in Moscow three agreements concerning trade, economic cooperation and cultural exchanges . In April he had negotiated three agreements .
 Rawalpindi wanted to regularize relations between the two countries as part of an evolving new policy of non-alignment . The two countries have been at odds for years over the years .
 Moscow, for its part, wanted more flexibility in the complicated subcontinent situation than its close alignment with India had heretofore permitted . Moscow sought more flexibility with India .
 Moscow refused to include any mention of Kashmir in the joint communiqué concluding Shastri’s state visit to Moscow in May . India realized this and found confirmation in the refusal to include no mention of the Kashmir issue .
 Ayub Khan, whose own visit to Moscow preceeded Shastri’s, must have found this omission heartening . Conversely, Ayub .
 Pravda’s silence for three weeks on Kashmir crisis was interpreted by Rawalpindi as encouraging sign which gave rise to hopes that India could be isolated, not only from United States military support during the crisis .
 Pravda’s first words on the Kashmir fighting did not appear until August 24 . The Kashmir fighting began on August 24, 2008 .
 Moscow offered to mediate the dispute in the Russian Central Asia city of Tashkent . Moscow said it would remain neutral but would underscore its neutrality by offering mediation .
 Peking’s subsequent effort to keep the conflict alive explains why Peking kept the war alive . This maneuver, calculated to provide Moscow with a stronger position in subcontinent affairs, helps to explain Peking's subsequent effort .
 China could not afford to see the Soviet Union take honors as peacemaker and emerge as a stronger force in the subcontinent . The Soviet Union was seen as a strong force in India .
 This was particularly important because of the continuing rebellion in Tibet . This was especially important for Tibet, which has been fighting for independence from Tibet .
 China’s announcement on August 23, that Tibet had become an ‘autonomous region’ meant, in fact, that the last vestiges of autonomy had been swept aside . Tibet has been ruled out of Tibet by China since 2008 . Tibet is now an autonomous region
 Peking would henceforward rule with an iron grip . Whatever trappings of home rule were permitted or even encouraged for sake of appearances, Peking ruled . Peking was ruled by the Communist Party of China at the end of its rule .
 The Preparatory Committee for the Tibet Autonomous Region, established nine years earlier with the Dalai Lama at its head, would no longer exist . The Dalai Lama would have been at the head of the committee .
 The Panchen Lama, long considered Peking’s puppet, was removed in December . It marked the end of anv pretence of theocratic power in Peking .
 In the meantime guerrilla terrorism in Kashmir provoked Indian counteraction . In Kashmir, the Indian government has responded to guerrilla terrorism . The Kashmiris have been fighting in Kashmir for years .
 This secured the vital route to India’s China front along the Ladakh-Tibet border . The route secured by India's China front . This secured a vital route .
 New Delhi dreaded the prospect of Chinese action in Ladakh which would draw Indian troops away from the Pakistan front . New Delhi feared it would draw troops from Pakistan front to China .
 Even more serious would be a Chinese-Pakistan linkup in the region of the Karakorum Pass, crushing India’s Kashmir forces in a pincer .
 On August 25 Indian troops captured additional Pakistan posts in the Tithwal area, then probed across the cease-fire line between Uri and Poonch . The border was the first border post between the two countries .
 The next move was Pakistan’s; an infantry brigade with tank support struck toward Chhamb near the important city of Jammu on September 1 . Pakistan's next move is to strike toward Jammu, which is important for the region's people .
 Pakistan admitted that the Pakistan regular army intended to take Akhnur just north of Jammu and thereby cut India’s vital supply line to Srinagar . Pakistan abandoned any pretense that only Azad Kashmir irregulars were engaged .
 Pakistan's objective was clear—the military seizure and retention of Kashmir . By this time Pakistan’s objectives were clear, the military seized and retained Kashmir .
 The war spilled over into the Punjab plain when India launched offensives aimed at Lahore and Sialkot . India launched an offensive on Lahore in Lahore . The war also spilled over to Punjab plain in Punjab plain .
 Aircraft was being used by both sides in support of troops, and scare flights ranged deep into both Indian and Pakistan territory .
 The presence of Chinese Foreign Minister Chen Yi in Pakistan at this time gave a third dimension to the drama as seen from New Delhi . Chen Yi is the Chinese foreign minister who has visited Pakistan .
 The announcement added that “India’s aggression against any of its neighbors concerns all of the neighbors,” and warned against a ‘chain of consequences” which could follow . The announcement also warned against “a chain of . consequences’
 General Lo Jui-ching braced the Chinese people for a possible conflict with the U.S. arising out of hostilities in South Vietnam . Speaking at a rally celebrating the twentieth anniversary of Japan’s surrender .
 India accused of “military aggression and provocation” along the Chinese-Indian border . India was accused of 'military aggression' along the border . China accused India of ‘military aggression’ and ‘provocation’ along the Indian border .
 China demands withdrawal of Indian troops from contested posts on Sikkim border . Pakistan’s Ambassador to Peking, Mohammed Raza, met with the Chinese President Liu Shao-chi in Peking .
 India was also accused of violating China’s borders in July and August in conjunction with ‘aggression” against Pakistan . China accused India of violating its borders in August and July .
 In keeping with its technique of speaking through surrogates, Peking used Indonesia to make more explicit its own motives in entering the India-Pakistan crisis .
 Peking also hoped to win Pakistan’s endorsement of its claim to Aksai Chin in Ladakh . Aidit added significantly that Peking . also . hoped to . win Pakistan's endorsement of . its claim .
 Such a move would also make less tempting an Indian invasion of lightly guarded East Pakistan . The move would make it less tempting to invade lightly guarded territory .
 Peking's bellicosity served to encourage Pakistan at first to respond negatively to the U.N.’s call for a cease-fire agreement . It is difficult to determine the extent of the extent to which Peking helped Pakistan respond negatively . The U.S. should
 Secretary-General U Thant received Shastri’s promise to order a cease-fire providing Pakistan would also agree . Secretary-general U. Thant made a flying visit to the subcontinent to discuss the situation .
 Ayub Khan insisted that a cease-fire be contingent upon a solution to the Kashmir problem by a plebiscite as originally called for by the United Nations in 1948 . But he was not able to move Ayub .
 The United States viewed Red China’s intervention in the South Asian conflict with deep concern . The U.S. viewed the Chinese intervention in South Asia with concern .
 China would not easily be deterred from its course, which was obviously calculated to keep South Asian tensions raw . China's move would not be easily deterred by its actions, it said .
 Red troops massed at several frontier points, giving substance to the ultimatum . Red troops were massed in the wake of the announcement .
 Shastri reported to a worried Parliament that he had no hesitation in agreeing with China’s demand that India destroy all its fortifications on Tibetan soil since, in fact, there were none .
 Hoping that some concession would provide China with a face-saving avenue of diplomatic retreat, he also announced India’s agreement to a long-standing Chinese proposal for joint inspection of Indian installations along the border .
 The need for a cease-fire is even more urgent because of China’s ultimatum . U. Thant proposes that the Security Council threaten immediate economic and military reprisals against the combatants .
 New Delhi appealed to the United States, Britain and the Soviet Union for urgent aid against aggression by China . New Delhi called on the U.S. and Britain to help against aggression .
 India may also have hoped that U.S. air power would retaliate against Chinese bases in Tibet if China launched a full-scale invasion .
 The introduction of China into the South Asian crisis forced the USSR to edge cautiously away from its neutral stance toward support of India . The USSR had been neutral in the South Asia crisis .
 Peking’s shrill cry of protest could be heard loudly . What additional pressure, if any, was exerted by Moscow was not made public .
 Peking announced on September 22 that India had complied with its demands . Peking said it had satisfactorially compiled with India's list of demands . India had been in talks with China for more than two years .
 Peking’s retreat could only mean Rawalpindi had already reached the decision to meet U.N. cease-fire terms . The move against India would provoke large-scale U.S. military assistance to New Delhi .
 Pakistan’s Foreign Minister announced in a tense pre-dawn session of the Security Council that Pakistan accepted the terms for halting the fighting . Pakistan accepts the council's terms for stopping the fighting in Kashmir .
 President Ayub went on the air to describe the U.N. cease-fire order as “inadequate and unsatisfactory’” because it did not include a specific solution for the Kashmir problem . He announced that in the interests of peace he had accepted it .
 Men had died and quantities of costly war machinery had been expended for no gain . Men died and . quantities of . costly war . machinery had . been expended on no gain. Men died .
 The acceptance of a cease-fire surely gave Pakistani extremists an excuse to attack Ayub Khan . Ayub had accepted the ceasefire in order to protect his country from the Taliban .
 China, however, by its own act of intervention, emerged the greatest loser from the September war . China's intervention was the most successful act of September war in the world .
 Its exhibition of belligerency before an Afro-Asian world tired and afraid of war further tarnished its image and prejudiced certain of its important objectives . The U.S. should not have been allowed to engage in war in Africa .
 China’s loss of face was a major reason for its backing out of the “Bandung II” Conference of Afro-Asian Nations . The conference had been rescheduled to take place November 5, 1965 . China backed out of Bandung II .
 The importance of this should not be minimized in view of earlier indications that Peking had staked much on the Algiers meeting . Peking has staked a lot on the meeting, according to reports .
 Peking’s pressure on India did not militarily help Pakistan, as presumably it was intended to do . Peking's pressure on Pakistan did not help Pakistan .
 Both the United States and the Soviet Union redoubled efforts to negotiate a cease-fire . The situation provided justification for both to exert the strongest possible pressures to bring this about . It simply increased tension to a point where both the U.S. and the . Soviet Union .
 Peking’s precipitous action also presented, at least for the moment, a tableau in which the U.S. and the USSR were revealed in alignment for peace while Communist China, in sharp contrast, beat the drums of battle . The United States and the Soviet Union
 China’s ideology and influence could be dangerous to underdeveloped nations, says China . Peking may have served Peking's purpose of discrediting its Communist rival as a collaborator of the ‘imperialists,” it says .
 The Soviet Union's strong stand against China’s entry into the subcontinent crisis brought the tensions between these two Communist antagonists to a new pitch of intensity . The Soviet stand brought tensions between China and the Soviet Union to an intensity .
 Peking could blame the Soviet Union as well as the United States for its diplomatic defeat in South Asia . The Soviet Union and the U.S. could blame each other for their diplomatic defeat .
 Peking’s bitter denunciation of Moscow on November 10, 1965 for “acting in tacit agreement and close collaboration with Lyndon B Johnson” in Vietnam situation must have been influenced by U.S.-Soviet parallel action during the India-Pakistan crisis in September .
 Soviet Premier Aleksei Kosygin committed his country to preserving peace in South Asia . By taking the initiative in bringing India and Pakistan together at the conference table, he achieved agreement to withdraw all forces .
 This was the first occasion in history that the USSR had arbitrated between two non-Communist antagonists . The USSR committed its prestige to achieving at least limited settlement . This was first time the USSR has arbitrated .
 Kosygin’s effort was successful despite opposition from China . Peking's discomfort must have added considerably to the discomfort of Peking . The Russian president is expected to make the trip to Moscow in 2015 .
 Tashkent meeting also provided the Soviet Union with a long-sought opportunity to repair its relationship with Pakistan . The Soviet Union has long sought to repair relations with Pakistan, Pakistan .
 Rawalpindi may judge the worth of its relationship by whether Pakistan receives active support for its Kashmir claim, but for the time being Soviet neutrality on this issue is of sufficient benefit to cause Pakistan to welcome it .
 Implicit in neutrality is a Soviet obligation to deter India from aggression against Pakistan . And implicit in neutrality, the Soviet obligation is to deter Indian aggression, he says .
 With real improvement in the relations between India and Pakistan, the latter would become less dependent on Peking . The Soviet Union would benefit accordingly by reduced Chinese influence on its southern flank, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Moscow gained greater flexibility by its more neutral posture in the subcontinent . But, even immediately, Moscow gains greater flexibility . Moscow gained more flexibility by adopting a neutral stance in India .
 Moscow’s main target in Asia was Peking, writes Andrew Hammond . Tashkent in the context of other coordinated acts of Soviet diplomacy which occurred at almost the same time .
 Renewed Chinese outbursts accusing the Soviet Union of collusion with the United States gave unmistakable testimony to Peking’s ire and concern .
 To expect lasting peace between India and Pakistan requires more optimism than the realities of S.A. politics permit . To expect a mutually acceptable solution to the Kashmir problem requires optimism .
 While the Soviet Union and the West both have important stakes in subcontinent stability, intense communal antagonism cannot be eliminated . Both Indian and Pakistani selfinterest demand peace .
 Extremists in both India and Pakistan cried ‘sell out’ after Tashkent . Extremists can be expected to incite hate whenever permitted to do so .
 Ayub Khan signed the Tashkent accord in September 1965 . Pakistan too has its extremists, who were not permitted to see the severe supply problem facing their army in Kashmir .
 China can at any time exercise its option to harass India in the Himalayas, setting in motion the same forces of conflict which have twice already brought the subcontinent perilously close to major war .
 Political thrusts at the Himalayan border states and military maneuvers may have been intended only as tactical pressures . Military maneuvers near the frontier may have only been tactical pressures, say experts .
 Chinese intentions may have deeper significance as indices of future Chinese intentions . But they may also have significance as indicators of future China intentions .
 The choice of Sikkim, where the border is not in dispute, as pressure point on India during the September 1965 crisis with Pakistan had military logic . It may also have had sinister political significance when viewed in the context of remarks made at a press conference by Chinese Foreign Minister Chen Yi
 Chinese forces then reoccupied Thagla Ridge and Longju, two border passes in the Northeast Frontier Agency . The passes had figured prominently in China’s 1962 invasion of India and which had been neutralized as no-man-land .
 We stand at the crest of this change, looking at it, and a tremendous drama is unravelling before our eyes . We are looking at the change, and the drama unravelled before us, says Mr Smith .
 Jawaharlal Nehru: Every nation’s problems and prospects are significantly determined by history, heritage and its location on the globe . Nehru died January 17, 1960, in a hospital in Bangalore .
 Nehru’s new India was to break out of the limitations imposed by heritage and emerge full-blown from colonial cocoon as a prototype for independent Asian nations . The dream of Nehru's new India is to break .
 There are complex reasons why the dream has not been fully realized and may yet be spoiled altogether . The dream is still not fully realized, but it may still be spoiled .
 India has no choice but to co-exist along a 2,500-mile border with an aggressive, hostile China . But much blame can be fixed on environment since much of India's border with China can't be fixed .
 Communist China has mocked India’s political philosophy of peace and non-alignment . Communist Chinese have mocked India's political philosophy .
 It has undermined India’s national security, not only directly along its northern border, but indirectly by encouraging tensions with Pakistan and by inciting subversion and separatism within the Indian federation . It has also undermined India's national security .
 China, by its harassment, has also placed in jeopardy India’s precarious economy . China's harassment has also put India's precarious economy at risk, writes CNN.com .
 New Delhi's domestic policies are vulnerable to China's weaponry of subversion and external pressure . New Delhi’s domestic policies, which are concerned mainly with economic development, internal security and national union, are .
 India’s foreign policy, founded in the beginning on ideology and hope, has been rudely wrenched back to reality by its Chinese neighbor . China's own ideology has been linked more effectively with geopolitical reality, writes Andrew Hammond .
 China's assault on new India's ideology has hurt the most . It is perhaps China’s assault on Indian ideology which has hurt most . China is perhaps the most aggressive in its attacks on India's ideologies .
 Peaceful co-existence, non-alignment, Asian solidarity have been casualties of Peking’s aggression against India . Panch Sheela credo was reflected in India's Panch sheela, which reflected in its Panch
 Red China’s hostility toward India, more than any other single cause, wrecked the ‘Bandung spirit’ of Afro-Asian solidarity, so hopefully enunciated in April 1955 at the Conference of Asian and African Countries held at Bandung, Indonesia . Red China
 A second “Bandung’s” meeting, scheduled a decade later in Algiers, was cancelled largely as a result of Chinese pressure . There was thus something symbolic in the fact that a second ‘Bandungs’ meeting was cancelled .
 Peking, the principal promoter of the second conference, had originally intended to exploit it as a forum for asserting leadership of the Afro-Asian world . Peking had originally planned to use the conference to assert leadership .
 China’s abortive intrusion into the India-Pakistan crisis in September 1965 and the misfired pro-Peking Communist coup attempt in Indonesia, which also took place on the eve of the conference .
 The likelihood that the Soviet Union would be invited and would exploit to the utmost China’s misfortunes caused Peking to reverse its position and sabotage the meeting at the eleventh hour . Peking reversed position and sabotaged the meeting .
 Bandung II’s failure to take place could be attributed to divisions within the Afro-Asian world which were even more pronounced in 1965 than they had been a decade before . More basically, Bandung I’d failure to . take place was attributed to division within the
 The emerging nations of the former colonial area were caught up in big power competition, including competition between Moscow and Peking .
 The latter’s contempt for peaceful co-existence and its doctrinal break with Moscow on the issue of revolution had confused the meaning of non-alignment, writes Andrew Hammond .
 At least to this extent China was succeeding in its objective to prove that non-alignment is a fallacy . There is no middle way between Communism and capitalism, or between violence and peace . At least this is the aim of China .
 India’s first time of acute peril in October/November 1962 exposed those Asian and African leaders who considered non-alignment an instrument, not an ideology, not ideology . The first time India was at risk was when it was in danger .
 Many of the same nations failed to condemn China for its aggression against India in 1962 . It was, therefore, not surprising that many of the . same nations did not condemn China's aggression against .
 Even Yugoslavia’s Tito, the host of the 1961 Belgrade conference of non-aligned nations, had been equivocal . Tito was normally a champion of anti-Chinese sentiment .
 He was in the midst of delicate negotiations to narrow the ideological gap between Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union . He found it politic to let Moscow take the lead in determining the line to be followed with regard to China’s new aggression .
 Ghana’s Nkrumah refrained from expressing sympathy for its Commonwealth brother in 1962 . But, by implication, he took China's side and condemned Great Britain for rushing arms to India . Ghana also condemned Britain's decision to rush arms into India .
 The third conference of the Afro-Asian Solidarity Organization, held that same year at Moshi, Tanganyika, failed to condemn China . Instead, with Chinese prodding it passed a resolution which by implication assumed India to have been no less guilty of hostilities than China .
 When China threatened to attack India again in September 1965, members of the Afro-Asian world reacted on the basis of parochial interest and expediency . Similarly, when China threatened again in 1965, the world reacted to the threat .
 India’s experience in two acute crises with China should be proof enough that China does not admit the validity of non-alignment as a policy . China has not admitted the validity .
 There was clearly no place for non-alignment; the countries of the world must either have gone through the revolutionary stage or endure the hostility of those which had . The countries must either endure the revolution of those that had .
 Nehru argued that China’s aggression was the act of an international outlaw forced to live outside the community of nations because its admission to the U.N. had been blocked . Nehru died in 1975 .
 India’s close relationship with the USSR is, to a large extent, a consequence of Chinese hostility . The relationship is not simply an abstract expression of non-alignment in the East-West cold war sense of the word . It is a result of China's hostility, not
 New Delhi's policy toward the USSR is also recognition that India’s economic and military needs require very large foreign contributions, writes Aradhama . India's policy also recognizes that the Soviet Union cannot provide the country's military needs exclusively .
 The nonalignment label provides entrée to Afro-Asian forums . It reassures India’s electorate that there has been no backsliding toward colonial subservience .
 But here again India is guided by practical politics, not abstract principle, says CNN.com .
 India’s existence as a unified, independent nation depends not on its rigid adherence to principle, but on its ability to deter from aggression those nations—particularly China—which threaten it . India's ability to achieve a rate of economic progress which will satisfy the expectations of an exploding population
 New Delhi realizes that India’s national security will demand a vastly greater defense effort to back up its diplomatic and political policies . New Delhi realized that it will need a vastly more defense effort .
 It also recognizes that this will be enormously expensive, particularly if an effort is made to provide a nuclear capability to match China’s . The U.S. recognizes that it will also recognize that this is enormously expensive . It will also be enormously difficult for the U.N.
 Indian leaders and planners are concerned that an increased national defense effort will have an adverse effect on the country’s already precarious economy . For these reasons, Indian leaders are concerned an increased defense effort could have a negative effect on their economy .
 India may have to conclude that economic reality dictates a defense solution other than complete military selfsufficiency . Considering the staggering costs of maintaining a modern military machine, India may need to consider other options .
 The defense of the subcontinent against China must depend on the readiness of the West, particularly the U.S. or the Soviet Union to intervene if requested . The West must also be ready to intervene, writes Peter Bergen, a former British diplomat .
 Austria, Belgium, Canada, France, West Germany, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, United Kingdom, United States, the United States Export-Import Bank, the World Bank and the International Development Association .
 The elimination of the Pakistan threat could, of course, be achieved if the Kashmir problem were resolved . The Kashmir problem could be resolved if Kashmir problem was resolved .
 Both India and Pakistan’s defense problem would be simplified and some form of a mutual defense plan could be worked out . The plan would relieve both countries of the enormous arms burden they now bear .
 True peace between India and Pakistan would eliminate inhibitions of Western suppliers to provide India with the type and volume of military equipment which it needs for defense against China . True peace would also eliminate the inhibitions . Western suppliers would also be more interested in providing India with military equipment .
 Despite the Tashkent agreement, lasting peace in the subcontinent is not assured . The currents of hate still run too fast. Despite the agreement, despite the TASHkent deal, the peace is not guaranteed .
 Alarm at increased Western military aid to India following China’s 1962 invasion was one factor which drove Pakistan closer to Peking . Pakistan became closer to China after China invaded India in 1962 .
 It would be dangerous to assume that Pakistan will refrain from concluding formal defense arrangements with China if the West fails to replenish and supply Pakistan armories . In September 1965, the inadequacy of ammunition stocks and spare parts for U.S.-supplied equipment was a factor in causing Raw
 China still appears to Pakistanis to be an important protector to which they can turn should India in the future threaten attack . Peking’s threatening posture served only to provoke irresistible U.S. and USSR pressures for a cease-fire .
 Most Pakistani leaders genuinely believe that there is basic military and political logic in drawing closer to India’s enemy, although there is a considerable range of opinion as to how close they are .
 Rawalpindi is not willing to acknowledge that China represents an ultimate threat to the whole of South Asia, including Pakistan, says Pakistanis . Pakistanis have not been able to acknowledge the threat posed by China .
 Peking’s aggressive acts against India in October 1962 were -dismissed as simply tactical retaliation against Indian army action to clear its borders of the intruding Chinese .
 Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, in his capacity as Pakistan’s Foreign Minister, expressed the view that serious Chinese expansion, if any, would more rationally be directed toward Southeast Asia since it is there where food can be found .
 As recently as February 1966 he again denied that China represented a threat to the subcontinent . He again denied the threat in February 1966 .
 Pakistan's bourgeois leaders are ideologically no more acceptable to Chinese Communism than are India’s leaders . But Peking's doctrinal espousal of revolution, so eloquently reiterated, cannot indefinitely be ignored by Pakistan‘s bourgeois leaders .
 One of the greatest dangers to India of continuing friction with Pakistan is a worsening of internal communal tensions . One of India's greatest dangers is the worsening of communal tensions with Pakistan, writes CNN.com .
 India's large Moslem minority, acutely responsive to co-religionists in Pakistan, teeters dangerously on the brink of violence . India’s large Moslam minority teeters on the verge of violence in Pakistan .
 Since Nehru's death India can no longer rely on the personal charisma of a unique leader to preserve national unity . The possibilities of communal explosions are for this reason greater than ever before before . Nehru died in 1953 .
 The causes of Moslem dissidence in India are complex and derive from the age of the Moghul rulers . The modern tensions between India and Pakistan, dating from partition, seriously aggravate the problem .
 New Delhi is acutely conscious that there are more than 50 million Moslems within its borders . New Delhi says it is acutely aware of the presence of 50 million people in its city . The city is also acutely conscious of its Muslim population .
 India would find itself faced with a frighteningly dangerous security problem . Were there to be a major communal uprising, India would be faced with the problem .
 India’s relationship with the Himalayan border state of Nepal is also vital . India's relationship with Nepal is crucial to its success in Nepal .
 Nepal's traditional role as buffer became even more important when Tibet was absorbed by China . Nepal’s traditional role became more important after Tibet was incorporated into China .
 New Delhi believes that it must maintain a position of paramountcy in Nepal if the latter’s buffer role is to be preserved . India finds itself in a serious dilemma .
 To abandon its special position in Nepal would be to create a vacuum which could be exploited by the Chinese through infiltration, political intrigue and economic penetration . The Chinese could be able to exploit the Nepalese government through infiltration and political intrigue .
 The Nepalese must have a position of primacy which must be maintained by constant pressure . Yet to alienate the Nepaleses and drive them further into the arms of the Chinese, writes Andrew Hammond .
 China uses fear, favor and subversion as complementary influences on Nepal . The object of pushing India and Nepal farther apart is to push the two nations farther apart .
 Kathmandu believes it must reach tolerable accommodation with Peking . India’s limited ability to defend Nepal against Chinese aggression is limited . Nepal believes it will not be able to defend itself from Chinese aggression .
 Such aid, given either as grants or loans, is helpful to Nepal in its economic development . Such aid serves as pressure on India to be more generous, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 It also lessens Nepal’s dependence on India and thus gratifies a traditionally strong spirit of nationalism in the mountain kingdom . It also gratifies the traditionally strong nationalistic spirit of Nepal .
 Overland communication determines orientation of mountain lands such as Nepal which have traditionally relied on human transportation . Nepal is one of the world's most populous countries .
 With the completion of the road from Kathmandu to Lhasa, Nepal’s trade links with China will become progressively stronger . Nepal's trade link with China is set to become stronger .
 The Soviet Union’s sudden establishment of an embassy in Kathmandu during the 1959 Tibet crisis suggests that Moscow also saw with clarity the implications of Chinese influence in the Himalayan borderlands .
 It would be unrealistic to expect Moscow to compete with China in Nepal and the other border states . Yet it would be impossible to expect Russia to compete in Nepal .
 The Soviet Union is and must be primarily concerned with its relationship with India so cannot be too aggressive in the Himalayan states . New Delhi has special interests and responsibilities in the region .
 China may find renewed direct aggression against India difficult, particularly if the Soviet Union makes clear its intention to exert retaliatory pressure in places where China is vulnerable, such as in Sinkiang . The West supplies critically needed air support, aggression in Nepal is a very real possibility .
 It would be difficult for any country to justify intervention in Kathmandu’s defense unless requested to do so . Should Peking disguise its actions in Nepal through indigenous subversion or if the legal issues are otherwise clouded, legal issues may be clouded .
 Because of traditional resentment against Indian efforts to dominate it, Nepal would probably be disinclined to seek New Delhi's support against Peking’s subversion until too late .
 Unsolicited Indian initiatives could be misinterpreted or resented by the Nepalese . This could lead them to draw even closer to the Chinese, writes CNN's Andrew Hammond .
 Nepal is extremely vulnerable to Chinese influence and cannot be easily defended by foreign assistance . All this adds up to the gloomy conclusion that Nepal is vulnerable to China influence .
 A Communist-dominated Nepal would put China on the southern slopes of the Himalayas, contiguous with the rich Gangetic plain, with all that implies for Indian security . China would put its grip on the south slopes of Nepal on the northern edge of the mountains .
 The existence of many Nepalese immigrants in Bhutan and Sikkim gives some reality to the scheme . Bhutanese immigrants are believed to be part of the plan to bring Nepal to India .
 Non-Nepalese people of Sikkim and Bhutan do not relish being dominated by Nepalese . They are inclined to believe Nepal would be less overpowering—thus more acceptable—than India .
 It is no simple coincidence that China threatened India specifically on the Sikkim border during the September 1965 crisis . It is not a coincidence that India was threatened specifically by China during the 1965 border crisis . India was not threatened by China specifically in September 1965 .
 Communist China favors the Pan-Himalayan concept . It is significant that Communist China favored the idea of a Pan-Asian concept .
 Peking may see Nepal as a cat’s paw with which to create such a federation . Sikkim and Bhutan may weaken Bhutan's treaty ties with India . By so doing, it will weaken Sikkims and Bhunsuns' treaty ties .
 Indirect aggression of this kind against the mountain principalities would be less likely to invoke foreign backing for Indian military defense of its strategic buffer areas .
 The assassination of Bhutan’s pro-Indian Prime Minister, Jigme Dorje, in April 1964 and the attempted assassination of King Jigmed Dorji Wangchuk in July 1965 are ominous events . A more direct approach to Himalayan conquest by China cannot be ruled out
 There certainly exists a body of Bhutanese who are opposed to their country’s Indian ties . The body may ultimately become powerful enough to challenge the moderate leadership now ruling the country .
 The seizure of power in Bhutan by an anti-Indian cabal would reverberate in Kathmandu just as Chinese moves in Nepal are felt by Bhutanese people .
 The Chinese invasion of India in 1962 accentuated serious factional tensions among Indian Communists . It has since been aggravated by the Sino-Soviet doctrinal schism . The Chinese-Soviet schism has since aggravated by China's doctrinal split .
 By early 1963, soon after the Chinese assault, a climax was reached in the long struggle for control . The pro-Soviet faction condemned China while advocating peaceful co-existence .
 This represented a total victory for the pro-Soviet faction, which at the same time voted unqualified support for Moscow’s position on Cuba and backed India in its dispute with China . The pro-Russian faction also backed Russia in its stance on Cuba .
 Dange’s statement appears to have had major significance beyond the Sino-Indian border dispute . The statement was timed and phrased as it was . Dange's statement is likely to have been significant beyond the border dispute.
 It was probably meant to be an indirect warning by Moscow that the USSR would not tolerate Peking's current actions and claims along the Soviet-Chinese border .
 It more obviously set the definitive party line that direct Chinese aggression against India was doctrinally inadmissable . It made reconciliation between the pro-Soviet and pro-Chinese wings of the party more difficult .
 Soviet policy requires a unified India which Moscow hopes to influence politically, diplomatically and economically through its relations with New Delhi . Moscow wants to influence the country politically, politically and economically .
 Peking—doctrinally dedicated to bringing about revolution by the masses—is determined to splinter the nation so as to assist the revolutionary objective . Conversely, Peking is determined to split the nation to assist its revolutionary objective.
 Communist China cannot have anything but contempt for India’s bourgeois central government . Without being untrue to its doctrinal fundamentalism, Communist China can’t have contempt for the Indian government .
 The death of Stalin and the shift to parliamentary tactics in Moscow’s doctrine. This did not work, but of more importance was the death of St. Stalin . This was more important than the shift in parliamentary tactics .
 By 1954 Soviet foreign policy, following the dictates of peaceful co-existence, sought accommodation with Nehru . The Soviet Union sought accommodation from Nehru, India, in 1954 .
 Peking was the inheritor of the militants and hard-liners who refused to abandon insurrection and linguistic separatism . Peking is inheriting the militants who refuse to abandon insurgents and linguistic separatists .
 It is understandable that this faction is strongest in the non-Hindi-speaking states of India such as West Bengal, Andhra and Kerala . It is also strongest in West Bengal .
 The militants have fought the adoption of Hindi as India’s national language . Encouraged by the strains on Indian unity caused by Chinese aggression . They have been proponents of total autonomy for India's linguistic groups, even tribal aborigines .
 It is here that one can see one of the greatest dangers of China’s hostility toward India . It is also a convincing logic of China's actions along the border .
 Faced with the likelihood of a pro-Peking Communist regime taking power in Kerala State, New Delhi moved decisively against Peking’s agents throughout the country . Faced then with the . likelihood of . the likelihood . of taking power, New . Delhi moved . decisively against
 India probably feels it must continue to pursue if its defenses against Red China are to be effective . This is the kind of forceful approach to the internal Communist problem which India feels it needs to pursue .
 With an appreciation of the causes and consequences of China's actions and recognizing India’s vulnerability to communal and linguistic disintegration, New Delhi has to be continually on guard . New Delhi needs to be constantly on guard.
 Chinese aggression has humiliated India and created a defense requirement certain to strain India’s economy . Chinese aggression and threats have humiliated India, according to the report .
 Peking’s actions have convinced the Himalayan border states, Nepal and Bhutan, that they must respond to the realities of strength . India, unable to protect itself, cannot protect them, Bhutan says .
 This has deprived India of its traditional northern buffer protection . It has provided China with a foothold of influence on the southern slopes of the Himalayas overlooking the Gangetic heartland .
 Peking’s actions have aggravated India-Pakistan relations, making much more remote any possibility of cooperation between them for the mutual defense of the subcontinent . The U.S. has taken steps to strengthen its influence in the region, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The invasion of India in 1962 and the threatened attack in 1965 were, above all, dramatic demonstrations of China’s willingness to use aggression as an instrument of foreign policy in a world which hopes for peace . China's aggression in India and the threat of an attack on India in 1965
 China's nuclear capability has awesome meaning in a world which fears but respects power . Viewed now in the context of China’s nuclear capability, this has . awesome meaning .
 The avalanche of publications which pour from Peking’s presses preach violent revolution as the only road to freedom, have been translated from theory into reality . Violence is the only solution to disagreement, and aggression is aggression as only solution .
 Samuel Turner, An Account of an Embassy to the Court of the Teshoo Lama in Tibet in Tibet, xiii. Samuel Turner wrote that the embassy was sent to Tibet by the Tibetan Lama . Turner's account of the embassy's visit to Tibet is published in Turner's book,
 Turner, An Account of an Embassy to the Court of the Teshoo Lama in Tibet, 457—473. Turner, an account of an embassy to the Tibetan court, 457-473 . Turner's account of the embassy's visit to Tibet is published in Turner's book .
 George Alexander Lensen , Russia’s Eastward Expansion , Chap., “The Ideology of Russian Expansion,” by Andrew Malozemoff, 92 . Lensen: “Russia's Eastward expansion is a model for the future”
 Samuel Turner, An Account of an Embassy to the Court of the Teshoo Lama in Tibet in Tibet, 273. Samuel Turner . Samuel Turner wrote an account of an embassy to the court of the Tibetan Lama .
 Tzu-yuan, “Historical Relations between the Tibet Region and the Motherland,” Min-tsu Yen-chiu, 19. Tzu Yuan .
 All quotations from the 17-Point Agreement are from The Question of Tibet and the Rule of Law . The 17-point Agreement was signed by Tibet's government in 2009 .
 This publication in turn took its quotations from the New China News Agency . This publication is based on the opinions of opinion experts from across the world .
 The International Commission of Jurists, Legal Inquiry Committee on Tibet, 1960, (1960), 204. (1961) The International Inquiry Committee was on Tibet in Tibet . Tibet is Tibet, Tibet is a major source of human suffering .
 Report of the Officials of the Governments of India and the People’s Republic of China on the Boundary Question, 112. Report . The report was published by the Indian and Chinese governments on the boundary question .
 Notes, Memoranda and Letters Exchanged and Agreements Signed between the Governments of India and China, 1954-1959 , 49. Notes, . Memoranda . and . Agreements signed between the governments of . India and . China .
 The Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, 1961), 277. (1.2 million copies of the book .
 Chinese Communist World Outlook (Bureau of Intelligence and Research, U.S. Department of State, Publication 7379 [Far Eastern Series 112] ), 84. China's Communist Party World Outlook is published by the United States.
 U.S. Bureau of Intelligence and Research, United States Department of State, June 1962), 67.
 NCNA release. November 10, 1959 (Reuters, Hong Kong, dated November 9, 1959, quoting NCNA)
 The Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, 1954), 147. The publication of the book was published by the government of India .
 “A Study of Sino-Tibetan Relations, 1949-56,” United Asia (special Tibet ed., 1959), United Asia . ‘A Study’: A Study of China’s relations with Tibet, 1949, 1950-56 . �
 Fisher, M W. Rose, L E., Rose, and Huttenback, Robert, write about Himalayan Battleground, Sino-Indian Rivalry in Ladakh .
 Huc, E. Huc is author of "Souvenirs of a Journey Through Tartary, Tibet and China" Huc wrote about Tibet and Tibet in a book published by Huc .
 Jenkins, William M. Jr. and Karan, Pradyumna, The Himalayan Kingdoms, Bhutan, Sik,im and Nepal .
 Derek Verschoyle in Association with the Institute of Pacific Relations, 1954 . The author of the book, "Derek Verschoy," was interviewed by the Institute for Pacific Relations in 1954 .
 Jawaharlal Nehru Speeches, 1949-53, were published in 1961 . Nehru's speeches were published by the Government of India .
 Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, 1954, .
 Notes, Memoranda and Letters Exchanged and Agreements Signed between the Governments of India and China, September-November, 1959 .
 Notes, Memoranda and Letters Exchanged and Agreements Signed between the Governments of India and China, November, 1959March, 1960 .
 Notes, Memoranda and Letters Exchanged and Agreements Signed between the Governments of India and China, March, 1960-November, 1960, 1960 .
 Notes, Memoranda and Letters Exchanged and Agreements Signed between the Governments of India and China, November, 1960November, 1961 .
 Official Correspondence between the Central Government of India and the Chinese People’s Republic . Relevant to the Subject of the Sino-Indian Border .
 External Publicity Division, Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India, 1959. External . Publicity division of External .
 Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India, 1961 . de Riencourt, Amaury, was the author of the book .
 Turner, Samuel Turner wrote an account of an Embassy to the Court of the Teshoo Lama in Tibet . Turner was in Tibet at the time of his embassy's visit to Tibet .
 Letter, dated November 17, 1950 from the Chairman of the Delegation of E]. Salvador addressed to the President of the General Assembly,” November 17 . 1950 .
 Alan Winnington, Alan, “Statement Of Dalai Lama Is Suspect,” New China News Agency , April 22, 1959 .