 The fact that this nuclear tragedy did not eventually occur is a reflection upon the actions of the key individuals involved in the nuclear disaster, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev played major roles in averting a nuclear war which was seen at the time as quite possible . Kennedy and the Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchchev averted nuclear war in 1962 .
 There is doubt about how much credit Kennedy can take for the results of the crisis in 1962 . However, in light of evidence acquired by historians, there is doubt .
 The roles of the major politicians involved in the crisis are fairly well documented as well as the actions of Kennedy himself . Kennedy's actions are well documented .
 English: It is questionable as to whether Kennedy was given credit for the actions taken by others, simply because he was the President . English: Thus it is questionable whether Kennedy should have been given credit .
 Sources show contrasting views over the actual consequences of the crisis . However, sources show the contrasting views on the actual reality .
 These contrasting views ultimately effect the way in which Kennedy is perceived as a hero . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968, and his death has been blamed for his assassination .
 In August 1962, there was evidence that the Soviet Union had begun to install missile sites in Cuba, perhaps to protect Cuba from invasion . The Soviet Union began installing missile sites around Cuba in 1962 .
 Good support of theis, well written . Good support for theis . Well written. Well written and well supported .
 Very descriptive by skierdude1000 on 27/Feb/2005 .
 3 out of 3 people found this comment useful . Great support and good explanations. Great support for good explanations .
 With a little work... by tdesando86 on 30/Apr/2007 . With a few work this could be an excellent essay .
 There is no way a single gunman could have fired all the bullets that hit Kennedy and Connnally in that short period of time . No way could have shot all of the bullets in that time .
 Clinton attempted to launch his political career when ... used the anger of the teachers' union as a political asset . Clinton was 48% of voters in his first term .
 Franklin began to strive towards moral perfection after turning towards his own religious doctrine . Franklin became famous for his efforts to achieve moral perfection .
 When an historian looks at the present, he sees the effects of many events and many profound people, historian says . Historians look at the past and present, and see effects of those events .
 Franklin Roosevelt reduced the number of Supreme Court justices to 15, to free up the court .
 Thomas Jefferson was one of ... a "court" of his own . Thomas Jefferson had his own court .