 This is my first note to you as the new Editor-In-Chief, and I must give a big thank you to Jasmin Bath, who ran the Journal last year . This is the first note I've written to you .
 The Journal team would also like to give a big thank you to all the students that contributed to the journal by submitting in their essays for this theme .
 Our editors worked hard to narrow these essays into just six essays which will be published in this essay . This essay is the first of its kind to be published by The Guardian .
 I would like to thank every member of the QMUL History Journal, without whom the Journal could not survive and flourish . I would also thank the Journal's contributors .
 Thank you to all those who worked on the committee, your had work is inspiring and it shows in the wonderful Journals that you have put out these past two years . Thank you for your work and your support for the campaign .
 You can find us on Twitter @QMULHJ, Facebook under ‘Queen Mary History Journal’ and by email at qmhistoryjournal@gmail.com .
 We are happy to feature in this weekly Newsquiz . Please contact us for more information about this week's featured news stories .
 America and Russia . omits the role of smaller powers such as Britain in Kennedy’s management of the crisis .
 Less attention has been paid to the role of other nations, including Britain . As a result, less attention is being paid to other countries, including the UK, it is claimed .
 There was truly little Macmillan could do to influence the course of events and discussions within the White House . There were internal pressures within the administration over the establishment of a naval blockade in Cuba .
 Macmillan was still able to voice his concern over what Khrushchev may do in Berlin if the U.S. were to invade Cuba . He advised Kennedy to favour the blockade over an invasion of Cuba .
 Turner has suggested that the fundamental decisions over the crisis had already been made by the time information was conveyed to Macmillan . The fact that Kennedy contacted MacMillan highlights the value of the relationship between the two countries, whilst also reinforcing the idea that Kennedy was a man who needed reass
 If Kennedy authorised an invasion of Cuba Khrushchev might use it as a bargaining counter to get the western powers out of Berlin . It was feared that if Kennedy authorised it, it would be used as a negotiating counter .
 Macmillan’s anxieties over this are especially apparent in the telephone call between him and Kennedy on the 26 th October . The call was made by the Prime Minister of the British Empire .
 This is telling of the fatherly figure Kennedy saw in the Prime Minister, and the overall role Britain played in assuring Kennedy that he was acting correctly . Kennedy saw the PM as a father figure, and Britain played a key role in reassuring him .
 Rusk also states that Kennedy would not have been swayed by European voices, but the fact that Kennedy contacted Macmillan is of high importance, as it ultimately supports the view that the President was looking for affirmation on his Cuban policy, from this ‘father figure’ that he
 The view of Macmillan and Britain as the father figure to Kennedy tends to romanticise the relationship between Kennedy and the US Superpowers . However, this view is romanticising the influence the Prime Minister had over the President’s management of the crisis .
 Richard Lamb maintains that Kennedy and U.S. policy makers were influenced by Macmillan and altered their views to accommodate the PM’s opinions . Lamb maintains Kennedy and United States policy makers changed their views .
 It is clear that the role Britain and Macmillan played was just to reassure Kennedy . It did not have as clear-cut of an effect on U.S. policy as Lamb would suggest .
 Macmillan suggested immobilising the Thor missiles which were present in England at the time . This can be seen within one of the many telephone calls between Kennedy and MacMillan which occurred during the crisis .
 Later in the conversation, when Macmillan agrees on actions made by Kennedy, the President is more cooperative with the Prime Minister . The President reasserts the view that Britain’s role was to simply support and reassure .
 The Camelot school of thought bolster the view that Britain had little influence on Kennedy’s management of the Cuban Missile crisis as a result of their creation of a mythicised history of the Kennedy administration .
 Camelot school have established this ‘hero like’ image of Kennedy as the only arbiter of peace in the face of this unprecedented global nuclear threat, thus diminishing the role Macmillan and his government played in .
 The issues raised by this historiographical school are particularly intriguing and can tell us a lot about the special relationship, especially when considering why they have chosen to diminish Britain’s role in the Kennedy administration of crisis .
 Britain did indeed play a role in the management of the crisis, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond says the role is often forgotten by Camelot historians and popular media as it does not fit in with their romanticised view of Kennedy presidency .
 Nigel Fisher has suggested that Kennedy put a high premium on Macmillan’s advice . The daily telephone calls and correspondence went far beyond the requirements of co-operation .
 Kennedy himself told Lord Home that he 'valued being able to talk to Mr Macmillan' therefore supporting the claim that he was a leader who needed reassurance .
 The romanticised view of Kennedy presented by the Camelot school omits the role Britain played as a figure to reassure Kennedy of the decisions he made during the crisis .
 The frequency of meetings, ~ 10 ~ telephone calls and public presentation of the almost family-like relationship essentially painted an image of interdependence between the two countries . When considering the wider trend of the Anglo-American relationship, the relationship was far from the truth as the relationship between the
 This ‘special relationship’ was not natural, requiring nurture and negotiation in order for it to survive . Winston Churchill’s efforts to create a 'special relationship' with the UK were not natural . The relationship, from its beginning in 1945 through Winston Churchill's efforts, was
 His appointment as ambassador to Washington in 1960 was highly influenced by his close personal links to John F Kennedy . The relationship granted him an exceptionally privileged position during Kennedy's presidency .
 Due to his close relationship with Kennedy, Ormsby-Gore was often co-opted into many of the key meetings during the crisis . Macmillan used him as a conduit for his own views during the war .
 This allowed Britain to have a more definite role and consult Kennedy, rather than merely advising and reassuring him over decisions that had already been made . Kennedy was the first president to be elected to the presidency .
 It was important to paint this picture of interdependence between Britain and the United States, and propagandise it to their benefit, says historian . The U.S. and Britain were both important allies of the Middle East .
 The role of individuals like Macmillan and Ormsby-Gore had a clear influence over Britain’s role during the Crisis . If not for their personalities and close relationships with Kennedy, arguably if not for . their personalities, they would not have had as definite of a
 The role Britain played in reassuring Kennedy was inherently small, to such an extent that it has been omitted by some American scholars . It is telling of the respect Kennedy had for the British, and the gravity of their opinions was not lost on him .
 Britain and America have maintained a particularly close relationship for decades . The relationship began when the two countries formed an allegiance during World War Two .
 This essay will discuss the relationship in various areas, i.e. military, economic, political and linguistic . It will analyse its nature and benefits, mutual or not, of the alliance in these different spheres .
 This essay will also seek to determine whether the ‘special relationship’ between Britain and America was a marriage of convenience, particularly for America . It will also try to determine, via the aforementioned factors, whether the 'special relationship' was a 'marriage of convenience' The essay concludes
 One element of the ‘special relationship’ that this essay will discuss is the military aspect . The military aspect of the 'special relationship' will be discussed .
 Many historians argue that the basis of the relationship is rooted in ‘military and intelligence cooperation’ that took off during the Second World War .
 Both during and after the war, both the superpowers countries saw each other as their primary ally . The United States considered Britain their ‘principle partner and ally’ and Britain sought ‘military guarantees’ from the United States .
 Britain wanting the support of the wealthy and powerful United States and America, perhaps, looking to capitalise on Britain’s historically iconic naval forces and military prestige .
 Britain wanting to hold onto the coattails of the next great power and America allowing them to do so relatively amicably . This also sets up the argument outlined in the introduction that the relationship was unequal with Britain wanting the next superpower to hold on .
 Leigh-Phippard: ‘There can be little doubt that the British Government chose … to pursue an interdependent relationship with the United States’ once the war was over .
 The British attitude implies that the relationship had been a military marriage of convenience during the war without a set plan to continue the alliance in the longer term .
 Britain would surely not have felt the need to chase America for a partnership at the close of the war . If there had been a longterm agreement, Britain would not have been chasing America .
 The ‘special relationship’ can also be examined in regard to the economic links between the two countries as both had the opportunity to gain financially from the other, if they were to maintain their alliance long-term .
 Britain looked to America for significant financial aid to rebuild its infrastructure and economy after the war . However, this 'moneyhungry' attitude was not entirely one-sided .
 Leigh-Phippard argues that ‘Britain was reliant on American financial help to restore its economy’ The American aid program, that became known as the Marshall Plan, intended to give Britain and its European allies a vast $13. billion .
 U.S. treated its relationship with Britain as a marriage of convenience as they could see the advantages of aligning themselves with Britain and its international economic network . America did not necessarily need this alliance, it was definitely an easier way to build on its existing economic standing .
 For Britain, the economic element of the alliance was not a convenience but a necessity . Britain's economic element was not convenience but necessity, writes David Cameron .
 Britain’s economy was ruined by the war to the extent that it could not have survived without the significant aid that Britain received from the United States in the following years . As has already been mentioned, the U.S. helped Britain survive the war .
 America believed it to be a marriage of convenience that they didn't necessarily need but preferred to have; whereas, Britain believed it was a lifeline which was imperative to the nation’s economic survival .
 This essay will now focus on another element of the ‘special relationship’, the political alliance . The political alliance is a key element in the 'special relationship'
 Historians argue that Britain latched onto the U.S. in order to maintain its political prowess on the global stage . This implies that Britain was manipulating the relationship to its advantage .
 The strength of the political alliance has ebbed and flowed with the changes in Prime Ministers and Presidents . But it is usually the British that pulls the two back together .
 Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and President Ronald Reagan were great personal friends with one friend of Reagan stating that they ‘literally loved one another’ who also recognised the benefits of a positive political relationship .
 Richard Aldous states that Thatcher realised that a political allegiance with the U.S. allowed her ‘to power in the furtherance of British interests’ The long-term goal in this relationship was political, an attempt to maintain world influence .
 Britain did not need the U.S. by their side to remain relevant and globally influential . In this respect, it does not seem as though Britain needed the United States by its side .
 Marriage of convenience is a marriage of convenience for the couple . Keeping the 'special relationship' was an easier way to achieve the same goal than going it alone .
 The 'special relationship' can also be considered in terms of the shared primary language of the two countries . The ‘special relationship’ is also seen as a strong bond between the countries .
 The military, economic and political factors discussed earlier in this essay are not constants and not necessarily a basis for a long-term union of two nations . The military and economic factors discussed are not constant and are not necessarily an economic or political factor .
 Many high-profile politicians speak multiple languages and there are many excellent and reliable translators . Language barrier does not seem like so difficult an issue as to prioritise a relationship with a shared language country on this basis alone .
 British and American English are not exactly identical . The ‘diametrically opposite British and US usages’ of some words may cause difficulty at conferences .
 The correlation of the two nations sharing a primary language does not necessarily cause a strong alliance to be made . The two nations share a language but do not necessarily mean an alliance .
 The shared language on its own does not strongly indicate that the ‘special relationship’ between Britain and the U.S. was a marriage of convenience . Instead it seems to have been an added bonus to an already mutually beneficial partnership .
 In conclusion, the ‘special relationship’ can be considered a marriage of convenience on all fronts from the perspective of the United States .
 This is because they did not have to come to Britain’s Special Relationship aid with military power during the war or economic support after it . Neither did they desperately need Britain's shoulder to stand on in order to gain and exert global political influence .
 They most likely did the aforementioned as they felt a partnership with Britain would be a relatively easier way to gain and maintain a higher global standing than they had had before the Second World War, compared to doing it alone .
 For Britain, the ‘special relationship’ was not a marriage of convenience but a partnership of necessity . Britain, on the other hand, was not married of convenience, it was a relationship of necessity.
 They started to lose steam towards the end of the war, were financially ruined by it and were facing a gradual decline in influence in the global arena, which was difficult to come to terms with for a nation which had once had an Empire .
 They desperately needed and wanted the wealth and power that the U.S. was gaining . Therefore, they desperately needed to be able to gain the wealth they gained .
 Britain realised that Britain could gain a lot more from maintaining the relationship than they could achieve on their own . The partnership became a lifeline for Britain and the relationship became a partnership for them .
 The 'special relationship' was a marriage of convenience to the United States but an essential support system for Great Britain . To summarise, the ‘special relationship’ was marriage . to the U.S.
 International Affairs, 62/1 , 3.3. “America, Britain and the International Order Since the Second World War”, International Affairs . “Britain and Britain have been at odds for decades since the war’s start,” the author says .
 President Reagan’s administration approached the Falklands with what can at best be described as ambivalence, which was a far cry from the support that Margaret Thatcher sought from her principle ally . President Reagan's administration approached Falklands from the start of the war .
 The difficult position that the U.S. government found itself in arose from differing views on the Falklands . Caspar Weinberger and Jeane Kirkpatrick had differing views of the Falkland Islands .
 The Anglo-American relationship could not play a central role in the conflict, and this is not to mention the complicating factor of the Cold War alliance with Argentina at the time . This is not the case, and the US’s Cold War .
 Thatcher was outraged that the Americans tried to carve out an honest broker role with complete neutrality on the issue of sovereignty over the islands . Thatcher was nothing short of outraged that Americans attempted to carve a role with neutrality .
 The role of the AngloAmerican relationship was far from static and indeed Reagan became increasingly supportive as the war waged on . However, the relationship was not always static and Reagan was supportive .
 It would be misleading to imply that the Anglo-American relationship played too limited a role during the Falklands War . From the beginning the Americans provided vital assistance in terms of logistics and intelligence through unregulated backchannels .
 As such the relationship did play some part in the conflict, although this was largely kept from the public . As such, the relationship with the British government did play a part .
 The Falklands is held in public memory as a British war with much of the media coverage and public perception centring on Thatcher herself . The fact that the Falklands was held in British memory speaks volumes about the significance of the Anglo-American relationship in the conflict .
 Thatcher’s dismay was not central much to Thatcher's dismay . Whilst it was undoubtedly present, it was not a central central to the Thatcher administration .
 If the Falklands conflict was a test of American commitment to its UK ally on an exclusive level, the U.S. failed, she says . To her, the United States failed to meet the test of its commitment to the UK, she said .
 It is important to contextualise the Falklands within the existing framework of Thatcher and Reagan’s relationship . The Falklands was first important to be contextualised in the context of the Falkland crisis .
 Both were established leaders by the spring of 1982 and had met each other on numerous occasions with correspondences dating back to the mid1970s .
 Thatcher and Reagan had a shared affinity in that they had both been continually underestimated throughout their careers . Thatcher's lower middle-class origins and her gender led to questions about his capacity to run a country . Reagan's acting career led to doubts about his ability to run the country . Thatcher and
 Reagan had considerable anti-communist credentials stemming from his time as president of the Screen Actors Guild where he worked to root out communist influence . Despite concerns about the president in Britain, Reagan was surprisingly surprisingly not the president .
 Thatcher too had shown herself to be an uncompromising figure in her handling of the Brixton riots and the Irish hunger strikes in 1981 . Thatcher had shown her to be uncompromising in handling of those riots .
 In Reagan the British prime minister found an ideological soulmate, says Thatcher . The Anglo-American relationship was afforded a “special sanctity” under Thatcher .
 The two were from the right of their respective parties and pursued policies such as lowering income tax and reducing the size of the state with their mutual assistance perhaps strengthening each other's resolve .
 This shared ideology of neoliberalism was unprecedented on this level in the history of Anglo-American relations . The shared ideology was unprecedented in Anglo-U.S. relations .
 Thatcher and Reagan were united in the cause of anti-communism in the Cold War . Ironically it was the U.S. approach to Cold War that would prove to be the point of contention in the Falklands that would ultimately limit the role of the Anglo-American relationship .
 As with many aspects of Thatcher's premiership, it is difficult to examine her relationship with Reagan as it has come to be shrouded by myth . The popular perception of a romantic and at times flirtatious relationship between the two holds elements of truth, but it glazes over events such
 The British perhaps did not perceive the threat of Castro in Cuba in the same way that the Americans did, so the latter did not view Galtieri . Just as the British perhaps didn't perceive Castro's threat in Cuba, so did the Americans .
 Every indicator that Britain gave prior to the invasion taking place seemed to suggest a lack of interest in South America . The Americans could not quite comprehend Thatcher’s uncompromising position when it came to negotiating sovereignty .
 John Nott had been orchestrating serious spending cuts as Defence Secretary in order to reorient Britain’s military strength from conventional weaponry – with most cuts targeting the Navy – towards nuclear technology to adapt to the challenges of the Cold War .
 Thatcher had shown herself to have little attachment to British imperial legacies . Her policy on her colonial possessions was one of leaseback, as had just been the case with Hong Kong . At the same time, Thatcher showed herself to be less attached to the imperial legacy .
 Confronting a right-wing, anti-communist regime seemed nonsensical within the broader context of the Cold War for someone with the aforementioned anti-Communist credentials . The U.S. government was in the midst of a Cold War in the 1980s and '90s .
 The decision to send a task force seemed antithetical to the Thatcher government’s outlook . The balance of involvement in the Falklands was undoubtedly tipped towards the British .
 The Americans also had their own interests to pursue in foreign affairs which dictated the role they chose to play far more than any historic loyalty to Britain could ever hope to .
 Since the Second World War the Americans had had a somewhat uneasy alliance with the Argentinians, something that some in the Reagan administration were keen to maintain .
 Jeane Kirkpatrick, US Ambassador at the UN, was most hostile to Britain . She kept a dinner appointment at the Argentine Embassy on the evening of the invasion .
 Her distinction between ‘bad’ totalitarian communist states and ‘sometimes tolerable’ authoritarian regimes meant she did not share Thatcher’s outrage at the invasion of Argentina . She did not wish to pursue Secretary of State Al Haig’�s suggestion of a more
 The United States took on an arbiter role sending Haig between Britain and the Falklands to negotiate some form of sovereignty settlement . It was in United States interests to diffuse tensions between two important allies in the struggle against communism .
 Thatcher’s staunch adherence to international law and her belief in national self-determination . Thatcher believed that Britain did not have the same resources as the U.S.
 USA’s policy of ‘the enemy of my enemy is my friend’ towards Argentina left them unable to condemn the Falklands invasion in such stark terms . This was seen clearly in the dispute over Grenada, but it was also seen in the Falkland Islands .
 The Anglo-American role did not feature greatly in the conflict . The lack of common purpose which had historically brought the two nations together meant that the conflict was not a success .
 This is not to say that the Americans completely abandoned the British for the sake of neutrality . However, this is not the case of the Americans abandoning the British .
 From the outset vital assistance was offered by the anglophile Defence Secretary Caspar Weinberger at a speed that was altogether unprecedented in the Pentagon’s bureaucracy .
 American support for the British in 1982 came down on the side of the British at the end of April 1982 . This included ammunition and intelligence which was only set to increase .
 The Americans did not offer the uninhibited support that Thatcher desired . However, there was a definite propensity to lean towards the British in the conflict .
 The Anglo-American relationship did not take centre stage in the Falklands, especially not publicly in the international arena, but American assistance proved vital to Britain’s war effort .
 Reagan essentially allowed a European power to intervene in the western hemisphere to repossess a colony . The very significant the Anglo-American relationship was, as it is difficult to imagine the same favour being extended to other allies .
 The implications of the Argentine invasion were not considered in a vacuum and one memory that loomed large was that of the Suez Crisis . Britain and France invaded Egypt without United States backing, leading to a humiliating retreat several days later .
 Historians have debated the degree to which this was a watershed moment in Anglo-American relations . The crisis resulted in the balance of the alliance tipping irreversibly towards the Americans . Britain’s role in the world was damaged on a symbolic level epitomising the nation’
 It was recognised in the USA that Britain could not be left humiliated on the world stage in having a country such as Argentina successfully invading an island with a population of just under 2000 people .
 The Anglo-American relationship should play some part in helping the British to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past which might jeopardise the western alliance at a critical point in the Cold War . As such it was somewhat imperative that the Anglo-U.S. relationship should help the British avoid
 Germany won the 1982 Eurovision Song Contest with the song ‘Ein bißchen Frieden’ or ‘A Little Peace’ in 1982 . The first British casualty in the Falklands took place raising questions about the human costs Britain was willing to pay .
 In terms of military capacity, Britain was clearly the dominant force in the conflict . But it was unthinkable that Thatcher would employ sophisticated and expensive weaponry on Argentina .
 The American position was neutral on the issue of sovereignty over the Falklands, but not over Argentine aggression . Reagan used a more condemnatory tone towards the Argentines once fighting on the ground began .
 With American backing, the British could hope to maintain international prestige . Superpowers maintain their international prestige and mitigate the costs of the conflict . The 'special relationship' has a considerable role in the Falklands .
 It is important to consider the role that the Anglo-American alliance played in public perceptions of the conflict as it informs our understanding as to how the British and American peoples saw themselves .
 The Falklands endeavour was essentially viewed as a British conflict that echoed the First and Second World War concepts of fighting alone . Despite some degree of assistance from the US, it is worth noting that the Falkland endeavour was viewed as an attempt to fight alone .
 There were of course some opponents of the war in Britain with the likes of Elvis Costello's ‘Shipbuilding’ and Billy Bragg’s ‘Island of No Return’ However, dissenters were a vast minority, as for many the Falklands had
 There was a large degree of romanticism surrounding the conflict in Britain, with some viewing it as a moment of national renewal that the country had desperately needed since Suez .
 The public was consumed by a jingoistic fervour that was simply not matched in the USA perhaps best epitomised by The Sun’s infamous headline after the dubious 43-year-old sinking of the Belgrano which simply read ‘Gotcha!’
 The role of the Anglo-American relationship was further minimised in this way as the Falklands became increasingly centred on Thatcher herself .
 Enoch Powell claimed that this was an opportunity for the so-called Iron Lady to show the world from which metal she was really made . The Iron Lady was actually made from metal .
 Michael Foot made a name for himself in his anti-appeasement writings during the Second World War . Foot agreed that the people of the Falklands have the absolute right to look at us at this moment of their desperate plight .
 The Falklands took on this narrative as a British war led by a determined prime minister . The Anglo-American relationship could not be featured heavily as it would take away from the sense of national purpose that had been created .
 Reagan administration were not entirely unaware of Britain's domestic situation . However, this is not to suggest that the Reagan administration was unaware of the situation .
 Thatcher recognised that victory in the Falklands could give her a much-needed popularity boost on the back of newfound patriotism .
 Foot speech was evidence that Foot could be a credible electoral force . Foot's speech was not simply a strong performance in the House of Commons in so much as it was evidence of his ability to stand for Labour . Foot is a former MP for the Labour Party, which he won't be
 The AngloAmerican relationship played an implicit role in terms of the domestic repercussions of the Falklands . Reagan too recognised this, and thus to some degree the Americans took on a so-called ‘save Maggie’ mission to help her achieve victory at home .
 In a broader sense the role that the Anglo-American relationship played during the Falklands was indicative of a rift between the two countries in what would become the final phase of the Cold War . The Falklands conflict was the last phase of a Cold War between the U.S. and
 Britain and the U.S. had fundamentally different approaches to the Cold War . The Americans sometimes acted unpredictably and even unnecessarily aggressive at times .
 The unreliability of the USA in backing Britain during the Falklands illustrates this tension within the AngloAmerican relationship and how it only worked up to the point that it ceased to serve their respective national interests .
 Reagan’s support for Galtieri, albeit half-hearted, was unfathomable to Thatcher . Thatcher resented the fact that Britain was essentially being compared to an aggressive, fascist junta in Argentina .
 This was against the backdrop of the United States already losing a considerable amount of their moral high ground during the Cold War, most notably with Vietnam . The U.S. already lost a lot of moral power ground in the wake of Vietnam .
 Thatcher approached Reagan with such high expectations and was subsequently wounded when he did not deliver speaks of a strong affinity between Britain and the United States . Episodes such as the Falklands may illustrate that there was nothing constant about the Anglo-American relationship .
 There was something natural in the way in which Thatcher turned to Reagan in her hour of need . This was a relationship that transcended the usual diplomatic niceties alliances usually conjured up .
 Thatcher received stronger support for the Falklands from the French president Mitterrand, in part due to their shared colonial histories . Yet Thatcher consistently misspelled his name – a far cry from the familiar, sentimental ‘Ron’ that she used to address the American president .
 Despite a rosy image of the Anglo-American relationship under Thatcher and Reagan, the Falklands is evidence that this was not always the case . The Falklands was the first time the British government had been involved in the region .
 As Richard Aldous argues, there were 46 ~ Superpowers deep, fundamental differences between Thatcher and Reagan that should not be overlooked . The differences between the two should be overlooked, he argues .
 The Falklands conflict may illustrate small diplomatic misunderstandings that would explain why the Anglo-American relationship did not take on a central role . However, on another it illustrates larger features of the somewhat uneasy alliance .
 The US's support came altogether too late in Thatcher’s mind, and as such the Anglo-American relationship never took centre stage in the Falklands . The general reluctance and lack of understanding frustrated the prime minister .
 Thatcher had such high expectations of the U.S. that shows the significance of the relationship in itself . However, the very fact that Thatcher had . such . high expectations shows the importance of the United States in itself, the author says .
 There is something implicit in the events of the Falklands which convey something about the nature of the Anglo-American relationship . Beyond individuals, there is also something implicit about the relationship between the two countries .
 The fact that the U.S. Defense department was able to quickly provide such support illustrates the historical channels between the two nations that were wholly unique . The United States Defense department provided such support .
 Reagan administration felt any sense of obligation towards Britain at all considering the issue of the Falklands was essentially colonial . The Falklands issue illustrates how there was a certain gravitational pull between Britain and America that was inescapable .
 Even under the Eurocentric Heath ~ 47 ~ Dominique Pope Falklands War administration, the Anglo-American relationship was never completely ignored . Certainly this was exacerbated by the ideological kindship of Thatcher and Reagan .
 Thatcher and Reagan were both able to bounce back from a dip in the alliance speaks volumes about its durability and strength . The Falklands did not play a key role in the Falklands, but the alliance did not .
 Reflections on Foreign Policy under Margaret Thatcher and John Major . John Major, 51, was John Thatcher's successor to Margaret Thatcher .
 Anglo-American Relations from the Cold War to Iraq, second edition (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006), 106.
 The Relationship Between Britain and America in the Twentieth Century (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1988), 314. The relationship between Britain and the U.S. in the 1920s and 1930s was described as a "relationship between the two countries"
 The Music and Politics of Rock Against Racism, 2 Tone and Red Wedge, 1976-1992 (London: Macmillan, 2016), . 2 Tone, Red Wednesday, 1976 to 1992, . The Politics of 2 Tone: 2 Tone vs. Racism: The Politics and
 The Spanish-American War was a significant event in the history of the United States . It was a key step in placing itself firmly among the great world powers . Freddie Stoker is the author of the novel, "The Last Star Wars"
 The motivations of the public support and of the McKinley administration are complex and intertwined . The motivations behind the support for the president are complicated and intertwined, says CNN's John Sutter .
 This essay will argue that it was primarily imperialism that drove the U.S. into war . It will also argue that imperialism was primarily responsible for the war in Iraq .
 There was a general and widespread desire for expansionism and imperialism among influential Americans and policy makers . The desire was driven by economic factors but most importantly driven by a competition with European states, he says .
 This essay will start by looking at the short term factors that were important in breaking down Spanish-American relations . It will then ask whether the media had a part to play in provoking a response from the public and the government .
 The last section will address imperialism as the main factor leading to war . It will look at the reasons why America was imperialistic and arguing that competition with European states was the most important one .
 Roosevelt claimed that ‘war became inevitable’ with many other contemporaries claiming that, if the Maine hadn’t blown up, war might have been avoided . Spain was blamed for the disaster and after this war seemed likely .
 Diplomatic relations were harmed, but the U.S. was already receptive to the idea of war . The Maine incident led to diplomatic relations being harmed .
 There were factors leading to these diplomatic crises that created an atmosphere ready for war, says CNN.com's John Defterios . The atmosphere was created by these crises, he says .
 Some suggest that the media were responsible for creating the atmosphere which led to the U.S. involvement in the Iraq War .
 Although the impact of the press was limited, they merely compounded a feeling that the public had already had already . The impact on the public is limited, but the public has already had a feeling for the press .
 Small notes that the press sold similar stories during the Ten Years’ War but that it did not lead to U.S. intervention . Small says similar stories were sold by the press during the 10 years' War but not by the United States .
 The public and politicians were now receptive to this due to imperialism, resulting largely from increased competition with European states . The public was receptive to imperialism due to increased competition, according to the historian .
 There was a general desire for some kind of empire, control, and domination over other states . There was also a desire for domination, domination, and control of other states.
 Economic factors but most importantly a desire for world power resulted in competition with Europe which led to imperialism and therefore to war with Spain . Spain's desire to be a world power led to the conflict in Spain .
 War portrayed as liberation of Cuba and the Philippines from Spanish exploitation but also as civilisation of them as ‘backward’ nations . It is possible to suggest that United States imperialism and a desire to interfere was influenced by humanitarian imperialism .
 Those who signed up to fight were clearly influenced by the idea of it being a noble cause and were genuinely moved by the atrocities . Perez cites the diaries of men who fought and the reason most had for signing up was to help Cubans .
 The treatment of the Philippines and Cuba after the war highlights that it was more of a quest for power than humane . However, the element of domination and control suggests it was a power game rather than truly humanitarian .
 McKinley and the United States cut Cuba out of negotiations after the war . McKinley led the Filipino revolution, leading to 18,000 casualties and McKinley cut Cuba from negotiations .
 U.S. interests in challenging European power were more important in explaining imperialism and were higher on the agenda than a liberating or civilising mission . United States interests in . challenging European . power were important in . explaining imperialism, rather than liberating .
 Some historians argue that the U.S. was more motivated by the acquisition of markets than of territory . The domestic economic situation was responsible for its desire to expand . Economic factors partly explain the imperialist impulse .
 McKinley declared that his primary motive when he came into power was to lead America out of depression . He declared that he wanted to lead the country out of it . McKinley was the first president of the United States to be elected in 1896 .
 The general belief among businesses and economists was that supply exceeded demand and the solution to depression laid in offsetting surplus in overseas markets . This suggests that the domestic economic situation led to imperial impulse and war .
 McCormick has pointed to a desire to dominate the China market, citing a partnership between government and business in leading to war . McCormick: Government and business partnership in China lead to conflict .
 McCormick argued that the U.S. wanted to create an informal empire by dominating the world markets as to do this they needed Spanish territory in the Pacific to use as coaling stations .
 The fact that they annexed Hawaii as well as Spanish territory indicated their desire for a route to China as a kind of market imperialism was at work in leading to war .
 McKinley administration saw Manila and Guam primarily as coaling stations to the Orient . Plans to create outposts were formulated before the war .
 China was seen as a valuable market in this. Although, economic factors were important, there was a belief that offsetting the surplus would solve depression .
 The intent to dominate trade was still there in the lead up to war . Even if the extent of trade the U.S. had wanted didn’t materialise immediately, the intent was there still there .
 The Monroe Doctrine was key to U.S. foreign policy leading up to and following the war . It opposed European presence in the Western hemisphere and stated that it would harm United States interests .
 The desire to obtain outposts to China and to monopolize the world economic market can also be seen to be seen as competitive and aimed at increasing U.S. world power .
 Powerful politicians and citizens advocated an increasing presence around the world . This was largely in response to European powers . Powerful politicians, citizens advocated increasing presence .
 Roosevelt, Lodge and Hearst supported expansionist and Weltpolitik foreign policy to compete with other world powers . Hearst, Roosevelt and Lodge supported an expansionist foreign policy .
 Lodge claimed ‘the great nations rapidly absorbing for their future expansion and their present defence all the waste places of the earth much not fall out of the line of march’ so the imperialism was motivated by a wish to counter to European power . Lodge claimed that the great nations were rapidly
 Mahan claimed global power was desirable, especially in achieving great naval power . Mahan, in the widely read book The Influence of Sea Power upon History, claimed that global power is desirable .
 Many in the United States took on these ideas and used them to condone imperialist expansion and therefore the war with Spain . Indeed, many in the U.S. used these ideas to condone imperialism and therefore war with the Spanish .
 The denial of sovereignty to Cuba and the Philippines can be seen as an attempt to prevent it being transferred from Spain to anyone else . The denial is seen as a bid to prevent the transfer of sovereignty .
 America imposed a protectorate, legislated by the Platt amendment, over Cuba which meant, among other things, that they could not enter into treaties with other powers . America imposed the protectorate .
 This paternalistic control over Cuba and the Philippines as well as annexation of territories not under Spanish control in years following the war were attempts to challenge European power and increase their own .
 In conclusion, imperialism led to the U.S. decision to go to war and was caused partly by economic factors and a desire to dominate the world markets . The war was started by the United States in 1941 .
 The most important cause of this yearning for increased world power status and hegemony was a competition with European states, the author says .
 It was this that made the Maine disaster and the De Lome letter so damaging for Spanish-American relations . The Maine disaster was the result of the letter and the Maine letter .
 American self-interest was the priority in deciding to go to war and in determining U.S. actions after it . The humanitarian imperial argument is limited, but it's not limited to the humanitarian imperial arguments .
 Britain's entry to the European Economic Community was a remarkable feat of both persistence and international diplomacy . Thomas Chadwick: Britain entered the European Community with persistence and diplomacy .
 Heath government's decision to apply for a third time was politically courageous and became the most lasting legacy of the 1970-1974 government . After the 1963 and 1967 vetoes to entry, the Heath government re-applied for entry .
 Edward Heath saw entry as central to his vision of a modernised and restructured Britain . The eventual success of this bid was in large part due to the dedicated 'Europeanism' of Edward Heath .
 Heath's personal agency in setting this key pillar of government policy was bolstered by a number of ministers including Alec Douglas-Home and Geoffrey Rippon .
 Heath's persistence was central to the government's decision to apply for entry, it would substantially distort the reality of the reality and the complexity of government policy-making to attribute entry only to the actions of the Prime Minister .
 Before considering the application itself and Heath's role in it, it is important to briefly consider the dominance of any Prime Minister .
 Prime Minister is unable to completely direct and routinely intervene in the entirety of government policy, but he is able to set its tone . The Prime Minister can set the tone of the entire government .
 Heath was able to set the direction for the government's negotiations despite being unable to manage its day-to-day business . Heath's renowned Europeanism dates from his maiden speech of 1950, when he was prime minister .
 Historians have personally attributed entry to Heath's personal agency . Yet despite this, there is a consensus which has personally attributed it to him personally .
 Peter Hennessy identifies 1 January 1973 as a moment unparalleled in British history and which is directly attributable to Heath's own agency . Heavily influenced by his own agency, he says . The first day of January 1973 marked a moment of British history in history .
 Biographer attributes Heath's insistence on entry, both in opposition and government, to 'wounding rebuff' of de Gaulle veto .
 Peter Hennessy has situated Heath’s support for the cold douche theory in the context of the postwar consensus . He says Heath's support of the theory is seen in context of postwar consensus.
 The Conservatives did not choose to trawl for anti-Europe votes in opposition as Labour sought to in 1970-1974 and throughout the 1980s . Heath’s personal agency ensured that the Conservatives didn’t choose to try to win anti-EU votes as Labour did in 1970
 Heath exerted influence on Cabinet in moving government towards European entry . Heath exerted particular influence on cabinet in moving the government towards EU entry .
 His use of Cabinet and Cabinet committees can be seen as a tool of prime ministerial influence . His appointment of senior ministers is of central importance to his involvement with the application .
 Peter Hennessy’s theory of Cabinet overload throughout the 1960s and 1970s is of particular importance in understanding how Heath used his time in Cabinet .
 Heath's use of the Europe Committee allowed ministers the opportunity to extensively discuss items of European business without risking a split in full Cabinet . Heath used the committee to avoid risking a full Cabinet split over the issue .
 By preventing a split in the Cabinet Heath enhanced the unity of his government and therefore his own authority . Although delegating these items to a Cabinet committee appears to inhibit his personal agency, it has also enhanced his personal authority .
 This was coupled with the creation of a Europe Unit in the Cabinet Office, reporting to Heath and the Cabinet Secretary .
 The creation of the Europe Unit allowed Heath to harness the full weight of official advice . Heath was able to exert a considerable level of control over briefing work done by officials for the negotiations .
 Heath’s dependence on senior civil servants including William Armstrong, Burke Trend and Robert Armstrong can be seen in the structure of the Europe Unit . The Europe Unit was headed by a second Permanent Secretary and staffed entirely by civil servants .
 Heath’s close relationship with William Armstrong (Head of the Home Civil Service) is noteworthy as he valued Armstrong's advice and shared a great deal of his politics, including those of the European Community .
 Heath valued Burke Trend's integrity, as shown by Philip Ziegler's view of him as ‘the epitome of the correct civil servant’ in contrast to Heath’s unofficial ‘Deputy Prime Minister’ William Armstrong .
 Heath’s comfort with and dependence on senior civil servants makes his concentration of the Europe Unit in the Cabinet Office particularly understandable . Heath is comfortable with and dependent on civil servants .
 Heath manipulated their Whitehall struggle for influence to enhance his own agency as Prime Minister . By placing this key unit in the Cabinet Office, the Prime Minister’s domain, rather than the Foreign Office, he manipulated the Whitehall battle for influence .
 Geoffrey Rippon’s appointment as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster is revealing in its reflection on Heath's personal agency . The appointment is a reflection on his personal agency, and his personal life .
 Rippon's requirement to report directly to the Prime Minister is telling as an exercise in Number10’s dominance of negotiations . The Foreign Office largely agreed with the Foreign Office .
 The relative absence of Foreign Secretary Alec Douglas-Home throughout the negotiations prevented the kind of tensions that Geoffrey Howe thought were bound to develop between a Prime Minister and Foreign Minister .
 Douglas-Home’s involvement in the European negotiations and discussions in Cabinet were coupled with his management of the rest of the UK’�s foreign relations . Douglas Home was involved in the negotiations in Cabinet discussions .
 Douglas-Home concentrated the full force of Number 10’s energies on the European negotiations . Heath left the majority of foreign affairs to Douglas Home whilst he himself concentrated his energies on negotiations .
 Richard Thorpe briefly commented on the Heath-Home dimension in his seminal biography of Alec Douglas-Home published in 1997 . He highlighted how Heath was able to build on his commitment to entry as Foreign Secretary and opposition leader .
 Heath's biographers highlight the importance of Rippon reporting to the Prime Minister in ensuring the success of personal diplomacy . Philip Ziegler: 'Rippon was a great diplomat'
 Ziegler argues that Rippon was responsible for handling the negotiations with the Six as a whole . Heath took closer control of the negotiations that would have to occur with France alone .
 Ziegler argues that Heath’s experience of Foreign Office negotiations in the Macmillan bid encouraged him to overrule the Foreign Office's traditional ‘divide and rule strategy’ in favour of a personal negotiation with President Pompidou .
 It was this personal diplomacy between the Prime Minister and the French President that facilitated the lifting of General de Gaulle’s veto which had hung over British membership since 1963 . The veto was lifted by the French president in 1963 .
 Christopher Soames and Michael Jobert met in Paris to discuss expansion of the EEC . Pompidou was elected to power in France in 1969 . The meeting was made possible by the negotiations of Christopher and Michael Soames . It is important to consider the change in French attitudes
 The importance of the change in French government attitudes was recognised by Number 10 in minutes of a meeting between Heath and Marshall (Deputy Prime Minister of New Zealand)
 French government’s realisation of the need to end Sterling's global reserve status and encourage Britain to adapt to EEC market conditions allowed Pompidou to justify British entry on France's terms . The French government's realisation that the need for the end of the global reserve
 Young argues this was part of a clever strategy by Pompidou to convince Britain to pay a substantial contribution to the Common Agricultural Policy as the price of entry .
 It was not until the deadlock had crystallized at the multilateral level, not in other words until France had made clear that it was in her power to insist on conditions no British government was likely to be willing to accept . Georges Pompidou could reckon to obtain the
 A great deal of the bargaining manoeuvres in the early part of 1971 could be construed as signals to ""come up and see me some time"". By agreeing to a summit on the terms that France demanded, the Heath government reaffirmed France's dominance of proceedings .
 As Heath squared British entry with Pompidou, Germany’s willingness to accept British entry was more easily achieved because of Willy Brandt's willingness to expand the Community . As Heath and Brandt squared Britain's entry into the Community, Brandt was more likely to expand
 John Young argues that Brandt’s decision not to try to force France to agree to British membership was part of a consistent trend in German foreign policy not to create a Franco-German rift over European enlargement .
 Heath wrote in his memoirs that Brandt’s Ostpolitik ~ 77 ~ was coupled with a determination to enlarge the European Community to include Britain with the aim of creating a common European foreign policy . Heath said Brandt wanted Britain to be part of the European community .
 Philip Ziegler is in agreement with John Young about Germany’s reluctance to push France towards British entry . He emphasises the need to use German influence in Paris with great discretion . Philip is confident that Germany will not push the UK into France .
 Ziegler argues that the Federal Republic’s growing strength was a cause of alarm for the French government . The acceptance of British entry was designed to reinforce French leadership, he argues .
 Germany's willingness to allow Britain entry to the Community also satisfied France's desire to curtail growing German dominance, thus clearing both major geopolitical obstacles to British entry . Therefore, Germany’s willingness to let Britain enter to the community also satisfied French desire to curb German dominance .
 This clearly points toward wider geopolitical factors being of greater significance than the personal agency of Edward Heath . But it does demonstrate the growing accord to British entry, which Heath recognised when applying .
 Britain's entry to the Community had been agreed by the Six in late June 1971 . Heath government's actions were particularly agentic in moving towards the signature of the Treaty of Accession on 22 January 1972 .
 Heath's decision not to offer a referendum reinforced the supremacy of Parliament to decide Britain’s future in relation to Europe . Parliament is still still a largely alien constitutional device, at this time still an alien device .
 Heath’s decision not to take the issue to the country gave him a greater control over events than Wilson had in 1975 after the Callaghan-led renegotiations . Despite the possibility of losing the vote because of the opposition of Harold Wilson and the anti-Europe wing of his own
 Young highlights the commitment Heath gave to only take Britain into Europe with the ‘full-hearted consent’ of both Parliament and people . Young suggests that Heath reneged on a commitment to a referendum .
 Heath’s aversion to referenda meant that his references to the consent of the people were most likely to be referring to the House of Commons . Heath participated in the 1975 referendum, it seems more than likely that he was referring to a referendum held in 1975 .
 Heath allowed whips time to put pressure on Conservative 'anti' MPs to support the government . Young does, however, recognise that by delaying the vote until after the recess, Heath allowed the Conservative whips to pressure MPs to back the government to back it .
 Heath’s decision not to call a referendum on entry greatly reinforced his ability to encourage entry, unlike Norway which had rejected membership by 79 . Norway had rejected its membership by ~ 79 .
 Had Heath followed Tony Benn’s proposal for a national binary referendum on entry, as Wilson did in 1975, and lost, both Heath's personal agency and that of any Prime Minister would be severely damaged .
 Edward Heath achieved a considerable level of personal agency in relation to Europe . As Prime Minister, Edward Heath had a considerable amount of personal responsibility .
 His personal knowledge of and deep commitment to the ideals of European union allowed him to exert considerable influence over colleagues in Cabinet and over direction of negotiations .
 The structure of his government, including his choice of Alec DouglasHome as Foreign Secretary, allowed him to have a close involvement in entry .
 Heath has rightly received the credit for initiating the move to entry at a domestic level . But international geopolitical shifts including the post-de Gaulle political climate in France and Germany’s willingness to widen European integration coalesced to facilitate British accession .
 Key to his idea of the inevitability of embracing Britain’s European destiny . Key to idea of idea of . embracing Britain's European destiny. Key to . idea of an inevitability .
 With the advent of industrialization, the family production system of the preindustrial era was replaced by a system of wage labour which would reign supreme for decades to follow .
 The social and economic relations of the city’s working classes were significantly altered . However, not only did this have extreme effects on the economic development of the . city, it also significantly altered the social . relations . of the working classes .
 Urban expansion significantly affected social relations between working-men and women and also between women of different classes . As this essay will prove, by altering their economic role, urban expansion dramatically affected their social relations .
 Working-class women not only threatened men’s place within the labour market but also threatened the status of womanhood itself . By escaping the traditional realm of the ‘private’ sphere, working-class . women . not only . threatened men's place within . the labour
 Discussion of how the working-class developed and started to be affected by this economic change . Discussion will be interwoven discussion of how working-classes developed and how they are affected .
 This essay will end by focusing specifically on working-class women and how they were affected by this expansion . It will also focus on how they are affected by the expansion of capitalism .
 Urban expansion or urbanisation began at the end of the eighteenth century . Urbanisation began in the 17th century .
 America was able to capture European international trade . As the rest of main land Europe became engrossed in wars, America captured Europe's trade . America captured the world's most important trade routes .
 The NY port managed to increase the value of its imports by $6.6 million between the 1790s and 1807, which created important financial growth for the creation of infrastructure and urban development .
 The growth in the city’s population was crucial to its urban expansion . Economic growth is important in the expansion of the city, it was also important to its population growth .
 At the beginning of the nineteenth century, NYC had become a hub for immigration both from abroad and within the United States itself .
 By drawing people to NYC, urban expansion, industrialisation and the development of capitalism are all intimately combined . Urban expansion and industrialisation are all intertwined in NYC's development .
 The effects of industrialisation and capitalism are often treated as the effects of urban expansion also . Consequently, throughout this essay, this essay is treated as an example of how urban expansion affects capitalism .
 Urban expansion was incredibly important in creating an entire class of workers in NY which had not existed beforehand . Thus, by drawing people to the city, urban expansion created a class of people which had never existed before .
 The first effect of urban expansion was the creation of working-class communities, in which all other effects would be based . As a result, urban expansion would create working class communities, the first effect would be on working class areas .
 Until the late 1810s, the main source of revenue for working families was income made by male labourers in traditional crafts such as tailoring and shoe-making .
 These male labourers would have been trained by skilled artisans as young apprentices, developing their skills alongside their employers . They were paid not in wages but in shelter, food and training and shelter .
 If women did need to work to supplement the earnings of their husband, they would have undertaken traditionally female jobs such as domestic service, street selling, and work within the ‘putting-out’ system .
 The ‘putting-out’ system, beginning in the colonial era, saw women produce cheap but low-quality shirts and trousers that would then be given to a tailor to sell on . The 'putting out' system began in colonial era .
 This was very beginning of a process which would include women in the labour market . Although this did little to drastically alter the NYC economy and male prospects in the job market, it was the beginning of the process .
 In the first two decades of the nineteenth century, there was a clear gender division in which women were, in the most part, spatially constrained to the home .
 Even women saw themselves as having a “narrow sphere” in ‘domestick affairs” as one pre-revolutionary female writes . Dating right back to the colonial era, even women thought they had a ‘small sphere’ in “domest
 This illustrates the pervasiveness of the separation of genders into different spatial areas, both metaphorically and literally . Women are dependent on their husbands, fathers and brothers to provide incomes .
 Women were not expected to have economic independence in the form of paid work . Their biggest role, especially after the American Revolution, was to be good wives and educate their children on civic virtues, all things they could do from the home .
 Both working-class men and women had to cope with the changing economic realities of industrialisation, urbanisation and the early development of capitalism .
 Working-class women could no longer just exist within the ‘private sphere’ as status and spatial restrictions started to be questioned . Working class women were no longer able to live within the 'private sphere'
 The artisanal labour system which dominated NYC’s economy at the beginning of the nineteenth century had begun to decline . By 1820, the artisanal labor system had began to decline.
 As the city expanded with the expansion of markets, better transportation systems and easier access to labour, NYC became a hub for mass immigration . The city's population grew in the 1970s and 1980s .
 It became clear to artisanal entrepreneurs and merchants that more profit could be made than the current labour system provided . The labour system has been a model for artisan entrepreneurs .
 The industrial revolution in Britain meant that there was an influx of cheap goods, there were further incentives for merchants to reform the labour process by minimising their outgoing costs .
 There was a turn away from artisanal labour and towards waged labour, which allowed for the maximisation of profit . Therefore, there was a turning away from . artisanal . labour and . waged labour .
 This new economic system was far from stable and the new class of wage labourers could not always guarantee that work would be there for them . The situation was made worse by the constant supply of poor immigrant workers and, within a short amount of time, women .
 Merchant bosses looked at the ‘putting-out’ system for low paid workers to produce a vast amount of cheap goods . Merchant bosses, for example, looked towards the 'putting out’s system .
 This created a whole new system of labour in which women began to be more dominate . This created the birth of the industrial revolution, which saw women become more dominant .
 This new system was known as the ‘Outside’ system and would become notorious for its poor pay and working conditions . The new system became notorious for poor pay, conditions and conditions .
 The ‘Outside’ system allowed women to work in their own households for wages . It gave employers the ability to expand outside of their workshops given the limited space the city had for industrial factories .
 By allowing women to be wage labourers from within their home, there was an illusion that the traditional role of women was being retained in this new economy . Women were allowed to work in their homes as labourers .
 Domesticity now became ‘practical necessity of industrial capitalism’ However, however, the public and private spheres became blurred for working-class women in a way they had not been before .
 This stark transition from the artisan system of labour to that of wage labour reordered the social relations in which the working-class existed .
 More women had to enter the workforce in order to ensure they could survive . However, given that this work paid less and was unstable, it meant that more women were forced to enter .
 This increased importance on the labour of women affected relations between workingclass men and women . The increased importance of women's labour affected relations with working class men, women .
 Stansell has demonstrated the deterioration of male independence and complete control over the household as women gained wage . As men tried to enforce the subservience of women by force, Stansell saw men try to enforce it by force . As Stansell demonstrated, he has demonstrated that this has led
 Trade Unions started to suggest that men should be paid enough so that women did not have to work and could go back to their traditional role as domestic housewife .
 By allowing women in to the work place, it threatened working-class notions of what it meant to be a man in this period . Women's role in the workplace was historically a male dominated sphere, says historian .
 As urban expansion led to the altering of women’s economic role within society, it led to a complete re-evaluation between both working-class men and women .
 Wage labour created the foundation of the working classes in NYC . This was the first and perhaps most significant effect of urban expansion . Wage labour was the very foundation of NYC .
 Urban expansion became incredibly important by changing the labour system in the city, and creating the conditions in which a new class could be created . Urban expansion created the conditions for a new social class to be created in the cities, says the author .
 It was the very creation of this class after 1820 on which all other effects felt by the working-class would be based . It was created on the basis of the creation of the class in 1820 .
 Historian Sean Wilentz has followed a very similar argument in his book Chants Democratic . Historians have followed a similar argument .
 There is a lack of meaningful analysis into the lives of working-class women and how wage labour, urban expansion and capitalism affected their lives specifically . However, there is a need for analysis into how these women's lives have affected them .
 This is not only a weakness of Wilentz’s work but the wider historiography around capitalism and urban development . This is the wider history of capitalism, urban development and capitalism, writes Andrew Hammond .
 This essay will show the importance of women and gender to understanding the effects of urban development on the working-class . As Amy Dru Stanley has argued, ‘problems of sex appear to lie outside the optic of a new history of capitalism'
 It is women’s relationship to the urban space and the industrial setting, which was growing within it, which would change labour relationships and give women a sense of independence on one hand, and oppressing them in another .
 There was an unprecedented emphasis on trying to keep women as moral guardians, uncorrected by the effects of urban expansion . Therefore, there was an enormous emphasis on keeping women as guardians, says historian .
 This was done, not only to ensure the saviour of women, but also of men, says the author . This is done, as well as ensuring the welfare of women and men .
 Welter specifically looks at middle-class women in New England . The ‘Cult of True Womanhood’ extended along both class and regional lines .
 Working-class women’s lives would come to be defined by the expectations of womanhood . The nature of working-class . lives would become defined by expectations of . womanhood.
 The Outside System which dominated female wage labour was accepted because it placed women inside the home, where their job as wife and mother could be retained as well as providing cheap labour to capitalist bosses .
 The ideas of true womanhood, domesticity and women’s place within the private sphere all strengthened as the city expanded . Therefore, the idea of true womenhood and domesticity was strengthened as a result of the city expanding and women's role within the economy grew .
 Middle-class ‘urban ladies’ saw it as their duty to ‘reform’ the lives of ‘poor but industrious’ women who had fallen morally from the virtuous pedestal on which middle-class women sat . The 'urban ladies' saw it
 This is clear from the copious amounts of charity work which was carried out by these urban ladies in the first half of the nineteenth century . The women's charity work made an emphasis on working with the worthy, deserving poor women .
 They required seeing evidence, such as marriage certificates and character references from each person seeking their help before they decided to help them .
 The possibility of being unable to feed, clothe and provide shelter for your family was a consequence of the new capitalist system which had developed by 1840 . However to suggest that urban expansion only had negative effects on the lives of workingclass women would be incorrect .
 NYC became a place of migration for single young women looking for work where they departed from the dependence of their family homes to move to boarding houses in the city in which they had wages all their own .
 Single women in particular embraced some of the things the city had to offer, defying middle-class standards of domesticity to fight for their own sense of freedom within an ideologically restrictive world .
 Nowhere was this new sense of freedom and independence seen more than on the Bowery . Nowhere were this new freedoms seen more clearly than in New York City .
 The Bowery, located in the fifteenth ward, was a promenade which was home to various shops, amusement and entertainment outlets at a price which worked-class .
 Working-class women would use the little disposable wages they had left to engage in the Bowery life . They would do what they could to reject middle-class notions of bourgeois female .
 Bowery girls had an ‘exhilarating appearance’ as they dressed in a combination of colours and patterns [see figure 1]. Clothing became a way to express pride in their class and sex .
 Working-class women would not remain submissive, they would use their new-found independence to express rather than hide themselves . This open display rejected middle-class notions of ‘True Womanhood .
 Despite the oppression that industrialisation brought workingclass women in the form of poor working conditions and poor pay, urban expansion also brought more positive opportunities . As a result, despite the problems that came with urban expansion and the oppression it brought working class women, it also brought positive opportunities, says
 Urban expansion allowed single working-class women to escape the bonds of the family and live their own lives dictated by their own small sense of independence which wages gave them .
 The impact of expansion, industrialisation and capitalism changed labour systems and labour relations, which would alter not only the economic development of the city but the social development of those labouring within that system .
 As a result, this essay goes a long way in proving the important of understanding the effect urban development had on the lives of the working-class .
 This essay proves beyond anything the importance of marrying these two fields . This essay is an example of how important it is to be able to combine the two fields of interest .
 Urban expansion radically affected the lives of working-class men and women . Gender and sex were just as important to the development of urban expansion, class and capitalism as any other historical lens .
 In the History of American Feminism, Norton, Mary Beth. Selected Writings In the . History of . the History . of American . Feminism . Norton .
 Carol Lasser, Carol. The Rhetoric of Women’s History’, The Journal of American History, 75:1, Lasser .
 The Ford Motor Company and The Five Dollar a Day were founded in 1903 . Nancy Cott, Christine Stansell, Christine. Cott wrote a book on the history of women in the United States .