 This review article questions the answers Allison and Zelikow provide to each of these questions . The answers to these questions are provided by the authors of this article .
 New evidence suggests Turkey may not have been opposed to decommissioning its U.S. Jupiter missiles at the time of the crisis . Khrushchev–Kennedy agreement was a factor in ending crisis .
 It is something of a paradox that the best-known book in the vast literature on the Cuban missile crisis is recognized more for its theorizing than its historical analysis . The book is recognized for its theory of decision-making than its considerable contribution to understanding the crisis .
 The crisis itself, the most dangerous great power confrontation in human history, is now a half-century old . It is now 50 years old, and the crisis itself is now more than half a century old .
 It is an opportune time to assess this pioneering work’s contribution to understanding its chosen event. It is a good time for us to assess the impact of this work .
 It is so universally known that its very title is regularly punned by other missile crisis writings and by non-missile crisis books, sometimes without any felt need to cite it .
 The book’s organization reflects its emphasis on exploring alternative explanatory theories . The book's organization reflects the emphasis on . exploring alternative explanations .
 It developed three now-familiar models of decision-making – the rational actor, organizational process and governmental politics models .
 Models take pride of place over the puzzles, with missiles in mind . The models take pride in place over puzzles .
 Even-numbered, substantive chapters each apply one model to answer all three questions, rather than successive chapters each answering a given question . The even-numbered chapters apply to all three models, instead of successive chapters .
 Essence provides brief, somewhat disconnected, narratives of crisis events . Unlike conventional histories, Essence provides only brief and somewhat disconnected narratives of crises events .
 Essence2 answers all three puzzles differently, however, and the changes do not always parallel the evolution of the literature . Essence2 is not the only answer to each of the three puzzles .
 This article focuses more on the second edition than on comparing the two . This article is more focused on the first edition of this edition than the second .
 It assumes that readers have some familiarity with both the crisis and the book . The book is published by Simon Cowell, a Pulitzer Prize-winning author .
 Analysts must venture beyond the familiar rational actor model and employ organizational and bureaucratic models to arrive at an adequate understanding of events such as the Cuban missile crisis .
 Even sympathetic critics have severely questioned the original models and interpretations of the models .
 Mounting historical evidence has tended not to bolster the once innovative, even sexy, organizational and bureaucratic models – as many analysts had expected further evidence would . Mounting history has tended to not bolster some of the once sexy, innovative organizational models .
 Essence’s argument about the value-added quality of the latter two models has not been reinforced by the crisis, it says .
 The missile crisis was an extraordinarily tough case for demonstrating the influence of intra-government forces in policy-making . To be fair, the case was a tough case .
 Crises tend to centralize decisions, to push leaders to the forefront, and the 1962 crisis did so more than most . Crisis in 1962 was the most centralized crisis crisis in history .
 Many existing appraisals of Essence of Decision, even by historians, nevertheless emphasize the three models .
 My focus here is the explanatory puzzles more than the famous models . What follows is thus, oddly, a somewhat unconventional treatment of the models .
 Focusing today on possible explanations of and conclusions about the crisis means confronting changing interpretations of crisis events and exploring the interaction between established notions and recently discovered facts . Focusing on possible solutions to the crisis must confront changing interpretations .
 I raise some additional questions about the missile crisis beyond Essence’s now-holy trinity of puzzles . I also raise some more questions about missile crisis .
 On this subject, given the now vast and detailed missile crisis literature, it is an unrealistic claim . That would pose a challenge on most subjects at most points in time .
 It would help us to identify four more or less consecutive but overlapping stages of missile crisis research . Historiographical stages would be identified in both editions of Essence of Decision .
 The first consisted largely of 1960s’ memoirs and popular history, broadly defined, all of them American voices . All of them were American voices, and all were American .
 The most prominent of these were Robert F Kennedy’s Thirteen Days . Theodore Sorensen's Kennedy, Roger Hilsman's To Move a Nation, Arthur Schlesinger's A Thousand Days and journalist Elie Abel's The Missile Crisis .
 Publication of Essence1 opened the second stage, one of serious scholarly research . Essence1 is published in Essence1 .
 Essence1 established a new orthodoxy on the crisis but soon prompted some critics . Essence1 was established as an outlet for the crisis crisis in 2008, but soon faced criticism .
 Allison refers to Jupiter missiles in Turkey, to which Allison refers but does not emphasize . Donald Hafner and Barton Bernstein focused on the same issue, but Allison says it's not about Turkey .
 A surging tide of declassified documents and an extraordinary series of participant– expert observer conferences marked the third stage of the declassification process .
 The John F Kennedy Presidential Library began releasing material in the late 1970s and continued that process apace through the 1980s and 1990s . The library is releasing material from Kennedy's archives .
 The United States National Archives, the Central Intelligence Agency and the now-entitled British National Archives followed suit . The U.S. National Archives and the CIA followed suit.
 The private National Security Archive secured release of many U.S. documents . The private archive secured many documents from the United States .
 The fourth and most recent stage is heavily represented by international perspectives and by re-evaluations and refinements, based partly on stage three disclosures .
 The volumes here include important contributions from Soviet, Cuban, British and European analysts . The second edition of Essence of Decision is published in the second edition .
 The current scene is, in short, a vastly more complex, varied and crowded one than when Essence1 emerged, but is one in which a significant consensus has emerged on many key issues . Essence1 is one of the world's most diverse political parties .
 All experts accept the former explanation as one goal if not the primary goal . Virtually, all experts accept that .
 In the early 1960s, Washington and Moscow both perceived Berlin as a key Cold War problem . Berlin was a key part of the Cold War in the 1960s .
 In 1961, the Soviets and East Germans began constructing the soon-to-be famous wall to seal off West Berlin . The wall was built by the Soviets, East Germans in 1961 .
 In October, Soviet and US forces directly confronted each other at ‘Checkpoint Charlie’, a major crossing point between the east and the west .
 The wall would survive for almost three decades without a similar confrontation . It would be the first time the wall has survived without a major confrontation .
 Berlin was in the minds of U.S. officials pondering Moscow’s moves and motives in October 1962 . Berlin was the focus of the U.N. officials when they were considering Moscow's actions .
 As logical as perceived links at the time might have been, only circumstantial evidence connects Berlin and the deployment . Only circumstantially evidence links Berlin to the deployment.
 Russian participants in oral history conferences have argued that Moscow had made no such direct connection . Key Russian participants have said that Moscow made no direct connection with the Soviet Union .
 Moves against West Berlin, they insisted, were never part of Khrushchev’s calculus . They insisted that it was not part of the calculus .
 It is possible that there might have been an indirect link between the missiles in Cuba and the future of Berlin . It is not the first time the missiles have been found in Cuba .
 Successfully deploying missiles to Cuba would have been a major Cold War coup for the Soviet Union . It would be a clear manifestation of Moscow’s ability to project force abroad .
 Khrushchev's success could have increased Soviet prestige globally . That success, in turn, could have strengthened its position on Berlin – an issue about which Nikita Khrushche cared deeply .
 A better term for the possible objective here than the so-called ‘Berlin’ motive might thus be the ‘Soviet prestige and influence’ factor . The 'Soviet prestige' factor may be the reason for the decision to take action .
 Many existing discussions of Soviet aims in Cuba curiously do not appear to consider this motive systematically . Many existing discussion of Cuban aims do not seem to consider it systematically .
 The U.S. says it was not a significant Soviet motive for the deployment . But they still insist that defending Cuba was not an important Soviet motive . The Cuban government still insists that the Soviet motive was not to blame .
 Gromyko's oversight, such as it was, does not prove Cuba’s fate was unimportant to Nikita Khrushchev . But it doesn’t prove that Khrushchchev was uninterested in Cuba, it does not mean Khrushcheche .
 JFK’s statement to Gromyko is not considered significant . Two considerations lessen the significance of JFK's statement .
 The President had made a similar statement in September and, when he repeated it in October, he immediately retracted any implied promise . The President also retracted the statement in October .
 The situation had changed, he told Gromyko, because the Soviets were now building up Cuba’s military capability . The Soviets were building up their military capability, he said . The situation was changing, he added .
 President's statement was actually more warning than assurance . The President’s statement was thus actually more than assurance than assurance.
 No Kennedy assurance in October could have alleviated Soviet concerns about Cuba’s security at the time Khrushchev ordered the missile deployment – fully six months earlier . More importantly, no Kennedy assurances in October would have eased Soviet concerns in Cuba .
 Essence2 argues that the defence of Cuba explanation is inconsistent with the nature and number of missiles sent to Cuba . Essence2 also argues that it is inconsistent to explain the nature of the missiles sent and the amount of missiles fired .
 No single metric exists to calculate the forces ‘required’ to deter potential attacks . No metric exists, however, to calculate what forces are needed to deter attacks .
 Whether or not a chosen action is 'optimal' is ‘completely irrelevant’ to explaining decisions . Moreover, whether or not an action is . ‘optimal’ is . 'completely irrelevant' to explain decisions, he said .
 Had the crisis unfolded as Khrushchev hoped, had the USSR completed and announced the full deployments in November as planned, then the tactical missiles might very well have helped deter an American invasion . Had the planned deployment of tactical missiles had been announced as planned .
 Moscow's original motives cannot be assessed ex post facto, according to the way events unexpectedly unfolded months later . Moscow’s original motives can’t be assessed by ex-post facto, says the author .
 Various critics of the ‘defence of Cuba’ theme also argue that however much ballistic missiles might have deterred a U.S. attack, they would not have helped 'defend’ Cuba .
 This general deterrence argument assumes, incorrectly, that Soviet thinking then rested on a deterrence–defence distinction as much as did U.S. thinking . This is incorrect, and the argument is wrong .
 The ‘deterrence versus defence’ argument does not apply at all to tactical nuclear weapons . Moreover, the ‘Deterrence vs. defence” argument doesn’t apply all the time to the tactical nuclear arms .
 Defending Cuba is now widely regarded as a primary Khrushchev goal for the deployment of Cuba . Defending Cuban is now regarded as one of Khrushches' top goals for the mission .
 Support for this motive grew in recent decades as evidence emerged on extensive U.S. planning for an invasion of Cuba and covert CIA operations against Fidel Castro . The motive behind the killing of Castro Castro has grown in recent years .
 Whatever Washington's true intentions, Cuban and Soviet concerns about Cuba’s security were more than reasonable . The U.S. and Soviet Union had concerns about Cuban security that were reasonable .
 Essence1 shows Kennedy’s so-called Executive Committee, or ExComm, came to focus increasingly during the first crisis week on the blockade rather than on the air strike or full-scale invasion options . Essence1: ExComm was focused more on blockade than air strike options .
 Allison and Zelikow argue the ExComm did not in the end pose establishing a blockade and using or threatening military force as dichotomous alternatives . In a highly interesting and useful departure, they argue that establishing or threatening a blockade did not pose a blockade .
 The actual U.S. response was imposing a blockade, issuing an ultimatum and negotiating an agreement . Arguably, the actual United States response was imposed a blockade and negotiated an agreement.
 Most early analyses suggested that ExComm gave the negotiating option short shrift . ExComm was criticized for not giving the option short-shrift .
 In fact, negotiating a deal involving the Jupiters in Turkey was not overlooked and was not an afterthought . The deal was not considered afterthought in negotiations with the Turkish government .
 Khrushchev raised the issue in a 27 October letter to Kennedy in a letter to the Soviet Union leader . Kennedy was not the first to raise the issue, but it was the second to raise it late .
 The ‘friggin’ missiles’ in Turkey figured early and figured often in U.S. crisis thinking . ‘Friggin' missiles were the focus of the crisis thinking in the early years of the Obama administration .
 The Kennedy administration did not ‘reject’ Khrushchev’s proposal regarding the Jupiters . It publicly avoided a response while secretly preparing a response .
 Implicitly, it thus provides an answer to this puzzle that changes the question itself . The answer to the puzzle itself is that it changes itself, and that it does so .
 The puzzle is not why the President chose a ‘blockade’ but why he chose the combination of responses . The puzzle we should pursue here is why a 'blockade' was chosen, rather than why it was chosen .
 ‘talking ‘them out’ played its part in the combination of responses . Making that conceptual shift, in turn, raises the question of how 'talking 'them out' played its role .
 ‘The blockade did not change Khrushchev’s mind,’ says Allison and Zelikow . ‘Krushchev's mind was not changed by the blockade,' they say .
 JFK did not specifically articulate the air strike or invasion threats publicly or even privately to the Soviets . One might quibble with the wording here – JFK didn't mention the threats publicly .
 American military preparations were not hidden and the Soviets used their imaginations as to the further action Kennedy might take . But the U.S. military was not hidden in the Soviet Union .
 Essence2 argues that U.S. threats forced Khrushchev to withdraw missiles from Cuba . The thrust of the Essence2 argument is that United States threats, per se, more or less alone, forced the move .
 The Soviet leader initially feared the President might order an immediate military attack . When he learned Kennedy had scheduled a televised address for 22 October, the Soviet leader feared an attack .
 Khrushchev misjudged Washington’s reaction to the missiles, but also suggested to him the United States might be willing to deal with him . The announced blockade signalled American resolve and made clear to him that the U.S. was willing to do so .
 The effective naval blockade, coupled with the interception of Soviet submarines in the area, underscored the U.S. conventional military advantage in the Atlantic and Caribbean .
 The blockade also stopped the shipment of intermediate-range R-14 missiles . The blockade stopped the entire shipment of the missiles .
 This was arguably the point in time at which Khrushchev began to realize there was no real alternative to withdrawal, short of risking Cuba and nuclear war, he says . This was the point at that time at that point, he adds .
 Realizing one has to change one’s position is distinct from changing it, but is a critical start psychologically . Realizing that one must change one's position is not changing it is a key start psychologically, but it's a good start .
 Khrushchev himself dwelling less on the specific possibilities of an air strike or invasion than on other, broader consequences . Second, the available evidence shows him dwelling on the possibility of an invasion . The evidence shows Khrushchevs himself dwelling on other potential consequences .
 The fact that unauthorized action by his own troops brought down the U-2 spy plane only emphasized the dangers of unauthorized action . The U.2 plane was brought down by the U.S. government .
 The threat to attack Cuba was the threat of nuclear catastrophe . The threat of a nuclear attack on Cuba was also a threat to Cuba .
 Graham Allison suggested that both Kennedy and Khrushchev sought a peaceful solution . The need to avoid ‘the final failure’, as the American president called it, was a key point .
 Allison’s analysis would later be confirmed by documentary evidence and oral testimony . Allison's analysis was later confirmed in documentary evidence, oral testimony and documentary evidence .
 The shift is reflected in another comment he made, about his ally, Castro .
 Khrushchev said Fidel was ‘a very hot-tempered person’ who ‘failed to think through the obvious consequences of a proposal that placed the planet on the brink of extinction’ The same could have been said of Khrushvic himself, before 22 October 1962
 That week, however, he saw the quicksand into which he was walking, reconsidered his poorly conceived deployment decision and backed out before becoming stuck . He said he was "stuck" by his decision to deploy to Afghanistan .
 JFK's thinking shifted dramatically during late October, from assuming he had no choice but attack Cuba to making a politically dangerous deal . JFK’s thinking also shifted dramatically in late October . JFK: "I'm going to make a political dangerous deal"
 If he had not obtained acceptable terms, things might well have ended differently . If he hadn't secured acceptable terms he might have had a different outcome .
 His response to the deployment was not just a blockade and threats of further action but also informal negotiation . His response was to a blockade, threats and threats to further action .
 An agreement was negotiated rapidly, only partially put to paper, and thus never signed let alone ratified . An agreement is negotiated rapidly but never signed and ratified .
 Kennedy’s written component was his conditional pledge to end the blockade and eschew an invasion of Cuba . The written component of the Cuban blockade was Kennedy's conditional promise to end it and end it .
 Khrushchev publicly promised to withdraw the missiles and later the IL-28 bombers . The missiles were withdrawn from the Soviet Union in 1964 . The IL-29 bombers were the first to carry out the missiles .
 The so-called ‘missile trade’ was really a mutual missile withdrawal pact . It was really an agreement to withdraw missiles from the U.S. and Russia .
 Our understanding of this accord has evolved and deepened, as some background will show . Our understanding has evolved, as well as our understanding of the accord, has evolved .
 Kennedy was surprised during the missile crisis to discover that American Jupiter missiles were still in Turkey . According to Elie Abel, Kennedy ordered the missiles removed .
 In Essence1, Graham Allison hypothesized that Washington bureaucracies must have frustrated the President’s removal order . Allison: Washington bureaucracy must have been frustrated .
 For bureaucratic politics folks, the example was a veritable Krupp Diamond . For bureaucrats, it was a good example .
 Donald Hafner brilliantly shredded this myth within a few years, and even before official documents became available, he brilliantly shredded it . Hafner: "Donald Hafner's story is not a myth. It is a myth that he is a hero."
 Hafner used Kennedy’s own words and actions to show that the President knew very well before and during the missile crisis that the Jupiters remained in Turkey . Based on public material and the secondary literature .
 Hafner also inferred there had been no withdrawal order ; he was correct, but he lacked direct evidence on this point and his reasoning was faulty . Hafner was correct but his reasoning is faulty .
 Kennedy had earlier directed his officials to explore ways to remove the Jupiters . But he did not, however, explicitly order the missiles withdrawn – at least not before 28 October 1962 .
 President Kennedy's men were hardly the first in history to spin events for political reasons – or the last . President Kennedy’s men are hardly the last in history of spin stories .
 Even as the missile crisis dust was still settling, public speculation arose that its abrupt and unexpected end suggested some sort of secret deal with the Soviet devil . That was the question .
 The New Frontiersmen denied this rumour with all the ‘vigah’ they could muster . The New frontiersmen deny the rumours .
 U.S. officials also told North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies the same story . United States also told allies the United States and allies the story .
 The fact that RFK and Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin held secret discussions during the missile crisis became public knowledge in 1966 from Abel’s book . RFK's secret discussions with the Soviet ambassador were made public in 1966 .
 The volume, however, makes no mention of the Jupiters being discussed . The volume of the book, which was released in March, is released by the U.S. government .
 RFK’s Thirteen Days was published posthumously in 1969 . RFK was assassinated in 1968, but his story was still popular with fans .
 Bobby told Dobrynin that the President would remove the Jupiters from Turkey . Washington observers could not help but notice it showed .
 'Both admirers and critics assumed that President Kennedy had been wholly unresponsive on the Turkish missiles' RFK’s account thus surprised both groups, according to the book .
 The 1971 edition of Essence of Decision was its treatment of the Jupiter issue . In retrospect, it was an interesting but much-ignored feature of the 1971 edition .
 RFK claims he told Dobrynin ‘there could be no quid pro quo’, no deal involving the Jupiters of the sort Khrushchev proposed earlier that day . Allison notes RFK’s claim that he said there was 'no quid
 The first edition of Nikita Khrushchev’s memoirs, published in the U.S. in 1970, was silent on the Jupiter concession . The first version of the memoirs in 1970 was silent .
 Andrei Gromyko similarly wrote about the arrangement, citing Thirteen Days . Andrei .
 Fidel Castro spoke about the deal in the late 1960s and Turkey’s Prime Minister publicly acknowledged it in 1970 . In 1980, historian Barton Bernstein argued the case for an explicit Kennedy–Khrushchev agreement .
 The President 'privately offered a hedged promise to withdraw the Jupiter missiles' Two years later, on the 20th anniversary of the missile crisis, six high-level Kennedy administration officials revised the record .
 The Thirteen Days account, he said, did not faithfully render the Kennedy–Dobrynin meeting . He said it did not accurately render the meeting .
 As the book’s ghost ‘editor’, Sorensen had taken it upon himself to alter RFK's wording . RFK was assassinated in 1968 .
 Dobrynin himself recalled RFK had portrayed the Jupiters as a significant concession . Removing missiles ‘was part of the deal’ Removing the missiles was ‘a significant concession’
 Sorensen’s confession was a significant reversal of the public position traditionally taken by Kennedy administration officials . Whatever the value added in the confession, it was significant reversal .
 They quote and seem to accept McGeorge Bundy’s 1988 version of the RFK–Dobrynin meeting – an account that describes something less than a clear offer . They also quote and appear to accept Bundy's 1988 version .
 JFK’s 27 October ‘Trollope Ploy’ letter ignored Khrushchev's Jupiter proposal, as the President’�s ‘final move’ The letter relegates to a sort of limbo Kennedy's later response on the Jupiters .
 NATO Council eschewed a formal decision on withdrawal of the Jupiters from Turkey and Italy because, it noted, the countries concerned had already settled the matter . In fact, the NATO Council opted not to make a formal withdrawal decision because the countries had settled the issue .
 Allison and Zelikow devote little attention to the two fallback options Kennedy initiated . Kennedy initiated on 27 October in the event Khrushchev rejected the secret Jupiter offer . Allison: Kennedy initiated two options in event of a rejection .
 One option was to arrange a public missile withdrawal deal under the auspices of the United Nations’ acting Secretary-General . The deal would be arranged under the U.N.’s acting secretary-general .
 NATO meeting for Monday 29 October to discuss the Jupiters . The other, less well-formed, was to call a NATO meeting to discuss Jupits .
 Since neither back-up plan proved necessary, their historical importance was easily overlooked . The historical importance of the plan is easily overlooked.
 Kennedy’s commitment to including the Jupiters in the overall agreement shows his willingness to take large political risks to do so, if necessary . Kennedy: "They demonstrate President Kennedy's commitment to . including the . Jupeters"
 A senior Turkish official told a NATO ally that the government could probably accept decommissioning of the Jupiters . Space constraints here prohibit details, but a senior Turkish Foreign Ministry figure said a senior government official said in October that Turkey could decommission the aircraft .
 It may also help explain aspects of the ExComm discussion that day and explain why Ankara so quickly and readily accepted, post-crisis, the idea and the eventual fact of a U.S. withdrawal .
 Observers disagree on whether the causal factor was a crisis-reinforced fear of nuclear confrontation . Crisis-induced sense of possible superpower cooperation may have been a factor .
 The crisis led to, indeed featured, its own arms agreement . What these assessments overlook is that it led to the crisis .
 This pact comprised both a limited mutual withdrawal from allied territory of offensive nuclear missiles and an implicit understanding eschewing future deployments . This pact was comprised of both a mutual withdrawal and a limited withdrawal .
 A secret Kennedy–Khrushchev agreement resolved the 1961 Berlin tank stand-off . But there was an earlier precedent – there was a secret JFK-Krushchev deal .
 In October 1961, President Kennedy asked his brother to pass to Moscow a secret message about the ongoing Berlin tank stand-off, using a back-channel contact at the Soviet embassy in Washington . The message was passed to Moscow via a secret back channel in October 1961 .
 JFK proposed staged withdrawal of tanks facing each other at the Wall . JFK proposed a mutual and staged withdrawal from the Wall at the end of WWII .
 If Khrushchev would remove his tanks, United States forces would follow . If U.S. forces removed tanks, it would have been followed by Khrushnik's forces .
 Khrushchev agreed, the tanks pulled back, and the crisis quickly evaporated . The crisis was quickly over and the tanks were withdrawn .
 JFK made this proposal exactly a year to the day before he asked Robert to convey another secret message – the offer to withdraw US missiles from Turkey . By extraordinary coincidence, JFK made the proposal exactly one year after he made the offer .
 The Checkpoint Charlie deal and the Jupiter part of the missile crisis agreement have some striking parallels . The agreement has been signed by the U.S. and South Korea in the past .
 Both aimed to defuse tense East–West confrontations, both comprised mutual force withdrawal arrangements . Both employed informal channels and oral rather than written assurances . The Soviet withdrawal of forces followed by an American one .
 1961 agreement, really a ‘tank withdrawal’ accord, was a precedent for the 1962 agreement on withdrawing missiles from Cuba and Turkey . The 1961 agreement was really a 'tank withdrawal' accord, which was thus a precedent .
 It is tempting to dismiss Kennedy’s Jupiter offer simply because of this timing – but it is too easy to do so . Kennedy is currently on the hunt for the world's second largest private company .
 The offer may well have affected the Presidium meeting and its formal decision . The offer could have affected Presidium's decision to accept it .
 Khrushchev first told his Presidium colleagues that he was willing to dismantle the missiles not on 28 October but on 25 October . Three days prior to the planned dismantling of the missiles, he had said he was ready to do so .
 As his letters to Kennedy suggest, Khrushchev changed his mind more than once during the three-day interim, not about withdrawal per se, but about the conditions of the withdrawal . Khrush' letters suggest that he changed his minds more often during the interim period .
 If he had by then made an unconditional decision to withdraw, he could have simply, unilaterally, announced that decision . If he'd made such a decision, he would have simply announced it .
 The fact he did not simply order a retreat on 25, 26 or 27 October suggests he was still deciding what U.S. commitments would comprise an acceptable bargain . The fact that he didn't simply order an order of retreat suggests it was still a matter of consideration .
 He discerned in Kennedy’s actions and words an American willingness to talk . But he had also discerned that in Kennedy's actions, he said, an American willing to talk.
 Khrushchev’s behaviour during those days was that of a man in search of a deal he was trying to ‘haggle’ The anti-aircraft missile attack on the unarmed U-2 spy plane .
 Khrushchev was nevertheless quite willing to receive an improved offer . The former Soviet Union leader was willing to accept a better offer .
 The Presidium did know about the Dobrynin telegram, containing both RFK’s warning and Jupiter offer, before making its final decision, before deciding . Second, the Presidium also knew about the offer, which was made by Dobrynina .
 Allison and Zelikow argue that the telegram affected the mood of the meeting but still insist that the secret offer itself had no impact . Allison: The telegram changed the mood but the offer itself did not affect the meeting .
 Many observers did not expect Khrushchev to live up to his promise, and it was perhaps as surprising that he did so as that he made the promise itself . Many observers didn't expect him to do so .
 Successful negotiations are those that not only ‘get to yes’s, but also get implemented . Successful negotiation is those that get to yes, and get implemented. Successful talks can also be successful, says the president .
 Policy decisions do not always lead directly to implementing actions – as we know from a considerable literature, including both editions of Essence . And policy decisions don't always lead to implementing action – as well as policy decisions .
 Kennedy’s offer on the Jupiters and their actual withdrawal became integral to the deal – for both sides . Whatever its influence on Soviet decision-making on 28 October, Kennedy's offer was crucial to both sides' success .
 Khrushchev declared victory in the fall of the Cold War . The Soviet Union was defeated by the Soviet Union in 1968 .
 His letter to Kennedy the following day deliberately noted the secret provision . He deliberately noted it in his letter .
 For its part, Washington proceeded to dismantle, indeed destroy, the obsolete Jupiter missiles with considerable dispatch .
 Khrushchev’s deployment decision came in April 1962 with the deployment itself occurring between May and October 1962 . Kennedy and the ExComm debated the blockade decision from 16 to 21 October . Moscow approved the R-12 withdrawal on 28 October .
 The ‘blockade’ is the only American decision here, and no ‘puzzle’ covers any U.S. decisions during the last crucial week of October, nor any decisions during subsequent weeks and months .
 We cannot understand the crisis fully without understanding the two leaders’ decisions to negotiate and conclude the agreement . The two leaders' decision to negotiate is key to understanding the crisis, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 Questions arise from the lingering but wrong-headed notion that the crisis lasted 13 days . Other questions arise from perhaps the most sacred of missile crisis-related historical cows – the 13-day crisis .
 This framing of events began with the administration and publication of Thirteen Days and continued in the movie of the same title . The film is based on the administration of Th13 Days and the publication of the book .
 It is implicit in the term Cubans still use (the ‘October crisis’) and the phrase ‘the missiles of October’ It is found even in recent writings, including recent writings .
 Conceptualizing the crisis as ‘13 days’ blinkers us to important questions about events before 16 October, in November and beyond . Conceptualization of the crisis is important to think about before and after .
 One question is whether and why there was a dangerous delay in obtaining hard intelligence on missile sites under construction in Cuba . One concerns the so-called ‘photo gap’ – whether there was an intelligence delay .
 The United States intelligence community was late identifying tactical weapons in Cuba and never confirmed their nuclear capability . The U.S. intelligence community never confirmed Cuba's nuclear capability.
 American threats of attack cannot explain their withdrawal . By the time Khrushchev quietly ordered them out, there was little or no likelihood of an American attack on Cuba .
 Khrushchev’s removal of these missiles makes more sense in terms of complying fully with the spirit as well as letter of his agreement with Kennedy . The removal of the missiles is more than a violation of the spirit and letter of the agreement .
 This is a question about the risks of having nuclear-capable fighter-bombers and large numbers of Soviet troops remain in Cuba . Essentially, this is the risk of having both nuclear-armed fighters and Soviet troops in Cuba, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Essence argued strongly for examining the crisis from the organizational and bureaucratic politics perspectives as well as, if not more than, from the rational actor perspective .
 The considerable historical evidence accrued in stages two and three of missile crisis research has generally not supported the claims about intra-governmental factors, and perhaps even undermined them . The research was published in the 1990s and 2000s .
 The answers provided to the three famous puzzles have accordingly, if implicitly, emphasized the role of leaders and their calculations .
 Long-standing missile crisis myths include that Kennedy had ordered U.S. missiles withdrawn from Turkey prior to the crisis . ‘talking ‘em out’ was never a serious consideration, and that Kennedy made no deal to end the crisis.
 Essence1 and Thirteen Days helped propagate and perpetrate these myths . Essence1 helped perpetuate and perpetuate these myths, including those of the past .
 The agreement he and Khrushchev constructed was informal but vital, and still often overlooked . The agreement was informal and vital, but often overlooked by the world .
 The Jupiter concession was kept secret, although arguably not kept as secret for as long as scholars often assume . It was not as secret as it was thought to be .
 The end was ‘much more of a draw than a United States victory’, says Essence2 . Essence2 does not so much dispute these points as it betrays a decided ambivalence towards some .
 It does not adequately incorporate certain now well-accepted, key facts, it does not . More importantly, it doesn't adequately incorporate key facts about the world's most recent history .
 It relegates the secret Jupiter concession and the Kennedy–Khrushchev agreement to near irrelevance . In particular, it relegates them to near irrelevant both the Kennedy and Khrushchev agreement .
 The missile crisis was not only a tough case for the organizational and bureaucratic models but also a much less than perfect fit for the Realist form of the rational actor model . Realist model of rational actor models has been criticized .
 Both Khrushchev and Kennedy temporarily pursued objectives that were arguably neither concrete nor lasting national interests, and certainly not all objectively given ones . Both were not all objective given ones, but some of the objectives were not concrete or lasting interests .
 The available evidence makes clear that both leaders reformulated their perceptions and goals during October 1962, did so fundamentally, and did so in ways that departed from the preferences of close advisors .
 Keeping the concession secret facilitated myths that there had been ‘no deal’ and that the U.S. had forced Moscow to back down . Keeping the deal secret facilitated the myth that the United States had forced Russia back down. Keeping the agreement secret helped the myth of ‘
 These myths bolstered Kennedy’s presidency but also powerfully reinforced that core belief about waging the Cold War . The myths bolster Kennedy's presidency, but also reinforce the core belief that war was not over, he says .
 Kennedy–Khrushchev agreement on the crisis’ outcome is highly significant . The mere fact that they were able to reach an agreement amidst those tensions is significant . Whatever the actual impact of the agreement .
 Surviving the Cold War was not ultimately about ideology or threats or military power, let alone nuclear weapons . That fact, and the accord’s viability, both illustrate that surviving the cold war wasn’t about ideology .
 Khrushchev advocated superpower arms control even as the crisis was winding down . Kennedy advocated ‘a strategy of peace’ in a June 1963 commencement address .
 Neither man had by then the time left to pursue new visions . Unfortunately, neither man had time to pursue a new vision .
 I am also indebted to the journal’s editors and reviewers . Miriam Matejova, for her perceptive comments on a draft draft, and Fay Al-Hakim, for technical assistance .
 This version omits applying Model III to the first puzzle, the missile deployment . This version of the Model III will not apply to the task of deploying missiles .
 Abel used interviews and had indirect access to a primary document . Abel used extensive interviews to get access to the book .
 A 2009 survey of JFKL missile crisis-related files conducted by the present author suggested that many documents still classified in the 1980s and early 1990s had been declassified by 2008 .
 Stern says JFKL only acknowledged existence of the Kennedy tapes after the Watergate scandal unearthed Nixon-era White House tapes . Stern says the JFKL acknowledged existence after Watergate scandal .
 Other repositories, particularly Canada’s national archive, have been inexplicably much slower to release relevant material, now fully a half-century old . Canada's national archive is also slow to release material .
 The term has not since become common usage by other states in other situations nor become accepted by legal scholars . The term was first used by the U.S. but has not been accepted by scholars .
 A student in the 1990s asked why it would have mattered if the airlines had gone on strike . On a less serious note, I recall a student who was puzzled about a lecture of mine referring to a US 'air strike'
 'some time ago' could mean earlier that evening when JFK and a few aides agreed to make the Jupiter offer . If he did, then the statement was surely misleading, if he did . It could mean that JFK and his aides agreed that evening .
 The myth was to defend the President against domestic political attack by downplaying the importance of assuring the Soviets about the Jupiters . The political advantage was to be gained by the myth, according to the myth .
 Allison also claimed the U.S. Navy did not follow the President’s orders about where to position the blockade line, a separate myth .
 The warheads were technically under American custody . They were often mated with missiles for lengthy periods and thus ready to fire .
 The Last Testament (Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1974), 512; Strobe Talbott, Jerrold Schecter and Vyacheslav Luchkov, Khrushchev Remembers: The Glasnost Tapes, 179.5 . Khrushchkov
 Turkey likely knew about or suspected the secret concession in October 1962 . If so, Thirteen Days would have confirmed their suspicions .
 Canada’s Washington embassy received it the same day, and almost certainly passed this appreciation to the State Department by 26 October . The State Department is expected to pass the appreciation to Canada by the end of October .
 Such plans would have been politically dangerous in the extreme if the Turkish government had remained strongly opposed to a Jupiter withdrawal . The decision to withdraw from Jupiter would be politically dangerous if the government had not been strongly opposed .
 International law has ample precedents for unwritten and unratified inter-state agreements, says U.S. President Barack Obama . International law allows states to sign an agreement without ratifying it .
 The majority of the ExComm had consistently found it a totally unacceptable concession . To determine how ‘small’ the Jupiter concession actually was, consider the fact that the majority of . the . majority of of the . ExComm . had consistently . found it unacceptable .
 Corona satellite system was replacing the vulnerable U-2 spy plane by 1961 . Corona satellites were apparently never tasked to obtain photo intelligence from Cuba .
 American intelligence discovered some, but not all, Soviet nuclear-capable tactical missiles in Cuba . U.S. intelligence found some of the missiles in the country's Cuba .
 They assumed missiles were conventional, which some were, and that none had nuclear warheads . Some assumed that none of the missiles were nuclear warheads, some did . They assumed that some were conventional and some were nuclear .
 A Concise History, co-editor of Canadian Foreign Policy: Selected Cases, Rethinking National Security: The Public Dimension, and editor of Hazardous Waste Siting .