 The humanitarian crisis that is exploding in Syria is spilling out across every one of its borders . Tonight, we zero in on the humanitarian crisis in Syria .
 Assad regime is now using planes and helicopter gunships on its own people, says CNN's John Sutter . "The flood has gotten so fast and furious because of the Assad regime's use of planes," he says .
 The United Nations reports that 100,000 refugees fled Syria in August alone . There are now as many registered Syrian refugees as there are people living in the U.S. city of Orlando .
 Most of them are women and children, who often turn up orphaned and alone . The majority of them turn up alone and are often left alone .
 The United States is promising more humanitarian assistance . The head of USAID, Dr. Dr. David Rothkopf, says the U.S. is committed to providing humanitarian assistance in Haiti .
 Rajiv Shah returns from one of the worst refugee camps in Jordan . He says the refugees have been forced to live in a refugee camp in Jordan for years .
 For President John F Kennedy in October of 1962, the threat was real, the choices few . For President Kennedy, the threats were real, and the choices were few .
 Nick Paton Walsh has just sent us his report that tragically illustrates what they're running from . And we'll get to that in a bit, but first, if you need any more evidence of the horrors inflicted on the Syrian people, it's a video .
 Nick spent the day at a field hospital in Aleppo, Syria, which is the epicenter of the battles being fought right now . Nick had spent most of the day in the hospital .
 "The story is hard to bear, but it's real and it's what happening every day," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It's what happened every day. It's what happens every day"
 Dar al-Shifa Hospital is where many in Aleppo run when they're caught by the constant shelling . The hospital is a main hospital in the city of Aleppo, Syria, which is home to many refugees .
 Even though the hospital and the area around it have also been fired upon, the hospital has also been shot down .
 Doctors tell us the children's hospital has been closed by the government . Still, on this day, we see many civilians flooding here for treatment, some of them very young .
 Mohammed Mohammed, aged 8, was hit by shrapnel fired from Syrian regime mortars . Mohammed was hit with shrapnel from a mortar shell fired from the Syrian regime . Mohammed, from Syria, was struck by the regime's mortars in Syria .
 He is quiet, brave, but this hospital isn't equipped for the surgery he needs . He's quiet and brave but hospital doesn't have the equipment to perform surgery .
 Doctors have no choice but to exacerbate his ordeal and send him across the front lines to the government hospital . They hope perversely that those who hurt him can also heal him .
 President Bashar al-Assad is history in the minds of locals, but his regime still has the best hospitals . One doctor works during the day before sneaking here to help this rebel hospital in the evening .
 In the regime hospitals, 50 soldiers are brought in every day, but sometimes doctors mercy kill by injection those they can't treat effectively . If they found he was working in the rebel hospital, they'd kill him, he says .
 Akmad Akmad's head hit by shrapnel from shelling, his ear almost blown off . Akmad has been hit with shrapnel and his ear has been blown off by shelling .
 The people of Aleppo are numb, looking to the skies, checking what next may befall them Nick Paton Walsh, CNN, Aleppo . The people are numb and looking for answers .
 Rajiv Shah, administrator for the U.S. Agency for International Development, spoke to CNN.com's John Sutter . Shah says the agency is working with the United States to improve the environment .
 He returned hours ago from visiting one of region's worst refugee camps in Jordan . And he returned hours earlier from visiting a refugee camp in Jordan.
 Doctors must feel overwhelmed seeing the report as we've just seen just now. But let me ask you, as a medical professional yourself, as well as a doctor, you must be overwhelmed seeing this report .
 Well, it is tragic and it's overwhelming and it is an accurate report of what is happening inside of Syria, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Zaatari refugee camp is home to now-27,000 Syrian refugees . CNN's John Sutter visited the Zaatari camp to hear directly from the refugees .
 They finally left their communities when they had no other place to go for the safety of their children . The children's parents say they were forced to leave their communities because of their safety .
 "They want the things that all families want, peace, security, the ability to go to school. And you know, they want peace," she says .
 It seems -and I know you're announcing you're . announcing a multimillion aid for this crisis - it seems . It seems . it seems that this is not the case, but it is the case for the future .
 The U.S. announced an additional $21 million of support for food assistance, for families that are displaced inside of Syria and for refugees . The United States also announced $21million of support in Syria for refugees and refugees .
 More than $100 million has been spent on humanitarian aid for Syrians in and outside of Syria . That brings us to more than a billion dollars of humanitarian aid .
 More than 530,000 Syrians have been given a three-month basket of food commodities . Food is given to them when they've been displaced from their communities .
 We know that we're reaching Syrians inside in some of the hospitals that you showed in the show, with critically needed infrastructure, critically needed supplies . We're reaching Syria inside, with critical needed infrastructure and supplies, we know .
 When you meet with the people who are victims -I met with a young girl, who was 15 years old . She lost her parents in the tragedy and was now responsible for her younger children . She wants to be a child again .
 "When you meet those children, you'll never believe that this is enough," says mother-of-one . "You can't believe that that's not enough," she says .
 "There are humanitarian groups that are getting access inside of Syria and certainly with refugees to try to alleviate the suffering," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says humanitarian groups are trying to get access to the Syrian refugee camps .
 I've been talking to the Turkish prime minister, we've heard what the Turks are doing. I'm not surprised at what's happening in Turkey. I've talked to the prime minister. We have been talking about what we have heard from the Turks. We've heard from Turkey.
 The majority of refugees are housed in refugee camps in Haiti . The refugees are doing a lot of the work on their own without international assistance .
 Syrians inside Syria say they need more aid to Syrians in Syria . But they also say that there should be more assistance to Syrians inside the country .
 Foreign minister calls for internally displaced camps for those who've been internally displaced . Foreign minister has called for camps for people who have been displaced .
 I mean, I don't see anybody, not the United States, not anybody even trying to do that. "I'm not even thinking that," he says . "I don't think anybody is going to try to change that. I'm not going to change it," he adds
 "We're actually working on all of those options with the Turks," says President Obama . "The Turks, the Turks, Turkish government and other governments that are taking on huge responsibilities"
 "I want to commend them for their responsibilities they're taking on, by maintaining these open borders," says President Obama . "I commend them ... for their responsibility," says Obama .
 Families were getting shot at as they crossed the border into Jordan until they were with the Jordanian armed forces, that then delivered them safely to the camps . Families were crossing the border to Jordan, but were then shot at by Jordanian forces .
 "Right now, our goal is to provide as much medical and trauma support as possible," says the hospital . "We're going to try and help as much as possible"
 Aid and assistance accounts for almost 90 percent of all medical supplies that are getting in there . The aid and assistance is -accounts for nearly 90 percent - in communities like Daraa in the south .
 "We need to continue to do all of those things, even as we explore other options," she says . "So we need to . continue to . do all the things that we do," she adds .
 Turkish prime minister said that that is what they would want. Let me ask you one other option, of course, is a no-fly zone which, again, Turkey says that that would be what they want .
 We saw what happened when the U.S. put up a no-fly zone to protect the Kurds after the first Gulf War . The United States put up the zone in order to protect Kurds in Iraq .
 The Obama administration is working closely with the Turkish government and all of the regional governments to explore a range of options, the White House says .
 "My priority has been heeding President Obama's call to make sure we do everything we can to provide immediate humanitarian assistance," Obama says .
 "We are working with a range of partners inside of Syria, including some networks of NGOs that are private NGOs inside Syria that are, in fact, reaching more than half of the displaced families," says President Obama .
 Families got food rations, water rations and other support from NGOs in the communities where their hospitals and schools and homes had been attacked . And I met families yesterday that got food .
 The support allowed them to keep hope and protect their children and provide for their families for months, months and months before they ended up crossing the border . And that support allowed . them to . keep hope, they said .
 Shah: Whatever help they can get is obviously going to be gratefully received . Shah: "There is no doubt that whatever help we can get" Shah says. Shah: 'Whatever help is needed, it will be grateful'
 There is a mounting sense of anger from people inside Syria and a lot of it is actually directed at the United States, basically, saying -and I remember this happening in Bosnia as well, as well . But there is also a mounting feeling of anger .
 "Nothing is being done to attack the root cause, and that is the conflict. In other words, the conflict is not being dealt with, it's the result of a lack of action .
 Turkey's foreign minister has given voice to that concern, that just aid and allowing them to come across is inadvertently perhaps being complicit in what's going on .
 "We are providing assistance because the American people want to stand with the people of Syria at this critical time," says President Obama . The U.S. is providing assistance to Syria .
 They have called the Bashar Assad regime illegitimate, have asked it to transition power, have drawn lines and drawn lines . They are working aggressively to effect that kind of political transition that is Syrian-led and supported by the international community .
 "At the same time, we're not waiting to provide critical lifesaving assistance that's necessary inside of Syria and around Syria," says President Bashar Assad .
 The specific announcement I made yesterday will reach another 186,000 people with food and water and critical commodities . The announcement was made by President Obama .
 "We have to work on all fronts simultaneously and the humanitarian front is a critical one. That's never going to be enough," says President Obama . "We need to work together, but we need to focus on humanitarian front," he says .
 The situation in Syria is made much more difficult by U.S. reports that Iran is flying in arms and other support to the Assad regime . Iran is accused of supporting the regime in Syria .
 President Obama's biggest international headache remains Iran . President Obama will accept the nomination for president for a second term at the Democratic convention .
 Nuclear talks are going nowhere and Israel threatens to attack Iran's nuclear facilities . Israel says it will not be allowed to attack nuclear facilities in Iran . Nuclear talks between Iran and the U.S. go nowhere .
 Syrian refugee camp in northern Jordan is one of the largest refugee camps in the world . CNN's Dr. Omar Ghitis visited the camp to give a firsthand account of Syrian refugees .
 To see an incredibly moving photo gallery of these camps, log on to amanpour.com/Facebook .
 The scariest and most confusing guessing game in the Middle East right now is if and when Israel will attack Iran's nuclear facilities . Israel is considering attacking Iran's nuke facilities in the region .
 Turkey's Prime Minister Erdogan told me that he didn't think it would be likely. Yesterday on this program, Turkey's prime minister said he thought it wouldn't be likely .
 There is a stalemate in the so-called last-ditch negotiations between the U.S. and its allies with Iran .
 The truth is that negotiations barely have a chance in this highly charged political atmosphere, not to mention the warp speed of our highly public digital world . Negotiations barely have chance in highly charged atmosphere .
 Fifty years ago this October, the world stood on the brink of an allout nuclear war . This October, 50 years ago, is the 50th anniversary of the first nuclear strike .
 The Soviet Union had moved nuclear weapons into Cuba, which is just 90 miles off the U.S. The Cuban island is 90 miles from the United States .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union were eyeball to eyeball until Kennedy and Khrushchev managed to defuse the crisis . That was the Cuban missile crisis, and the United States and the . Soviet Union .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev stepped back, just as you suggested earlier . Well, both Kennedy and . Khrushvic stepped back just as I suggested earlier.
 During the crisis, Kennedy said to his brother, Robert Kennedy, that he thought the chances were something between 1 in 3 and even that it would end up in a war including a nuclear war . Kennedy: "I think the chances of a war in the U.S. are something
 Nothing that I've found subsequently or that . other scholars have found looking at the record since then suggest that that . that was an exaggeration . And nothing that I . have found subsequently ... suggests that that is an exaggeration. And nothing . that's been found subsequently, he says .
 Before we continue with this fascinating story, I want to prove your expertise on Iran . CNN.com will feature a video from Iran .
 Iranian confrontation as a Cuban missile crisis in slow motion, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: We can think about the current Iranian conflict as a 'Cuban missile crisis' He says we can think of the situation as a slow-motion Cuban crisis . The U.S
 In 1962, in a condensed 13 days, the U.S. and the Soviet Union stood eyeball to eyeball, and the crisis was over . The crisis ended in a short 13 days .
 The parties are moving inexorably to a crossroad at which the president's going to have to choose between attack and acquiesce . This is developing in much slower timeline , but you can see the parties .
 Attack Iran to prevent it becoming a nuclear weapon state or acquiesce in becoming a state . Attack Iran would prevent it from becoming a nuke weapon state .
 The other one may be better than you thought, says CNN.com's John Sutter . It's a good idea to look at both options .
 These are precisely the options Kennedy had at the end of the game in 1962 . Kennedy had the option to win the game at the White House .
 His advisers told him on the final Saturday, "You've got only two choices, either attack or else the Soviet Union's going to have a nuclear armed base in Cuba," he says .
 At that moment then he rejected both options and intensified a search for finding some middle way . That -at that . moment then . then he . rejected both . options, he said .
 CNN's John Sutter says the Iranian case is an appropriate lesson for the case of Iran . He says the case should be dealt with as much as possible as possible . Sutter: Iran's case is the appropriate lesson to be learned today .
 In the Cuban missile crisis, you had two actors. And I ask you that because obviously -and you lay it out very concisely, but it'd be great to have you explain it -in the Cuban crisis.
 There are three independent actors, each doing his own calculation, says CNN's John Sutter .
 If the parties look at the outcome of attack, each of them will be worse off than they could have been with an alternative . Nonetheless, it seems to me in this case, if the parties think about their interests, play that out .
 If they think about acquiesce, again, they will be worse off, says David Frum . Israel and the U.S. would have been worse off if they did, he says . Frum says .
 Kennedy would have rejected the 'ugly' options at the beginning of the week of consultation . But he rejected them, except for the fact that they were better than the two other feasible alternatives that seemed to him even worse, he says .
 U.S. could mount a major diplomatic initiative after the election, CNN's John Sutter says . Sutter: "I am hopeful that the United States will mount a diplomacy initiative that will be into the zone of something that an Iranian government might conceivably accept"
 An Iranian government fearing the possibility of an attack, which would be terrible for Iran as well as for the rest of us, would find this close enough to their zone of agreement that we might find an agreement . And then an Iranian government, fearing . Iran, fearing the . possibility of
 Of course, everybody's worried that there might be an attack before the election, says Labour leader David Cameron . "Of course, everyone is worried," he says .
 President Kennedy had the luxury of time and privacy that he had over the Cuban missile standoff . But as I talked about and you mentioned, the idea of this all happening in public, in real time, you know, warp speed, what would have happened .
 The press has become a pervasive, even an invasive factor in the 24/7 world that's totally penetrated . Well, that's an extremely interesting question, then, as it gets to the way in which the press that you are so familiar with has become so pervasive, you are familiar
 Kennedy's intelligence community told him they had discovered the Soviets secretly building missiles in Cuba . Kennedy took a week in private to deliberate with his closest advisers in which they candidly discussed all the options .
 If he had had had to choose within 48 hours what to do, he would have chosen an airstrike . As Kennedy said after and it seems to me, again, this is correct in terms of the record, he said .
 If we had attacked, it's quite likely that that attack, followed by an invasion, would have been met by a Soviet nuclear response locally and would have escalated to a nuclear war . So if we had . attacked, . that attack would have . been followed by a . invasion,
 Time compressed in part because the bubble is now a 24/7 news bubble is a great constraint on thoughtful, serious deliberation for the purposes of decision-making . So the idea that time compressed in . part because of the . bubble is part of the time compressed, part of .
 Professor Allison: "We thank you very much indeed and hope that this current crisis somehow will be resolved without the worst alternatives being chosen"
 The United States and the Soviet Union exchanged threatening messages during the Cuban missile crisis . The U.S. and the U.K. exchanged threatening threats during the crisis .
 President Kennedy ignored the message that made all the difference . Kennedy ignored that message, and it made a huge difference .
 We've heard how the world narrowly avoided a nuclear war 50 years ago during the Cuban missile crisis . And finally tonight, we've heard about the 50th anniversary of the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 Imagine a world where letting your enemy retreat is the key to victory and even peace . Letting your enemies retreat is key to winning, even peace, says the author of the book .
 President Kennedy received a message from the Soviet leader himself, Nikita Khrushchev, offering to negotiate . Kennedy received the message in 1962 from the Russian leader himself .
 Kremlin hardliners threaten war with Russia . But then came another message, this one from Russia's hardliners, threatening war .
 The tape shows Kennedy discussing his choices with former U.S. ambassador to Moscow Tommy Thompson . The tape was recorded by the former ambassador to Russia . Thompson is a former CIA director and CIA director .
 "We're not going to get these weapons out of Cuba, probably, anyway, by negotiation," says President Obama . "We don't have to negotiate. We don't want to negotiate," he says .
 The important thing for Khrushchev, it seems to me, is to be able to say, "I saved Cuba," says JFK . "I save Cuba. I saved Cuba. That's what the important thing is to say," he says .
 Kennedy chose to answer the first message and ignore the second, giving Khrushchev a graceful way out of the crisis . Kennedy chose the first choice and ignored the second .
 It's how an army can win a battle by letting the enemy escape and avoid greater bloodshed . It's also how a battle can be won by allowing the enemy to escape .