 In October of 1962, the world held its breath as two nuclear superpowers squared off . The U.S. and China squared off in the first World War II test .
 The issue was resolved without a missile being launched . Fortunately, through many backdoor meetings, the problem was resolved .
 There have been many books, articles and narratives that have been written that describe the events and the backdoor negotiations that resolved the issue . There have also been many other books and articles written that have described the events .
 Nikita Khrushchev feared that the U.S. had a commanding arsenal of nuclear tipped missiles aimed at the Soviet Union . What was at issue was that the United States had a command arsenal of nukes .
 Khrushchev developed a plan to place Soviet offensive missiles and technical support soldiers in Cuba . The plan was meant to even the odds of a Soviet invasion of Cuba .
 The ships that brought weapons and support equipment carried false shipping documents of the cargo they carried . Soviet and Cuban soldiers were able to get a jump start that would have in place alongside their defensive missiles offensive missiles all aimed at the United States .
 Robert Kennedy and Anatoly Dobrynin forged an agreement to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba and the U.S. at some future date would remove the 30 Jupiter-C missiles from Italy and the 15 . missiles from Turkey . The agreement was forged through many backdoor communications between Attorney General Robert
 Khrushchev appeared too easily to back down and give up an advantage he supposedly had, the Soviet leader said . Khrushchevitch appeared to give up too easily, giving up his advantage .
 If the Soviet Union was producing nuclear tipped missiles ‘like sausages,’ then he should have had a better bargaining chip . The Soviet Union should have produced a better negotiating chip, he says .
 The Soviet Union had enough powerful rockets carrying nuclear warheads based within the Soviet Union that it did not need to search for sites beyond their borders . Only a few weeks earlier Tass had reported that the Soviets had sufficient powerful rockets with nuclear warheads to carry warheads .
 Joseph Stalin was anxious to get his hands on western weapons technology . During World War Two, Joseph Stalin wanted to get the hands of western technology . The Soviet Union’s Quest for Advanced Weapons was revealed .
 West's technology was leaving the Soviet Union far behind in aircraft . But in aircraft the West’s technology was not far behind . The West was ahead of Russia in aircraft technology .
 Three B-29 bombers had been diverted to Vladivostok because of battle damage after a raid on Japan . The incident gave him hope to catching up with western technology .
 The Soviet Union wanted to reverse engineer the planes and create the Soviet Union’s own version of the Soviet-era planes .
 Stalin now had a heavy bomber to carry the nuclear weapons that were being developed . Stalin was still far behind the curve .
 The U.S. rolled out the massive intercontinental heavy bomber, the XB-36, on September 8, 1945 . It was the first intercontinental bomber to be rolled out in the United States in 1945 .
 First flight was August 8, 1946, about ten months before the TU-4 flew . First flight took place on August 7, 1946 . TU4 was the first airplane to fly .
 The TU-4 would have been classified as a heavy bomber in World War Two . Its normal bomb load was usually 6 – 2205 lbs general-purpose bombs .
 Stalin had a bomber that could possibly dominate Western Europe, but the TU-4 was becoming obsolete in comparison to the B-36 . Stalin's bomber could possibly have dominated Western Europe .
 Any bombing mission against the U.S. would be a one-way trip . The TU-4 did not have fuel capacity for a round trip and the Soviet Union had no long-range fighter escort .
 The all jet powered XB-47 made its maiden flight on December 17, 1947, just 7 months after the first flight of the TU-4 . The all-jet-powered aircraft rolled out of the factory on September 12, 1947 . More ominous was the all jet-
 Beginning in 1953 the reconnaissance version RB-47B’s routinely overflew western Soviet airspace taking pictures of airfields and military installations .
 Great Britain’s Royal Air Force would routinely ‘borrow’ thèse reconnaissance planes for its flights over the western territories of the Soviet Union as far as Moscow . Also Great Britain would routinely "borrow" reconnaissance planes .
 At first these flights were uncontested, since the Soviet Air Force’s Mig-15 could not operate effectively at the higher altitudes . At first, the flights were uncontested, but now they are under attack .
 Soviet Air Force used to shoot at and even downed RB-47s . However, with the appearance of the Mig-17 in 1953, the Russian Air Force could operate at such altitudes and routinely shot at .
 The West knew very little about Khrushchev other than he was short, portly and wore ill-fitting suits . The West had little to say about him, but he was a short portly man .
 Khrushchev knew very little about the U.S. and President Eisenhower, says Eisenhower . Likewise, he knew nothing about the United States and Eisenhower, he says .
 His first face-to-face meeting with a representative of the U.S. government was on July 24, 1959 at an exhibit put on by the American Consulate in Moscow, on the modern American Kitchen .
 Khrushchev and Nixon discussed the relative merits of America’s technology to create a modern kitchen . The debate was dubbed “The Great Kitchen Debate” by Nixon .
 Khrushchev countered by saying that the Soviet kitchens were built to last and don’t need to be continuously upgraded . Khrushchevsvs. said that Soviet kitchens are built to . last and need to last .
 His second meeting was in September 15 – 27, 1959, when he invited himself and his son, Sergei, to visit the U.S. and meet with President Eisenhower . Sergei invited himself to the United States and met with Eisenhower .
 There he saw professors working directly with farmers to improve their crops . He also saw professors and farmers working directly to improve crops .
 His attempt to create a similar program in the Soviet Union failed due to the professors wanting to stay at their desks in the comfort of the universities and not go into the field .
 Khrushchev had to become familiar with a new president after JFK's defeat of Richard Nixon in 1960 . He had to get familiar with John F Kennedy’s defeat in the 1960 presidential race .
 On October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1 into orbit around the earth . The missile gap has been bridged between the two countries' missile arsenals .
 This was the first manmade object to be placed into orbit around the earth . It was placed into space around the globe .
 Khrushchev hailed this as the technological superiority of the Soviet Union over the United States . Khrushchev said it was a technological superiority over the U.S.
 America's answer to Sputnik 1 was spectacular launch failures of the U.S. Navy's Vanguard on December 6, 1957 and February 5, 1958 . America’s Vanguard was the first ship to be launched in the United States to launch in 1958 .
 Vanguard rocket was developed from a research rocket giving the illusion that the satellite was to be used for peaceful purposes . Vanguard rocket developed from research rocket to give the impression that it was intended to be peaceful .
 President Eisenhower authorized the United States Army to use the Redstone/Jupiter-C missile to launch Explorer 1 into orbit on January 31, 1958 . Explorer 1 was launched by the Army using the Jupiter-C and Redstone missiles .
 Vanguard has the last laugh since it was able to transmit data for 5 years and is still in orbit . The Sputniks and Explorers have long since burned up upon re-entry into the atmosphere . Vanguard is the only one to be able to send data for five years .
 The Soviet Union used an R-7 missile launched Cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin into earth orbit on April 12, 1961 . In a further embarrassment to the United States, the Soviet Union also launched a similar missile .
 Khrushchev proved to the world the technological lead the Soviet Union had over the U.S. The Soviet Union's technological lead over the United States was proved to be overstated .
 The fear of a missile gap existed between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . In response to these Soviet achievements, the fear of the gap existed .
 Eisenhower convened a committee chaired by Ford Foundation Chairman H Rowan Gaither . The committee was chaired by the Ford Foundation chairman .
 Gaither Report of November 7, 1957, stated that the United States was in danger of falling behind the Soviet Union . The report suggested that the U.S. begin a massive investment in strategic weapons, early warning radars and civil defense measures .
 In comparison by the end of 1960 the United States had 97 Atlas Missiles, 54 Titan 1 missiles, and 30 Snark missiles deployed .
 The R-12 and R14 were intermediate range ballistic missiles and were to be based in Cuba . The missiles were intended to be intermediate range missiles . The R14 and R12 missiles were based in the Cuban territory .
 It had a range of approximately 9,000 miles and could carry a 3-5 megaton nuclear warhead . It was designed to carry a nuclear weapon capable of carrying a nuclear bomb . It could be used to launch a nuclear missile capable of a nuclear device .
 Because of the caustic nature of its fuel, it could only be held on the launch pad for 24 hours . It was only able to be held there for the first 24 hours because of the nature of the fuel . The rocket was launched in the 1980s, when it was
 After 24 hours the missile would have to be refurbished mostly with new seals that were damaged by the caustic nature of the fuel . The missile would then have to have new seals repaired .
 If an attempt were made to launch a missile that had been sitting on the launch pad longer than 24 hours there would be a good chance of a spectacular failure, contaminating the area .
 Sources differ on the number of launch pads available to launch an attack against the U.S. Sources differ . Sources say there are more than enough launch pads in the world to attack the United States .
 The R-12 and R-14 were liquid fueled, intermediate range, ballistic missiles . The missiles were liquid-fueled, intermediate-range missiles .
 The R-12 and R-14 models had a range of 1200 miles for the 12 and 14 models . They had a maximum of 2700 miles for each of the models .
 The R-12 carried a one-megaton warhead and the R-14 a two- megaton nuclear warhead . The weapons were launched in the 1960s .
 These missiles based in Cuba could target almost anywhere in the United States . These missiles could target the U.S. and could be used in Cuba .
 These missiles, so close to home, posed a real threat to the United States, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: These missiles were so near to the U.S. that they posed a threat to America .
 The Jupiter-C, Thor, Atlas, Titan and Polaris missiles were the missiles available to the U.S. The missiles available were the Jupiter C, Thor and Atlas . The missiles were also available in the United States in the 1950s .
 SM-78 Jupiter-C missile was a liquid fueled, intermediate range ballistic missile with a range of about 1850 miles carrying a one-megaton nuclear warhead . The missile was launched in the 1970s and 1980s .
 The missiles were somewhat portable in that it was possible to move to them to different prepared sites . The missiles could also be moved to other prepared sites, such as the Pentagon .
 There were 15 of these missiles deployed in Turkey and 30 were deployed in Italy . 15 of the missiles were deployed to Turkey and 15 deployed to Italy . There were also 30 missiles deployed to the country .
 SM-75 Thor missile was a liquid fueled intermediate range ballistic missile with a range of about 2000 miles . Like the Jupiter-C missile the Thor missile had a long-range range of around 2000 miles.
 Under Project Emily, 84 of these missiles were based at Royal Air Force bases in Great Britain in semi harden sites . The missiles were deployed under the name Emily .
 The Atlas missile was America’s first intercontinental ballistic missile . The SM-65 missile was a slightly improved first generation missile over the Russian R-7 .
 It was liquid fueled and had a range of 5500 miles carrying a nuclear warhead . It had a nuclear missile that could be used to carry a nuclear bomb .
 Last models could be ready to be raised and fired in 15 minutes, experts say . It was stored in a semi protective coffin and stored in semi-protective coffin .
 The SM-68A Titan 1 missile was America’s second intercontinental ballistic missile . The Titan 1 was America's second intercontinental ballistic missile .
 The Atlas missile had a range of 5500 miles with a nuclear warhead . It was built as a backup to the Atlas missile and like the Atlas it was liquid fueled and had a 5500 mile range .
 It was housed in an underground silo, but had to be raised to the surface to launch . The launch was launched in a silo in a bid to reach the launchpad . It is the first time a rocket has ever been launched in such a way .
 The UGM-27 Polaris missile was a submarine-launched nuclear ballistic missile . The Polaris missile launched from a sub-marine submarine . It was the first submarine-launch of a Polaris missile .
 It used solid fuel making it safer to handle and did not need to be fueled prior to launch . The launch was the first of its kind .
 One notable characteristic of the missile was that it could be launched while the submarine was submerged . The missile was launched while it was launched by a submarine while submerged .
 Sixteen missiles were carried in specially built submarines of the George Washington class . The George Washington-class submarines carried 16 missiles .
 The Polaris A1 missile was succeeded by the Polaris A2 missile, similar to the A1 but with a range of 1500 miles . There were five submarines in this class - five submarines .
 Sixteen missiles are carried in the new Ethan Allen class submarines . Sixteen of these missiles were carried by the Ethan Allen Class submarines .
 Khrushchev had to back down due to the simple fact he did not have sufficient missiles that could target North America versus the massive firepower that could be brought to bear against the Soviet Union . Kennedy was trying to bluff Kennedy and the world .
 His bluffs and posturing gave the world an image of the Soviet Union’s over whelming technology lead over the U.S. and Western Europe .
 Within two years, Khrushchev was out of power, when on October 14, 1964, the Presidium and the Central Committee each voted to accept his “voluntary “retirement from his offices’s .
 He is a member of the International Naval Research Organization and the California Writers Club, Inland Empire Branch . He says he is a Navy veteran who has served in the Navy .
 His articles have been published in Military History Magazine, Colloquy and Fresh Ink . He has also written for Military History magazine and Fresh ink magazine .