 John F Kennedy was the 35th President of the United States of America . He was born in June 1963 . He died in August 1963 .
 He was a known civil rights activist and charismatic political leader . He led both the naval blockade in Cuba and Space Race against the Soviets .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy was born on May 29, 1917 in Brookline, Massachusetts . He was born in 1917 . Kennedy was a member of the Kennedy family .
 Both of his parents were from the clan of wealthy Irish Catholic Boston families .
 His grandparents’ professions included banker, liquor trader, politician, and politician . His grandparents' professions included banking, liquor trading, politician .
 He was the son of Rose Elizabeth Fitzgerald, a socialite, and Joseph Kennedy Sr., a successful banker . Kennedy was born in New York City . He was married to Joseph Kennedy Jr.
 The Kennedy children were raised in the political eye . John F Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 . The Kennedy family is famous for their political activism .
 His brother Robert became an Attorney General . His sister Eunice founded the Special Olympics . His brother became an attorney General .
 He also enrolled in Choate Preparatory school where he manifested his interest in sports, English, and History . He also participated in sports and English .
 'He continued to be an average student, yet handsome and charming to a lot of women,' he said .
 Jack joined the U.S. Navy and was shortly assigned to the South Pacific . A year later, Why England Slept was published with more than 80,000 copies .
 His heroic act of leading the survivors on an island was awarded with the Navy and Marine Corps Medal and a Purple Heart .
 After his discharge from the U.S. Navy, Kennedy worked for the Hearst Newspaper . John F Kennedy Facts: JFK worked for Hearst newspaper .
 He died in the field leaving the family’s political ambition and responsibilities to Jack. Jack. The family's political ambition was left to Jack .
 His heroic image after the war, together with his father’s money and influence, made winning easier for Kennedy . Kennedy's father's influence and his father's money helped him win .
 On November 8, 1960, John F Kennedy was elected as the 35th President of the United States . He defeated the incumbent Vice President Richard Nixon . JFK was elected to the presidency in 1960 .
 JFK took his oath of office at the East Portico, United States Capitol on January 20, 1961 . JFK was the 35th President of the United States .
 Russian astronaut Yuri Gagarin became the first man in space on April 12, 1961 . This declaration was made after a Russian astronaut became the world's first person in space in 1961 .
 On October 22, 1962, Kennedy declared the naval blockade of Cuba after the information of missile installations by the Russians . The blockade was declared by Kennedy after information of the missile installations .
 In July, Kennedy initiated the nuclear test ban treaty between the United States, Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom . Kennedy started the treaty in July . The treaty was signed in July 1963 .
 He was rushed to Parkland Hospital and declared dead minutes later . He was pronounced dead minutes after being rushed to hospital .
 Shortly after, Lyndon B Johnson took his oath as the new president of the U.S. Johnson was sworn in .
 On November 25, his state funeral was attended by diplomats from 90 countries and former presidents Eisenhower and Truman . JFK during his motorcade in Dallas, Texas, 1963 KIDSKONNECT.com John F Kennedy Facts .
 JFK became known to the world by winning the presidency of the United States of America in 1961 . JFK was elected to the presidency in 1961 and became the first president of the U.S.
 On February 20, 1962, __________ became the first American to orbit Earth .   _________ became  the first person in space to orbit the Earth .
 Kennedy delivered one of his most famous lines that marked American political speeches . Kennedy's famous line: "I don't want to be afraid of the future"
 Choose at least three of JFK’s quotable quotes and annotate what they mean . Choose a quote from JFK's most famous quote .
 Featured below are photos of two of the most influential leaders during JFK’s term . JFK's term was the first term of his presidency .
 Write a historical timeline that links them to the United States in the 1960s . Write a timeline that will link them to their time in the U.S. Write a history timeline that includes the events in the past .