 President John F Kennedy announced the discovery to the world in a televised address at 7m. on 22 October .
 Kennedy demanded that the missiles be withdrawn from Cuba . He announced his intention to impose a naval ‘quarantine’ on shipments of “offensive weapons to Cuba’
 Any missile launched from Cuban territory against any nation of the Western Hemisphere would be considered an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response . President Nixon warned Soviet Chairman Nikita Khrushchev that any missile from Cuba would be an attack on the U.
 Kennedy ordered a massive redeployment of forces to the Caribbean and placed the Strategic Air Command on heightened alert . Kennedy also placed Strategic Air . Command on high alert .
 Khrushchev denounced the quarantine as piracy and a gross violation of the Soviet Union's right to enter into military arrangements with friendly sovereign states . Furious, he immediately ordered construction at the missile sites accelerated .
 The Organization of American States voted unanimously in favor of the quarantine . The quarantine took effect on Wednesday, 24 October . The U.S. had ordered Soviet ships carrying suspect cargo not to challenge the blockade .
 U.S. and Soviet diplomats failed to reach a settlement of the dispute . Still, for several days, the dispute eluded United States and . Soviet diplomats .
 Pressure began to build on both sides for more decisive action . As the crisis dragged on, pressure grew on the government .
 Neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev was prepared to risk nuclear war over the issue . Both became increasingly preoccupied with the danger that an accident or inadvertent military action might push them over the brink .
 Khrushchev offered to withdraw the missiles in return for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . The letter dated 26 October, and was signed by the Soviet Union on 26 October .
 The president decided to ignore Khrushchev's latest demand and to “accept” his “offer” of 26 October . The president chose to ignore his latest demand .
 An American U-2 reconnaissance plane had been shot down over Cuba and another had inadvertently strayed over Siberian airspace, narrowly avoiding a similar fate . As the ExComm deliberated on Saturday, 27 October, word reached the White House .
 At this point, Kennedy evidently resolved to bring the crisis to an end . Kennedy was clearly resolved to end the crisis at this point .
 Secretary of State instructed to lay groundwork for a contingency by which the secretary general of the UN would propose the Cuba-Turkey missile swap .
 Kennedy therefore knew that it would provide a quick resolution to the crisis should events get out of hand . Knowing this to be acceptable to Khrushchev, Kennedy knew that this would be acceptable .
 Khrushchev's sudden agreement on 28 October to withdraw missiles from Cuba in return for a noninvasion pledge . Kennedy saved from having to decide whether to execute his demarche .
 Khrushchev's agreement proved to be the decisive break in the crisis, but it did not immediately resolve the confrontation . The agreement was signed by the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 Khrushchev had failed to consult Fidel Castro on the matter, and Castro felt betrayed by his Soviet patron . Castro understandably felt betrayed . The Castro family was killed by the Soviet Union .
 He refused to allow UN inspectors to examine the missile sites to verify the withdrawal . The United States Navy had to make do by inspecting outbound Soviet ships from the air .
 Kennedy also insisted that the Soviets withdraw a handful of Il-28 light bombers . These were believed to have a nuclear capability . Kennedy insisted that they were withdrawn .
 Khrushchev's special envoy, Anastas Mikoyan, took three weeks to persuade Castro to comply . The Il-28s had been supplied to Cuba for coastal defense purposes wholly independent of the missile deployment .
 On 19 November, Castro relented, and on 21 November, Kennedy issued a proclamation terminating the quarantine . Kennedy issued the proclamation on 19 November .
 Evidence and testimony currently available indicate that Khrushchev decided on the deployment in the late spring of 1962, after a hasty and uncritical decisionmaking process involving only a small group of advisers . Evidence and . testimony currently . available indicate the deployment was decided on by Khrush .
 One of his main motivations seems to have been to deter a U.S. invasion of Cuba, which seemed inevitable to the Soviets and Cubans . The United States role in the Bay of Pigs invasion the previous year and in light of Operation Mongoose .
 The goal was to counterbalance the U.S.’ massive superiority in strategic nuclear weapons . Roswell Gilpatric in an October 1961 speech exploded the myth of a “missile gap” favoring the Soviet Union .
 There is no evidence to suggest that Khrushchev asked the question of himself . It is impossible to know which of these was the more important motivation, but it was mutually reinforcing .
 A third and evidently subsidiary consideration was the desire to counterbalance the United States deployment of Jupiter missiles on the Soviet periphery, for reasons of prestige . The U.S. deployment of the Jupiter missiles was also a consideration .
 The Cuban missile crisis is considered by many a classic case of prudent crisis management . The Cuban crisis was considered by some to be a prudent case of crisis management in the U.S.
 Kennedy and Khrushchev managed to prevent the conflict from escalating while they sought and eventually found a solution satisfactory to both sides . Kennedy and his government managed to avoid a repeat of the war .
 They did so by avoiding irreversible steps, curtailing unwarranted bluster, and refraining from ultimatums . They avoided irreversible steps by avoiding unwarranted steps and curbing bluster .
 Some have criticized their handling of the crisis for being too timid or too bold . Others have criticized them for not being too bold or bold .
 Kennedy's critics on the Right lament his unwillingness to seize the opportunity provided by the pretext of the Soviet deployment to deal decisively with Castro once and for all . The United States enjoyed a massive advantage in strategic nuclear weapons and unquestioned local conventional superiority .
 His critics condemn his willingness to risk nuclear war merely to delay the inevitable—the vulnerability of the United States to Soviet nuclear weapons . His critics on the Left condemn him .
 Khrushchev's handling of the crisis has been largely criticized by hard-liners . Hard-liners condemn his willingness to yield to U.S. pressure . The crisis was largely dominated by anti-Krushchev opposition .
 Others applaud his cautious handling of the situation and his willingness to compromise . Others condemn him for recklessly provoking the crisis in the first place .
 Almost paradoxically, the Cuban missile crisis was the immediate cause of a considerable improvement in US-Soviet relations . Almost paradoxally, it was the cause of an immediate improvement in U.S. relations with Russia .
 A series of agreements intended to restrain the arms race and improve crisis stability followed closely on its heels . The Hot-Line Agreement established a “hotline” between the United States and Soviet leaders . The Limited Test Ban Treaty and the Hot-line Agreement were perhaps the most important
 The crisis severely strained, but did not disrupt, Soviet-Cuban relations . The crisis was the height of the Soviet-Cuba relations .
 Sources close to Kennedy insist that if he had won a second term as president, as seems likely given his popularity after the crisis itself, he would have ventured a reconciliation with Cuba .
 Kennedy's assassination in November 1963 and his succession by Lyndon Johnson marked the end of their two countries’ brief détente and forestalled any improvement in US-Cuban relations . Khrushchev's ouster in 1964 by Leonid Brezhnev led to a US-
 No treaty was ever concluded governing the settlement . The exchange of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev formalizing the terms of their agreement has not been made public .
 It is questionable whether they contain the firm guarantees against an invasion of Cuba that the Soviet Union trumpeted publicly as Kennedy's major concession . Kennedy's concession to Cuba was seen as a major concession by the Soviets .
 Ronald Reagan publicly denied being bound by any such obligation while in office . Ronald Reagan was president of the United States in the 1980s and '80s . Reagan was in office at the time .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union crafted and scrupulously followed a modus vivendi in which the purported terms on which the crisis was resolved played a pivotal role . Nevertheless, the United States and the . Soviet Union .
 The Soviet Union refrained from deploying military equipment with offensive capabilities to Cuba . The U.S. acquiesced in a Communist-controlled Cuba with close ties to the Soviet Union . The United States acquiesced to Cuba's communist government .
 The United States and the Soviet Union worked out rules of the road, limiting provocative initiatives in areas each regarded as being within its sphere of vital interest . Even more important, the U.S. and Soviet Union agreed to limit provocative initiatives .