 Its primary purpose is to provide a preliminary reference aid for future research . The primary purpose of this article is to help future researchers understand more about the project .
 Soviet piopaganda on the crisis from 23 through 30 October is reviewed in Radio Propaganda Report CD of 30 October 1962 .
 Peking rebuffed to the Soviet Union became more pointed on 31 October and blatant on 1 November, when the U.N. role was openly denounced . Peking's rebuffs to the . Soviet Union become more pointed in November .
 The pattern at this writing indicates an intensification of polemical propaganda designed to associate Khrushchev's approach with that of ""imperialism"
 The broadcast said nothing about the President's speech or the measures he announced . The broadcast did not say anything about the speech .
 NCNA created the impression that the U.S. was preparing for an attack on Cuba . An NCNA report said the Cuban people were making a heroic effort to repulse an invasion .
 NCNA's account of the editorial did not mention the Soviet Union . NCNA went on to assert that the Chinese, for their part, ""have always stood staunchly on the side of the Cuban people"
 In the face of such plots, "it is entirely necessary for Cuba to strengthen its defense,"" the statement said .
 CPR Government statement referred briefly to SOVIET GOVERN . The CPR Government said that the Soviet Government issued the statement issued by the Soviet government the previous day .
 The Government of the Soviet Union issued a statement on 23 October, pointing out that this act of aggression of the United States against Cuba entails extremely grave consequences . The Soviet Union will do its best to smash the aggressive schemes of the U.S. imperialist bloc and defend and strengthen world peace
 PRAVDA' s editorial declared that continued Sino-Indian antagonism would benefit only imperialism . CPR statement offered a three-point program as the basis for a negotiated settlement of the controversy .
 NCNA review of the Peking press described the statements issued by governments of East European bloc countries only as ""condemning the U.S. Government" not as supporting the Soviet position .
 NCNA reviewed a KWANGMING DAILY editorial which went even further than the CPR Government statement in minimizing attention to the Soviet stand . NCNA also reviewed an editorial that went even more than a government statement .
 KWnNGMING DAILY noted merely that a Soviet statement had been issued and added that ""the Chinese Government and people"" would support ""the Cuban people,"" TA KUNG PAO's 25 October editorial, dilating on the ""recklessness of U,S
 The paper spoke of Cuba as symbolic of oppressed nations and oppressed peoples of the world . It reiterated the CPR concept of imperialism as ""a paper tiger"" whose .arrogance today is a sign of ""inward weakness,"" not strength .
 KWANGMING DAILY pursued the theme that imperialism was the most vicious enemy of world peace .
 The article's assertion that the ""imperialists"" are attempting to bring India and China ""at loggerheads"" and undermine ""the friendship of the Soviet Union with fraternal China as well as friendly India" underscored the dilemma posed for the USSR by the Sino-Indian conflict
 NCNA carried a summary of Khrushchev's message to TO RUSSELL Bctrand Russell pledging to do everything possible to prevent thermonuclear war . KHRUSHCHEV replied: "Do everything possible" to prevent war .
 Peking broadcast media gave Khrushchev's 28 October letter about the same publicity . A brief report of the decision to withdraw the missiles from Cuba appeared in PEOPLE'S DAILY of 29 October .
 On 30 October the text was printed in PEOPLE'S DAILY, along with the President's reply, at the bottom of page three .
 NCNA and the domestic service carried items citing Cuban press and popular support for Castro's five points . PEOPLE'S DAILY editorially supported them as ""fully justified"" and ""absolutely necessary" NCNA noted that Raul Castro's speech in Santiago urging Cubans to be increasingly vil
 The big pro-Cuba rally at which Peng spoke was attended by Premier Chou En-lai, CCP Central Committee . Secretary General Teng Hsiao-ping, Foreign Minister Chen I, PLA chief of staff Lo Jui-ching attended .
 The 28 October PEOPLE'S DAILY editorial had said that the ""Cuban people"" would surely be able to defeat any new "" United States aggression,"" and TA KUNG PAO's 29 October editorial stressed the Chinese people's conviction that the Cuban people, who have won
 The CPR itself had successfully withstood a United States blockade . In this context, the paper commended the Chinese example to the Cubans .
 Peking omitted mention of Soviet support for Cuba in picturing massive worldwide backing of the Cuban people . Peking continued pointedly to omit mention of the Soviet support .
 PEOPLE'S DAILY of 30 October rounded up worldwide protests against United States ""war provocations,"" while other papers noted support for the Cubans in Algeria, East Germany, Cambodia, Mongolia, Uruguay, and Brazil .
 NCNA: In some countries the fight against U.S. aggression is closely linked with the struggle against the rule of pro-American reactionary forces . 30,000 people demonstrated in Montevideo against the United States blockade and the Uruguayan Government .
 NCNA pointed to reservations against United States ""armed intervention"" in Cuba voiced by such governments as Brazil, Mexico, Bolivia, and Uruguay . NCNA said that ""threats and bribery"" were factors which must be taken into consideration when assessing the attitude of Latin American coun Tics toward
 NCNA said Brazil was threatened with a reduction in its coffee export quota unless its policy of nonintervention in Cuba was altered . Similarly, Brazil was said by NCNA to have been threatened .
 Khrushchev indicated that the U.S. would agree to remove the blockade immediately and give assurances against an invasion of Cuba . The editorial began by noting that the chief of United States imperialism had indicated that . the United States would remove the . blockade immediately .
 It declared that the United States and its ""mouthpieces"" were ""declaring boastfully that by his 'firmness' Kennedy had scored a 'major triumph'"" — precisely the claims Soviet propaganda was making in regard to Khrushchev's actions .
 CPR lauded the people of Cuba for ""defending ttie honor of being a socialist country" and concluded with a portrayal of militant support for a Cuban stand that epitomized ""revolutionary struggle"" worldwide .
 PEOPLE'S DAILY frontpaged Havana-datelined reports on unanimous Cuban endorsement of Castro's 28 October statement and on Castro's inspection of combat-ready Cuban military units .
 NCNA supplemented this picture with reportage of newspaper support for Cuba in Burma and Pakistan, popular support in Ceylon, and a denunciation of "" United States aggression"" by Venezuelan workers .
 NCNA reportage on 31 October foreshadowed open U.N. role denunciation of the U,M. role . denunciation was to appear in authoritative Peking comment the following day .
 Foreign Minister Chen I's note to the Cuban charge d'affaires in Peking contained a thinly veiled indictment of the Soviet Union for its willingness to sacrifice Cuban interests for the sake of its own security .
 Chen's profession of anger that Cuban demands should not be regarded as a factor in the settlement of a crisis ""among the big powers"" was clearly aimed at a broader targrr.t . Denouncing this as an ""imperialist"" viewpoint, Chen asserted that the destiny of
 He reiterated the Chinese communist thesis that man, not weapons, is the ""deciding factor" in the revolutionary struggle .
 The Cubans are not only safeguarding the independence and sovereignty of Cuba and their own revolutionary gains, but are also defending the peace of the Caribbean Sea and the whole world . They are also giving encouragement to the just anti-imperialist struggles waged by the revolutionary people in all parts
 It called the President's ""safeguards"" — the quotation marks are NCh'A's — a deception . The President's "safeguard" was a deception, it said . It called it a deception. It called .
 History has proved, and will continue tr. p>-ovc , that the course of history is determined by rr. .'wakened people, who have armed themselves and have the courage to firht and win, not by weapons which the imperialist reactionaries deem all
 The message to Castro from the 28 October rally had similarly declaredc . that the ""people:-"" constituted a force which ""cannot he destroyed h\< any weapon,"" Throughout the crisis, CPP comment generally referred to the United States ""war provocat -""on""
 Sofia suggested a similarity between rocWet bases the USSR might have in Cuba and those the United States definitely had in Turkey and Italy . Sofia broadcast claimed that all the U.S.„S„ ""propaganda"" was based on the ""completely unfounded allegation
 East Berlin called the U.S. measures an extremely serious threat to world peace . Satellite transmitters stressed the ""danger"" and ""recklessness"" of the U,S, measures . Cuba was counting on solidarity with the GDR, the Soviet Union, and other socialist and friendly
 Moscow propagandists avoided specific address to the President's statements about Soviet construction of mediumand intermediate-range missile bases in Cuba . Satellite radios widely branded these statements ""absurd"" and ""provocative"
 Satellite radios ignore the OAS meeting of 23 October and its virtually unanimous endorsement of the American measures . Satellite radios ignored the meeting of the Oas meeting of October .
 Poland's heavy coverage emphasized unfavorable world reaction, with special attention to opposition in Britain . Poland was heavily criticized by the West for its anti-Polish policies .
 One domestic commentary said the speech ""aroused serious doubts"" in London, and another claimed that a majority of British papers ""negatively appraised"" the Kennedy speech .
 The statement called the President's address ""unprecedented in peacetime"" The statement expressed full support for the Soviet stand .
 A Sofia broadcast in Greek said that the 'artificial war hysteria' created by the President's statement was possibly for election campaign reasons . Sofia said that it could lead the world to the abyss of nuclear destruction .
 Rumania was slow to report the President's speech, remaining silent on it for 15 hours . The country was silent on the speech for more than two hours .
 Hungary's Janos Kadar issued a statement for Cuba journalists . The statement generally followed the line of the government statement .
 Albania's first reaction, like Rumania's, was limited COMMENT to reportage, with editorial comment interjected . President Kennedy's action violated international law and brought the world ""to the brink of an abyss "" First TIRANA .
 East Berlin gave heavy coverage to Cuba solidarity rally outside East Berlin . Cuban ORI leader Bias Roca and SED Politburo member Paul Verner spoke at the rally .
 The GDR, however, alone among the European satellites, failed to issue a government statement . GDR is alone among European satellites .
 Later the editorial pictured the Albanians as ""united with the heroic Cuban people, the Soviet people" and the other peoples of the countries of the socialist camp" in protesting against ""imperialism"" and defending Cuba .
 It proclaimed solidarity with the Cuban people's ""just cause"" as a ""sacred duty for all peace loving mankind" It declared that Cuba would be victorious because there is no force in the world to defeat a people determined to the point of death to defend their freedom, independence, and
 Cuban people are aroused and, with arms in their hands, are ready to face and destroy the new imperialist aggression . The Official Use of this article is a free expression of opinion . Use of these images is a form of form of expression .
 Late on 25 October Albania issued a government statement making no mention of the Soviet Union . Albania's government issued a statement denying mention of any other communist country by name . The statement was made by the government of Albania .
 Albania's support for the Cuban people in the company of ""all socialist countries,"" In pointed language, it pledged that the people of Albania , a member of the socialist camp, will be, as always, in full solidarity with all the socialist countries .
 The Soviet-oriented satellite media maintained a heavy flow of comment denouncing the United States quarantine action . However, emphasis appeared to be turning from unrelieved denunciation of the U.S. to praise for the Soviet Union's ""calm"" and ""peaceful"" response to the U
 Khrushchev's letter to Bertrand Russell was widely reported by all the satellites except Albania . Commentaries did not emphasize the call for a high-level conference . The letter was widely published by the satellites .
 Other satellite comment set out to offset any notion that Soviet ""calmness"" might be a sign of weakness . The Soviet state of calmness was set to counter the notion that it might be weakness .
 The commentators declared that it would be foolish and politically wrong to aggravate the situation by some isolated conflicts . They declared that more and more compromise proposals are appearing .
 Both the 27 and 28 October Khrushchev letters were well publicized by the Soviet-oriented satellites . Both of the letters were published on October 27, October 28 .
 Press comment of 29 October, according to Budapest, emphasized relief at the satisfactory outcome of the crisis . The weapons which the President regarded as objectionable, Budapest asserted, would never have appeared in Cuba had not that country been threatened ceaselessly with foreign intervention .
 A later Budapest broadcast said Khrushchev, U Thant, and Bertrand Russell had done the most to preserve peace . The 30 October TRYBUNA LUDU was reported by Warsaw PAP, in an English transmission, as welcoming the increased possibility of solving other East-
 The paper's reference to U.S. bases in Turkey and the ""problem"" of West Germany as an ""outpost of aggression"" was one of the few instances in satellite comment of an effort to draw a connection between the Cuban crisis and Berlin question .
 The Bucharest radio, after broadcasting the text of Khrushchev's 28 October message and the President's rejection of the proposal, followed up on 29 October with comment .
 Kennedy: Offensive weapons which threaten the security of the U.S. were established on Cuban territory . Because, according to Kennedy, offensive weapons . threaten the United States were established in Cuban territory, he said .
 The Cuban people know from their own experience— the experience of the Bay of Pigs and of all that is happening about them--that Kennedy and the imperialist monopolies represented by Kennedy cannot be trusted .
 Albanian people, ""comrades-in-arms,"" were on the side of the Cuban people, Albanians . The Albanians were in support of Cuba's Cuban people .
 Pyongyang propaganda followed CPR line of avoiding acknowledgment of Soviet involvement . A lengthy summary of a NODONG SINMUN editorial made only one mention of the Soviet Union .
 KCNA published a report of North Korean rallies in support of Cuba . The editorial asserted that the blockade was taken after the President had received ""the right of a hangman from Congress"
 Available Pyongyang comment failed to mention the Soviet or United States messages, or any easing of the crisis .
 Cuban ambassador to North Korea, Lazaro Vigoa, spoke bellicose anti-U.S. speeches . The radio reported protest meetings in support of Cuba, including belliose speeches by the Cuban ambassador .
 At a 26 October rally reported by KCNA, the chief Korean speaker, Ha Ang-chon, erated CPR argument that it was Cuba's ""inviolable internal affair"
 Hanoi radio mentioned briefly on 23 October MONGOLIA that the President had made a speech in which he officially announced the ""complete blockade of Cuba,"" on the following day . The following day reported the Soviet statement in a Lao broadcast .
 Moscow's attention to the disarmament and test-ban issues has remained at a low level since the recess of the conference on 7 September . Resumption of the 18-nation Geneva conference on 26 November occasions only a moderate increase in Moscow's . attention to disarmament .
 Soviet spokesmen repeatedly cite the near disaster of the Cuban crisis as dramatic evidence of the urgency of a disarmament agreement . Soviet spokesman: Near disaster of Cuban crisis is evidence of urgency of the disarmament .
 propagandists make clear that the next move in disarmament is up to the West . Declaring that the Cuban settlement demonstrated the value of approaching East-West problems in a spirit of compromise .
 Despite repeated assertions that the positions of East and West on the test-ban question ""are not far apart,"" Soviet spokesmen reject Western demands for on-site inspection to detect underground tests .
 The West is seen as deliberately blocking an agreement in order to continue the arms race . At the same time, the British decision to conduct an underground nuclear test in Nevada seen as further evidence .
 Other partial disarmament measures receive only sporadic attention . Tsarapkin says such measures constitute one of the ""main questions"" to be dealt with at the conference .
 Kuusinen said a disarmament agreement must be reached in order to save mankind from a thermonuclear catastrophe . Moscow Stresses Soviet ""Compromises"" in General F-isarmament . Assertions that a disarmament must be reached include that by Ku
 Kuusinen declared that ""disarmament is the imperious demand of our epoch,"" and that only disarmament can insure a truly stable, peaceful coexistence . Following his polemical defense of Soviet agreement to ""mutual compromise"" in the Cuban question, Kuusonen
 Kuusinen said that the USSR is ready to discuss ""any constructive proposals" which would bring disarmament closer . Declared that the ""imperialists"" are creating various obstacles to implementation of general disarmament . Kuusonen said that he was ready to discuss any
 Materials were identified, obtained, assembled, and indexed by the National Security Archive, a non-profit, Washington, D.C. based research institute and library .
 Chadwyck-Healey Inc. has filmed the best copy made available by the National Security Archive . In the case of each document, each document has been filmed by the company itself .
 The unique identification numbers assigned to the documents are listed in the top right hand corner of the microfiche title strip .
 The National Security Archive has developed this varied collection of primary materials . Through the use of the Freedom of Information Act, the Archive has collected this collection of material .
 Just as the type of materials included varies, so does the quality of each document . The quality of the documents varies from type of material to quality .
 The National Security Archive has made every effort to provide Chadwyck-Healey Inc. with the best quality, most complete copy of each document . The archive has provided the most complete copies of the documents .
 Chadwyck-Healey Inc. has faithfully reproduced on microfiche exactly what was provided by thp National Security Archive .
 sections or pages may be obliterated by the government due to the potentially sensitive information contained in them . Even when declassified, sections of the pages may still contain sensitive information .
 The variety of material reproduced in this publication includes photocopies or poor carbon copies of telegraphs, letters, cables, government documents, newspaper articles, and media publications .
 This variety can present difficulties of image and contrast which the most careful filming and processing cannot entirely overcome . This variety of images and contrast is difficult to overcome .
 This is a rich and varied source of primary documents made available for research . All microfiche have been produced to the highest quality and conform to NMA and BSI standards .
 Hanoi domestic broadcast early on 30 October contained first monitored reference to Khrushchev's 28 October message . A NHAN DAN editorial declared that the solidarity of the people of Cuba, the socialist camp, Latin America, Asia B and Africa had forced the U.S. imperial
 Ulan Bator domestic service: Mongolian Council of Ministers Chairman Tsendenbal met with Cuban ambassador to express Mongolian support and solidarity with the Cuban people .