 Polmar and Gresham sketch personalities that created and coped with the crisis . They sketch the personalities of the people involved in the crisis in Ukraine .
 Spy-satellite and aerial-reconnaissance photos reveal that one of the United States's bitterest enemies may be acquiring weapons of mass destruction . They also show us how close we came to the edge without becoming sensationalistic .
 Administration officials refuse to accept intelligence professionals' interpretation of these images and order an end to spy missions over the offending nation . Administration officials refused to accept the interpretation of the images .
 More than a month later, after vicious infighting, the president orders the spy missions to resume . The president ordered the missions back to resume after a month of infighting . The mission was a success story for the Obama administration .
 The new photos reveal an array of ballistic missiles capable of carrying nuclear warheads . The missiles are capable of striking deep within U.S. territory .
 He has served as an advisor or consultant on defense issues to three U.S. senators and two members of the House of Representatives . He has also advised several Navy and Defense officials .
 JOHN D GRESHAM collaborated with Tom Clancy on his bestselling series of guided tours of military units, such as Submarine and Special Forces . John D. GESHAM has written a series of books for Tom Clancy .
 He is also the coauthor of an upcoming book on the Special Forces during the war in Afghanistan .
 The Anadyr Effect. Appendix A: The Membership of ExComm.Appendix B: U-2 Missions Flown during Operation Anadry . Appendix D: Soviet Missile Characteristics.
 The book's title, which is also the name of a Discovery Channel documentary based on this volume, comes from the acronym for Defense Condition Two, the U.S.'s highest state of military alert short of war . The book is also also called Defense Condition 2 .
 The only time America went to DEFCON-2 during the Cold War was on October 22, 1962, the day President Kennedy publicly denounced the Soviet Union's construction of missile launching sites in Cuba .
 The authors interviewed Russian, American and Cuban military men who had leading roles in the showdown . They provide new logistical information on how the Soviet Union moved a small nuclear arsenal to Cuba . The authors also interviewed Russian and American military men .
 The book includes accounts of what happened in the sea, air and air with descriptions of political and intelligence operations in Washington and Moscow . They deftly meld accounts of the events in the air and sea and on the ground .
 Thoroughly researched and suspenseful, their book is an excellent choice for fans of Cold War history .