 Documentary films about President Kennedy have changed over the last four decades . It is remarkable to see how documentary films about the president have changed .
 " Years of Lightning, Day of Drums" presented the stirring images of a courageous and brilliant young president, also a devoted husband and father, cut off in his prime .
 By 1992, the pendulum had swung to the opposite extreme . The Public Broadcasting Service released ""The Kennedys,"" by 1992, when the film was released .
 This four-hour saga of an Irish-American family's drive for success and power transformed JFK into little more than an extension of his father's political ambition . JFK is the subject of a new documentary, "The Kennedy Years"
 The program raced through the Kennedy presidency, highlighting JFK's womanizing and the role of his father's money in his rise to power . All but ignored JFK's impact on the presidency and the American people .
 "A Presidency Revealed" provided a more balanced account of a man deeply flawed in his personal behavior but also capable of extraordinary leadership . The book "A President Revealed,"" was published by CNN.com .
 He was slow, for example, to embrace civil rights, but eventually became the first president to publicly declare racial equality in America a moral issue . He was also slow to embrace racial equality, but was the first to declare it moral issue in America .
 He approved plans to undermine communism in Cuba and eliminate Fidel Castro . He was a seasoned Cold Warrior who approved plans for the Cuban government .
 JFK and his administration bear significant responsibility for precipitating the missile crisis . The Bay of Pigs invasion, covert operations against Cuba and Castro, and plans to reinvade Cuba, were responsible .
 The president consistently dug in his heels in the face of pressure to bomb the missile sites or invade Cuba . The president repeatedly refused to invade Cuba or bomb missile sites .
 He repeatedly acted to prevent, postpone, or at least question, the advisability of potentially provocative measures . He also repeatedly asked, "prevent, or . question, or ask, what would be provocative measures"
 JFK repeatedly tried to rise above the Cold War rhetoric he had exploited from the 1960 campaign through his October 22 speech announcing the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba . JFK's speech was one of the most memorable moments of his presidency .
 Top officials in the Kennedy administration regarded the Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba as a clear justification for invading the island .
 Defense secretary Robert McNamara declared on October 16 that the U.S. must be prepared to bomb the missile bases and follow up with a full air and sea invasion within a week .
 President Kennedy replied that, on the contrary, an invasion would put extreme military pressure on the U.S.R. and undermine the NATO alliance . President Kennedy said, "An invasion would ... undermine NATO alliance"
 JFK held his ground, "Well, the logical argument is that we don't really have to invade Cuba," he said . JFK said he would not invade Cuba if he wanted to .
 Former Ambassador to the Soviet Union, Llewellyn Thompson, said Khrushchev would regard an attack on these missile bases as a greater provocation than the stopping of their ships . He explained that former Ambassador Llewyn Thompson felt very strongly" that an attack would be a greater
 History defines its own parameters and historical figures often defy our assumptions . History defines itself and history often defines itself as a result of historical events .
 Contradictions and inconsistencies, in short, are the rule rather than the exception in human affairs . Contradicts and inconsistencies are the norm, rather than exception, in the world, says author .
 John Kennedy often stood virtually alone against warlike counsel from ExComm, Joint Chiefs and Congress during those historic thirteen days . John Kennedy was often alone in the midst of the war .
 He never really abandoned efforts, even after the Cuban missile crisis, to undermine the Cuban regime and get rid of Fidel Castro . Nonetheless, he never abandoned efforts to undermine Castro's regime .
 Sara Jane Moore actually got off a shot at Ford in San Francisco . Two weeks later, Moore was arrested and charged with assaulting Ford .
 "No one is running around with all kind of ridiculous conspiracy theories," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I don't believe in conspiracy theories. Yet no one does."
 I can actually understand a sniper in a building getting a shot a whole lot easier than I can the Ford and Reagan attempts . I can't understand why a sniper is able to get a shot easier than a Ford or Reagan .
 This proves to me that Oswald acted alone in the killing, and I have seen no evidence to suggest that someone else prompted him to do it, says author . This proves that Oswald was alone, and he acted alone .
 All the rest of the theories and evidence are irrelevant as far as I am concerned . All of the other theories are irrelevant to me, I say .
 The jury returned a conviction for pre-meditated murder on 3/14/64, after deliberating less than an hour . The jury also returned a verdict of pre murder for a second time .
 The problem was that he had gone from being half a fruitcake to a full-blown fruitcake by then .
 The Commission also gave him a poly, which he passed, wherein he denied any involvement in a conspiracy or of knowing Oswald prior to killing him . He passed a poly to the Commission .
 Ruby was granted a new trial in late 1966 because his post arrest statements were allowed at the trial even though they were taken absent a “Miranda’s warning . Ruby's post-arrest statement was allowed to be taken without a ‘Miranda' warning .
 Ruby, who was suffering from cancer,died in January of 1967 of a blood clot . Ruby was a member of the original cast of The Beatles .
 Dennis Johnson agrees with you that the Communist purge was only after Suharto's coup . Dennis Johnson: "I agree with you" that the purge only came after the coup .
 Hakka Chinese communities were there for centuries, but they are still looked upon as foreigners . I know Hakka . Chinese communities have been in the U.S. for centuries but still look like foreigners .
 The end of the hostilites with the Dutch, however, gave the military generals more time to focus on domestic politics . The military generals are focusing on domestic issues .
 In the 1950s, the United States and British covertly supported the various break away movements in Sulawesi and other islands . The U.S. and British secretly supported the movement in the 50s .
 JFK siding with the Indonesians in their land grab for West Papua was a major policy shift . JFK sided with the Indonesian government in the 1980s .
 Using a supposed planned Communist coup in the works Indonesian Moslems instigated a massacre of Indonesian Communists, many of whom were of Chinese extraction, and their families, some half million people .
 I don't accept the idea that any U.S. gov't agency was involved in the possible conspiracy . Nor do I accept that any United States government was involved . I'm not sure if any of the possible conspirators were involved .
 The distance of the shots wasn't all that great, 88 yards, as I understand . On the other hand, two reasons I'm tempted to accept the lone shooter theory are that the distance was 88 yards .
 Oswald's murder before he could testify, Ruby's death before he was able to testify, was patrolled by the government . Oswald's death was the result of a determined effort to dismiss out-of-hand any likelyhood of a conspiracy . Oswald was shot to death by Ruby in
 It is ever so easy to attack a man was is dead & cannot defend himself. It is also easy for a man who is dead to attack himself. The victim is not able to defend himself from attack .
 Liberal icon was not in many respects a Liberal, certainly not of the weasel Clinton style . It amuses me that J.F.K.K., the Liberal icon, was not a Liberal .
 J.F.K. established the Army's Special Forces, our premier counter-insurgency military force . For one thing, it was J.K.'S. who established the Special Forces . The Special Forces were established by the British government .
 For evidence of the good repute the Liberal icon, J.F.K. is held by the Aremy's Special Forces . J.K.'s tomb is located in the town of Aremy, which is home to Special Forces soldiers .
 Special Forces mount a twenty-four hour a day honor guard at the tomb reflecting their respect for and gratitude to him . One thing one one will discover there is that the Special forces mount a 20-hour a day .
 Even I a died-inthe-wool Conservative remember with deep fondness the classy Whitehouse we had when Jack, Jackie, Caroline & John-John occupied it. Even I . a died .inthe . wool Conservative .
 There is another cold war crisis during the Kennedy administration that hardly ever gets covered, but is very significant in Southeast Asian History . Dennis Johnson is the author of a new book, "Southeast Asian History"
 Indoneasian President Sukarno claimed that all former territory of the Dutch should be part of Indonesia . Indonesia is now the only nation to have claimed all former Dutch territory .
 Dutch still held West New Guinea and recently discovered oil there . Dutch still hold West New Guinean and recently found oil there.
 Kennedy administration feared the growing influence of the Soviet Union in Souteast Asia . Kennedy adminstration feared growing influence in the region .
 Domino theory fear was once Indonesia falls, then all of Southeast Asia would fall . The Domino Theory was once thought that once Indonesia fell, all of the region would fall. The theory was that if Indonesia falls then the entire region would collapse .
 Robert Kennedy was sent to Indonesia and U.S. government pressured the Dutch to the negotiation table . Robert Kennedy sent Robert Kennedy to Indonesia in order to get the government to negotiate .
 The Dutch were to leave West New Guinea and transfer sovereignty to UNTEA until a national vote for independence or integration with Indonesia . The Dutch had to leave the island nation and hand over sovereignty until the national vote was held .
 This greatly improved U.S. relations with Indonesia and weakened the influece of the Soviet Union . It greatly improved relations between the United States and Indonesia .
 NYGuy, I have not heard about this, but have never seen a single piece of evidence that links LBJ to the murder of Kennedy . Cram 11/22/2003 .
 Even if such evidence did exist, you could prove conclusively that LBJ killed Kennedy, your line about "censorship controversy by the Democrats"" goes much farther . Furthermore, even if there is no such evidence, you can't prove it was LBJ's murder .
 This would be akin to sayng that ""the Republicans"" were responsible for the Watergate breakin . This would involve a baloon whose involved in the conpiracy to large number of people .
 I assume you really didn't say ""the Democrats"" with that in mind and that the line was simply referring to ""the Democrat"" Johnson . Johnson was a Democrat .
 Heard on TV today that LBJ censored Walter Cronkite and CBS on a story they were going to air on the assassination . NYGuy 11/22/2003 .
 No one has presented any serious evidence that anyone other than Oswald had anything to do with the JFK assassination . Oswald was the only person to have been involved in the assassination, according to the CIA .
 Oswald: "If it wasn't Oswald, it was probably the bigots" "It was probably Oswald," he says of the Oswald family . Oswald's son says, "I don't think Oswald is a racist"
 There is not a single piece of evidence that indicated that Oswold did NOT act alone, says Cram . Cram: "There is not one piece of . evidence"
 The forensic evidence, the physical evidence, and sheer logistical issues demonstrate time and time again that Oswold acted alone . Oswold was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 Of all of the theories I find the LEAST plausable, LBJ is certainly amung them . Of course, these conspiracy theories are going to exist forever, so it's a rather useless debate .
 History Channel show about LBJ and Kennedy relied on two impossibly duplicitous witnesses .
 This attorney admits that he has a grudge against the deceased managing partner of that firm . The attorney admits to the deceased partner's grudge .
 He presents no evidence to support his theory except for hearsay conversations with other attorneys around the water cooler .
 LBJ was one of the most fascinating and complex politicians in U.S. history . LBJ is a fascinating and fascinating politician .
 Hours of documentary programming every day this week about the JFK assassination . JFK assassination will be broadcast on PBS this week .
 They explicitly put forward and support the thesis that the JFK assassination was a coup, with Johnson the direct beneficiary . They explicitly support the theory that the assassination was an assassination coup .
 If you aren't able to watch any of this programming, you may be able to buy it from the History Channel in some recorded form . The History Channel may also be selling the programming in some form .
 Dick Cram: "I am sorry that our nation ever decided to blindly believe everything our government told us about why we ""had"" to be in Vietnam"
 Americans supported the war up until 1968, when most of the damage had been done . Americans today support the war In Iraq . It is worth noting that just as Americans supported .
 The Founding Fathers thought that they were creating a government where the popular passions of the people could be held in check . This is why the Founding Fathers wanted to keep the public in check, he says . This was the case for the first time .
 Since his assassination on 22 Nov 63, since his assassination, I, a Vietnam veteran, KNOW that this country is a downward slope, and the present president is at the helm of a sinking ship. However, since he assassinated, I KNOW that . This country is on downward slope .
 It is quite apparent, from this latest fiasco in Iraq, that the leaders of this once-great country haven't learned a thing from that Vietnam debacle . The Vietnam debacle was the Vietnam War, and the U.S. hasn't learned from that, writes CNN.com's John
 I am mildly traumatically brain injured, ""thanks"" to whatever was done to my brain in 1972, a little over 6 years since I got out of Vietnam . "I am mildly traumatically traumatically brain injured," he says .
 This is an excellent article. Dick Dettrey wrote to Mr Stern .