 The placing of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, aimed at the United States, could have escalated into a full scale war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The placement of nuclear missiles could have resulted in a full-scale war .
 The Soviet Union allied with the new revolutionary government of Fidel Castro in Cuba . Khrushchev supported revolutions which overthrew ""oppressive"" capitalist regimes . The Soviets used Cuba strategically against the United States .
 Khrushchev may have placed nuclear missiles in Cuba within reach of almost all USA . The United States had surrounded the Soviet Union with their own nuclear missiles, especially in Turkey .
 By the end of October 1962, the possibility of nuclear war had been averted by negotiations between U.S. President John Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev . The "winner" of the situation was not immediately clear .
 Oleg Penkovsky used his position in Military Intelligence and contacts with high ranking generals to determine Kruschev's alleged ambitions to spark a nuclear war . However, there was another possible scenarioa Soviet first strike according to Soviet colonel Olegpenkovsky .
 Penkovsky gave his life to provide technical data and operating manuals on the 1000 mile range SS-4 which is widely known to have been deployed to Cuba, but also on the 2100-mile range SS5 .
 The SS-5's deployed to Cuba would have put almost all of the continental U.S. within the reach of Soviet IRBM's tipped with 3 MT warheads . The SS 5 would have been deployed in Cuba .
 None of the SS-5's seem to have been armed, although a few SS-4's were armed and under local field control in case Moscow was hit in a nuclear exchange . Thankfully, none of these were armed, but a few were armed .
 Khrushchev defended the Cuban revolution and the legitimacy of the Castro regime in 1961 . The two leaders met at the Vienna summit in Vienna in June 1961 .
 Khrushchev held that no country had the right to be involved in Cuba's internal affairs . If Castro's government was not the right one, another revolution would inevitably depose Castro, he said . If the Cuban people were dissatisfied with Castro's regime, a revolution would depose him
 The tensions between the U.S. and the Soviet Union in regard to Cuba can be seen at the summit . Already at this summit, the tensions between this two nations are seen .
 He reaffirmed Soviet policy supporting nationalist movements by defending Castro’s revolution in Cuba . The Soviet Union reaffirmed its support for nationalist movements .
 He also used the summit to warn Kennedy not to intervene in Cuba . He basically warned the U.S. not to invade Cuba .
 Khrushchev also brought into discussion the U.S. nuclear missiles in Turkey . He also brought up discussion of the United States nuclear missile program in Turkey, Russia .
 Khrushchev realized that the U.S. possessed far more nuclear weapons and had them strategically better deployed to strike against the Soviet Union . The United States had far more nukes than Soviet Union did .
 The Soviet Union possessed far fewer nuclear missiles, and they were mainly obsolete . Very few, if any, were positioned to strike the continental United States .
 Khrushchev wanted the placement of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba to match the U.S. missile placement along the Soviet border with the United States . The placement of Cuban nuclear missiles was the result of a nuclear war .
 Khrushchev sent Soviet missiles to Cuba to threaten the U.S. border in 1962 . The missiles were deployed over the summer of that year .
 By October 1962, the situation had escalated to the brink of war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union and the United States were at odds of war .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev both wished to avoid war . The two leaders opened negotiations with the other to alleviate tensions brought by the placement of missiles .
 Khrushchev offered to remove the Soviet missiles in Cuba in exchange for a pledge by the United States not to invade Cuba . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were at odds over removing the missiles .
 Khrushchev blamed Kennedy for pushing the two countries closer to war with aggressive behavior towards Cuba . The Cuban blockade was also blamed for the blockade prohibiting Soviet ships from entering the Caribbean .
 Khrushchev’s reason for blaming Kennedy for trying to start a war was to legitimize the presence of Soviet missiles in the western hemisphere, he says . Kennedy was the president of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 The only way the Soviet Union could win a nuclear war against the U.S. would be to turn international opinion against the United States . The Soviet Union would need to win a nuke war to win it over the world to win . The United States is the only way to win
 Khrushchev added the removal of U.S. missiles in Turkey to his demands . The following day, 27 October 1962, he added that the removal was also on his list of demands for removal of missiles .
 Khrushchev desperately needed to avoid war with the United States . He criticized the U.S.’s hypocrisy regarding defense policy . The United States’ defense policy was hypocritical .
 The United States intervened in other nations’ internal affairs to protect its own interests, but denied the Soviet Union that same right . The U.S. intervened in its own interest in other countries' internal affairs . The Soviet Union was denied the same right to intervene in its internal affairs
 Khrushchev guaranteed the sovereignty of Turkey and pledged not to invade Turkey, but demanded that the U.S. pledge not to . invade Cuba, and remove American missiles in Turkey in exchange for the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 This arrangement would partially ease the reciprocity issue to Khrushchev’s benefit . The arrangement would be partially eased by the Russian state of mind .
 Later on the 27th, Kennedy responded favorably to Khrushchev’s letter of the previous day . Kennedy responded positively to the letter .
 Kennedy agreed to remove the blockade and give assurances against an American invasion of Cuba in exchange for the immediate removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . Kennedy also agreed to the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Kennedy’s letter to Khrushchev signalled the easing of the tensions between the two nations over the Missile Crisis . The letter was signed by the then-Khrrushchev in Moscow .
 Khrushchev agreed to Kennedy’s terms and proposed future exchanges regarding the prohibition of nuclear weapons, disarmament, and defusing of international tension .
 Khrushchev stressed the removal of American missiles in Turkey as part of the agreement . Once again, he stressed that the missiles would be removed from Turkey .
 Khrushchev wrote to Castro to be patient and not to provoke war with the U.S. by downing U2 planes . The Cuban situation did not erupt into war .
 In another letter to Castro on 30 October 1962, Khrushchev commented that the aggressor was the loser of the Missile Crisis . In the same letter, he said that Russia was the winner of the crisis .
 Kennedy was issuing his no-invasion pledge for Cuba in agreement with the Soviet Union . The pledge was issued in an agreement with Soviet Union in Cuba .
 In April 1963, Kennedy removed the American missiles from Turkey, thus fulfilling the last of Khrushchev’s demands . The missiles were removed from Turkey in April 1963 .
 It began the so-called period of 'dètente', which lasted until the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 . It began during the 'period of peace' between the two countries .
 This page was last edited on 4 May 2022, at 14:43 . Use this page to help users with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on this page .