 The action of the Soviet Union, deploying offensive weapons to the island nation of Cuba, shocked the U.S. and put the Kennedy administration to the test . The action shocked the United States .
 In retrospect, this crisis proved a major watershed moment in the Cold War . As Graham Allison and Phillip Zelikow put it, “This crisis proved to be a major breakthrough moment”
 Having peered over the edge of the nuclear precipice, both nations edged backward toward détente . North Korea and the U.S. have been on the brink of nuclear war .
 The United States decided to respond to the Soviet threat in Cuba with a blockade of the island . The U.S. ordered that the missiles be removed from Cuba .
 "This decision by the United States was the outcome of consequence analysis and the combining and compromising of available options," says U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Fulgencio Batista ruled Cuba during the Batista regime in the 1950s . Most of the island lived in poverty, while Havana was a destination site for tourists .
 Fidel Castro, an exiled Cuban, sought to change the situation in Cuba . He and Che Guevara, a man he met in exile, returned to the island of Cuba and began a revolution .
 By 1959 Castro and Guevara had reached Havana, and Batista had left the country . Castro was now in charge of the Cuban government . Castro and Chevara were the first to reach Havana .
 Castro reached out to the Soviet Union for help as relations with the United States began to deteriorate . Castro's relationship with the U.S. was at an all-time high point .
 In the context of a poor Cuba-US relationship, the Soviet Union began to send weapons to Cuba . Cuba-U.S. relationship and increasing Cuba-SR ties, the Soviets sent weapons .
 The discovery of the missiles in Cuba began in mid-summer 1962, when the CIA discovered an increased Soviet presence in Cuba . The missiles were discovered by the CIA in the summer of 1962 .
 CIA director John McCone postulated that the Soviet Union was trying to tip the international nuclear balance of power in its favor . CIA director McCone then postulated the Soviets were trying to balance the world's nuclear powers .
 ICBMs could reach the U.S. from the USSR, but IRBMs and MRBMs couldn't . ICBmers could not reach the United States from the Soviet Union, but the IRBmMs could .
 McCone reasoned that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev was moving some of his shorter-range nuclear missiles to the island of Cuba where they could better threaten the U.S.
 President John F Kennedy and his advisors were presented with a daunting challenge on the morning of October 16, 1962 .
 They had to determine what should be done about the Soviet offensive missiles on America’s doorstep .
 In the days that followed, this group of men traded ideas and suggestions for what the U.S. should do in response to the Soviet actions . The men were able to come up with some of the ideas they discussed .
 Members of the group had ideas, and a decision was made as each man weighed the consequences of each option . The group as a whole weighed each option, weighing each one of their options .
 For JFK and virtually all of his advisors, non-action was never an option . JFK's advisors say he was never given the option of not taking action .
 The missiles had to be removed; this was the goal of all of the discussions and suggestions that followed . The missiles were removed from the site of the site .
 The decision that United States action was necessary came because the President’s advisors thought that non-action would hurt world opinion of America, would be bad for its alliances, and would weaken its position if the U.S. was challenged over Berlin .
 Lines were drawn between, and within, these two camps and influenced by what their respective proponents perceived the consequences would be . Lines were also drawn between and within these camps .
 Those in the air strike camp shared some views of the consequences of the strike . However, they differed on other issues, such as whether or not to strike .
 One point of agreement amongst those arguing for an air strike was on the response of the Soviet Union to such an act .
 They did not think it would be adverse enough to avoid military action . They thought it would not be enough for them to take action . The U.S. military is considering military action against Syria .
 General Maxwell Taylor and the Joint Chiefs of Staff did not think the Soviets would retaliate, at least not with nuclear weapons . The Soviets would not use nuclear weapons, they did not want to retaliate, they said .
 Former Secretary of State Dean Acheson thought that Soviet retaliation would come, but he supported a strike against only the missiles thinking this would decrease the chance of a major Soviet counter-move . Former secretary of state thought that .
 The military action plan would remove missiles in Cuba . Unlike a blockade, it would remove the missiles from Cuba . Another advantage is that it would not be a blockade .
 This was espoused by McGeorge Bundy, the President’s national security affairs advisor . Bundy is a former White House adviser and national security adviser .
 He argued that a blockade would not remove the missiles, its effects would not be felt right away, and the U.S. might be pressured to enter into negotiations .
 Secretary of the Treasury Douglass Dillon, and John McCone, supported his suggestion . The Treasury Secretary's suggestion was supported by both Dillon and McCone . The proposal was later rejected by the Treasury Secretary .
 The President himself indicated on the first few days that at least an air strike on the missile sites would be necessary . President Obama has indicated on several occasions that air strikes would be needed .
 Division existed as to the size of the strike and whether it should be announced or unannounced . Division existed, however, even in the air strike group .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Joint Chiefs of Staff, McGeorge Bundy, Douglass Dillon, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, and John McCone all agreed that any strike should not have any advance warning . McNamara: "Any strike would not have advance warning"
 Others argued that a surprise attack would ensure that the missiles were not hidden . Yet another was concerned that the United States allies would be resistant to an air strike because they have lived under the threat of Soviet missiles for years .
 Dean Rusk disagreed, however, stating that United States allies should be informed prior to an attack . Rusk said that the USSR, the OAS, and NATO should be told as the strike was taking place . The U.S. should not be told prior to the attack,
 Rusk thought the opinion of the world would be on the United States’ side, as would a good number of U.S. allies, he said . Rusk: "I think the world is on the side" Rusk said the world will be on his side,
 Chip Bohlen, a Soviet expert, and previous ambassador to the USSR, was wary of an unannounced strike even though he supported non-military courses of action . Dean Acheson thought the United States should alert allies, but not consult anyone .
 Consequence-fueled disagreements arose over the nature of the attack . Consequences also arose over how the attack was carried out .
 McNamara and the Joint Chiefs of Staff were in favor of a strike against the missile sites and all other offensive weapons . Dean Acheson, Bundy, Rusk, and McCone supported a smaller strike against missile sites .
 General Taylor argued that the Soviets could still attack the U.S. if only the MRBM sites were taken out . Bundy argued that a surgical strike would be advantageous because it would eliminate the missiles that were the cause of the entire problem .
 Those who advocated an air strike also thought that a blockade would be too little too late because it would not solve the problem of the existing missiles . A blockade would also not solve a problem of existing missiles, they said .
 The other choice before Kennedy and his advisors was non-military action . Wiki Wiki Wiki says the other choice would have been to take action .
 Most of the people who advocated non-military action did so because they feared the negative results that a strike on Cuba would bring . Most of those who advocated not military action did not want to strike Cuba .
 The fear of a Soviet response leading to general war was a major reason several people involved in the decision-making process advocated taking non-military action .
 Ambassador to the U.N. Adlai Stevenson, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, and Robert Kennedy, the president’s brother and Attorney General, supported the blockade plan .
 McNamara also stated that he thought an air strike against all the missiles in Cuba was impractical . McNamara said he thought a strike against the missiles would be impractical .
 The bigger argument against military action was that it was too reminiscent of Pearl Harbor . However, the bigger argument is that it is too similar to the attack on Japan .
 George Ball, Under Secretary of State stated this concern, as did Robert Kennedy and McNamara . Robert Kennedy, McNamara and Robert Kennedy also expressed concern .
 The morality of an air strike was the most discussed matter of the first five days of the crisis according to Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy says the morality of a strike was most discussed in the early five days .
 Other arguments against an air strike were that the United States’ relationship with its allies would be hurt if the U.S. acted without telling them . A blockade would force Khrushchev to make the next move, be it escalation or negotiation .
 As the time for a decision drew near, peoples’ opinions began to change regarding the type of action that the United Sates should take, and this was driven by what the perceived consequences would be . People’s opinions started to change when the United States decided to take action
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk came to support a blockade, thinking that starting with an air strike would cause great a risk of escalation . Rusk, who had been a member of the air strike faction, thought that an attack without consultation was immoral .
 He also advocated a blockade because it provided a “pause’ so that further action could be decided, he said . He said a blockade would provide a "pause" to further action .
 CIA Director McCone and Secretary Dillon stated that an air strike could come as a consequence to Soviet refusal to remove the missiles after a blockade was implemented and an ultimatum issued . An air strike came as a result of a blockade of Soviet territory .
 As the decision-making process continued, the group appeared to unite behind a blockade . The group appears to be united behind the blockade .
 Several differences of opinion emerged as to what should follow such a blockade . However, several differences of opinions emerged on what would follow .
 Some thought that the U.S. should attempt to negotiate removal of the missiles . Some thought the United States should try to negotiate removing missiles .
 McNamara thought an ultimatum was too risky and that the U.S. would have to make concessions in order to get the missiles removed . Adlai Stevenson believed the United States should suggest a summit meeting .
 McCone stated that he was opposed to any attempts to negotiate missile removal, thinking they would hurt relations with allies in the Western Hemisphere .
 As seen, the options that were suggested by Kennedy’s advisors were influenced by what the perceived consequences to certain courses of action would be . The options were also influenced by the consequences of certain actions .
 President's decision was the one that mattered most, CNN's John Sutter says . The White House says the president is the primary decision maker in this situation .
 On October 20, 1962 President John F Kennedy decided to go with the blockade-ultimatum option, with a possible air strike coming later, if necessary . President Kennedy made the decision on October 20. 1962 .
 The main reasons he decided on this course of action were the decreased risk of escalation leading to nuclear war . The United States would be sacrificing the moral high ground that it held during the Cold War if a surprise air strike were done, he says .
 JFK thought the blockade would provide the least dangerous response to a Soviet response . While admitting that both a blockade and an air strike by the U.S. would provoke a Soviet Response, JFK thought it would be the least dangerous response .
 JFK also did not share the opinion of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the USSR would not respond to a U.S. attack . JFK said he wanted to avoid escalation to nuclear war . JFK also said he did not believe the Joint chiefs' opinion that the Soviet Union would respond to
 The last reason that caused President Kennedy to swing in favor of a blockade was that an air strike could not even guarantee complete removal of the missiles . An air strike would not have been able to remove the missiles, Kennedy said .
 The President chose the blockade-ultimatum route . Obama said that the U.S. should not begin with negotiations, but that they could come in the future .
 He rejected any thought of giving up the United States military bases at Guantanamo because it would convey a sense of fear and panic by the U.S. to the rest of the world .
 Kennedy chose the alternative that, according to him, produced the best consequences . Kennedy chose to give himself room for further action should the situation change .
 Navy HSS-1 Seabat helicopter over Soviet submarine B-59 near Cuba, Oct 28, 1962 . U.S. Navy H SS-1 helicopter over .
 The deliberations on the U.S. response to the Soviet threat in Cuba began with multiple advisors calling for different courses of action . By the time the blockade was chosen, most of them were behind it .
 How this happened is a classic example of combination and compromise in government decision-making, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff led by General Maxwell Taylor called for an air strike that would take out all of the offensive threats in Cuba . McCone was with them in Cuba when the strike was launched .
 Dean Acheson supported a surprise strike against only the missile sites . McGeorge Bundy also supported the strike . Aideson and Bundy supported the attack .
 He claimed that the President requested that he make sure the air strike option stay available . Although, he claimed that he made sure that he . made sure the President . stayed available, he said .
 Dean Rusk was also of this opinion, calling for a limited strike after one week . Rusk called for the United States to inform a few allies ahead of time, but not tell Khrushchev or NATO until the strike was happening .
 Those in the blockade camp early on were Robert McNamara, who thought a large-scale airstrike was the only one that could be carried out, and should not be considered . McNamara was among those in the camp of those who wanted an airstrike .
 McNamara was the first one to suggest the idea of a blockade, on Tuesday the 16th, and by the next day was its most vehement supporter in the group . The next day he was the most vocal supporter of the blockade . McNamara suggested the blockade on Tuesday .
 Robert Kennedy soon shared this opinion and with him were USSR advisor Llewellyn Thompson and Under Secretary of State George Ball . Robert Kennedy was soon in touch with the USSR .
 Adlai Stevenson and Chip Bohlen urged against military action . They advocated diplomacy and contact with other nations, particularly the USSR before action was taken .
 At the end of an 11:00 am meeting the president suggested that the group break up into two groups, one examining the blockade course of action, and the other, an air strike .
 JFK sought the advice of Robert Lovett who indicated that he was in favor of a blockade . That evening, JFK sought Lovett's advice . Lovett indicated he was against a blockade of Cuba .
 The next day, President Kennedy met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff and they presented him with a three-pronged plan of action . The Joint Chiefs' plan was presented to the president .
 First, they suggested a surprise air strike on all missiles as well as weapons that could be used against the U.S. or any other nation . They also suggested that a surprise strike on missiles could be carried out .
 Surveillance of the island and the implementation of a blockade would follow . The blockade would be followed by a surveillance of the area .
 President Kennedy seemed dissatisfied with this plan saying that the blockade decreased the chance of escalation to the point of war . President Kennedy said that this plan decreased the risk of escalation .
 Kennedy urged his brother and Presidential Council Ted Sorenson to unite the group . After this, Kennedy left for a campaign trip and urged Ted to join him .
 This began a day of crucial meetings, one of which would heavily influence the opinion of the group and, in turn, the President .
 In the course of one meeting the group split into two groups to work out what the blockade and air strike alternatives would look like . The blockade and strike alternatives were discussed .
 U. Alexis Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary of State, was in charge of the blockade route .
 The air strike group was headed by McGeorge Bundy, and had Douglass Dillon, Dean Acheson, and General Taylor . The strike group had a strike force of six aircraft .
 McCone was asked to join this group, but thought that he should refrain because of his position on the Intelligence Board . McCone said that he would refrain from joining this group .
 The groups met and then came back together and critiqued each other’s plan . "The groups met then met again and came together to critique each other's plan"
 While this was taking place, a seismic event occurred in the decision making process . The decision-making process took place .
 Both Secretaries Dillon and McNamara suggested that an air strike could come after the blockade . Robert Kennedy began to argue for a blockade as an initial action with others following, thinking that this was the obvious course of action .
 The meeting adjourned with the seeds of compromise firmly planted in the minds of the advisors . The meeting was adjourned in the hope of changing minds in the coming weeks .
 The president returned the next day for the meeting that would decide the course the U.S. would take in response to the Soviet threat . The next day he returned to the United States .
 The fate of humanity hung in the balance as the National Security Council met on the 20th of October 1962 . National Security council met on October 20, 1962 .
 This meeting showed the changes of opinion that occurred since the previous one . This meeting was the first of its kind since the last meeting . The meeting was held in New York City .
 At the outset, only General Taylor, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and McGeorge Bundy favored a U.S. response with an air strike . Only General Taylor and General Bundy favored the idea of an air attack .
 All others supported a blockade of Cuba first, but disagreements existed as to what should be done after that . The U.S. has been at odds with the Cuban government over the years .
 The impact of the suggestion to merge the blockade and air strike routes can be seen in that both Dillon and McCone, who the previous day had supported the air strike, had changed positions to favor beginning United States action .
 McCone said he was opposed to an air strike, but also did not think the blockade was sufficient to meet the challenge . Evidence of the compromise was further seen when McCone stated that he thought the blockade would not be sufficient .
 McCone and Dillon suggested that a time period of seventy-two hours be given to the Russians to remove the missiles . Also suggested that an air strike be conducted if they did not comply with the plan . If Russia does not comply, the air strike would be conducted .
 McNamara stated that a negotiation should follow the blockade . Adlai Stevenson pressed that the U.S. offer to make concessions around the world . McNamara said negotiations should follow .
 Kennedy vetoed any U.S. concessions, or suggested negotiations at the beginning of the conflict . Kennedy made his decision in favor of a blockade, coupled with an ultimatum and possibly an air strike .
 He confirmed to John McCone that he had chosen the blockade-ultimatum position advocated by McCone . Later, he confirmed to him that he chose the blockade .
 The next day, this decision was solidified in several choices the president made with regard to his speech to the nation . However, he remained somewhat aloof as to exactly what would come after the missile-removal demand .
 Kennedy signs Proclamation for Interdiction of Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba, Oct. 1962 . Kennedy signed the Proclamation in response to Cuba's threat to Cuba .
 Kennedy reiterates his view that escalation to nuclear war and moral problems with a surprise attack on Cuba are the two main consequences he wished to avoid . Kennedy says he wishes to avoid escalation to nukes war and the moral problems of a surprise Cuba attack .
 Kennedy also asserted that the course of action chosen by the U.S. was consistent with the character of the United States . Kennedy also said he believed that the actions were consistent with his country's character .
 Kennedy spoke of the superior moral character of the United States, especially when compared to the Soviet Union . In addition to the moral difference between the U.S. and Soviet Union, Kennedy also spoke of his moral character .
 The compromises and combinations of options that resulted in the decision made by the President are apparent in his speech, too .
 In particular, he had decided to side with McCone and Dillon by leaving room for an air strike or any other action in case it was necessary .
 He stated that the current action “may only be the beginning,” and that the army was being readied for any action . He said the army is being prepared for any military action .
 JFK says he was unsure of how the situation will turn out, and multiple times he said that the U.S. would meet Soviet action with a necessary response . JFK said he was not sure how the Soviet response would turn out .
 President Kennedy did not invite Khrushchev to a summit, but invited him to end the arms race . Kennedy invited the Soviet leader to an arms race summit in order to end it . Also worth noting is that president Kennedy did .
 This is yet another example of a rejection of the blockade-negotiate plan . This is the latest in a series of rejections from the U.S. President Barack Obama's administration .
 This can be seen in the views of President Kennedy’s advisors as well as in his own thinking about the issue . President Kennedy's own thinking is clearly stated in his climactic address to the nation in response to the crisis .
 The lens of time can sometimes cloud our perceptions of the past, giving the appearance that, because a situation was resolved peacefully, the danger of that situation was somehow minimal, and the appropriate course of action was obvious .
 The peaceful end to the crisis was not the result of the inevitable triumph of rationality, but of a long, tenuous interchange between American leaders and their counterparts in the Soviet Union . The U.S. decision to impose a blockade began with the U.K. imposing a blockade .
 Two of his main academic interests are history and International Relations . He hopes to do research and write for a think tank or university after graduation .
 This decision process befits the Rational Actor and Government Politics models, discussed by Allison and Zelikow in Essence of Decision .
 This paper will devote the most focus to the perceived outcomes or consequences of various actions and how that influenced the decision making process . The paper will focus on perceived outcomes and consequences of those actions .
 At separate times, both men indicated a preference towards a blockade . Discerning the stances of both men before the meeting in which the actual decision was made is rather difficult .
 He stated that “America’s traditions and history would not permit such a course of action ... This, I said, could not be undertaken by the United States if we were to maintain our moral position at home and around the globe .
 George Ball, Robert McNamara, Chip Bohlen, and Adlai Stevenson used this argument . The argument was used by the likes of Robert Ball and Adm. Stevenson .
 It was also advocated by Robert Lovett May and Zelikow, The Kennedy Tapes, 172. May .
 John McCone, Douglass Dillon, and Robert Kennedy favored this idea . Robert Kennedy: "I'm not sure what I really want to do with this."
 It also should be noted that ascertaining exactly how consequence analysis influenced the switch by John McCone and Douglas Dillon is rather difficult given the ambiguity of the sources used .
 Robert Kennedy says this was the consensus of most of the group as well . Kennedy, Thirteen Days, 21, was the subject of the documentary . Kennedy: "Thirteen Days is 21"
 Robert Kennedy elaborates on the pressure advisors were feeling during the morning meeting on October 19 . Kennedy: "The pressure the advisors are feeling, and their disagreements"