 All-out nuclear war between the U.S. and the former Soviet Union was a terrifyingly real prospect in October 1962 . Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro on the Brink of nuclear war .
 JFK and Khrushchev both lost close kin during the Second World War . JFK older brother Joe Jr. and a brother-in-law were also lost in the war .
 Khrushchev served in World War I on the Eastern Front . They had been personally blooded by war, themselves . They also had personal bloods .
 JFK would be passive were the East Germans to erect a wall separating East from West Berlin, says JFK . JFK had successfully bullied his younger counterpart in the June 1961 Vienna Summit . The Soviet leader concluded — correctly — that JFK would not be passive .
 In September 1961 the Soviet Union ended a three-year superpower moratorium on nuclear tests in the atmosphere . The tests were the culmination of a decade-long moratorium on nukes in the air .
 Its series of tests culminated in late October 1961 with detonation of the 50-megaton ‘Tsar Bomba’ Its Big Bang set the stage for the Crisis a year later .
 Though too large to be a practical weapon, the apocalyptic symbolism is unmistakable . The apocalyptic symbolism was unmistakable in the image .
 Much of the story of October 1962, and the months leading up to it, is well known, and merits brief mention . Much of this year's events are well known and well known .
 Reconnaissance photos taken in August and September 1962 showed that the Soviet Union was clandestinely deploying nuclear-tipped ballistic missiles in Cuba . The photos were contrary to assurances given the Kennedy administration .
 President Kennedy convened thirteen top present and former national security officials, creating ExComm . ExComm, short for Executive Committee, was created on October 15, 1963 .
 The Cuban government imposed a “quarantine’s’ decision to stop ships carrying military cargo from docking at Cuban ports . Initially sharply divided between pro-invasion hawks and pro-negotiation-only doves .
 ExComm came around over the fortnight to acceptance of a crisis-ending compromise . ExComm has been in touch with the White House for two weeks .
 Russia would remove offensive weapons permanently in return for a public U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . Russia and the United States would remove weapons permanently . The deal would be made in exchange for an American pledge to not invade Cuba, officials say .
 Kennedy was to withdraw nuclear-armed ballistic missiles from Turkey, though keeping intelligence and surveillance bases there . Quietly, six months later so as not to appear as a quid pro quo, Kennedy withdrew missiles .
 Russia’s UN Ambassador, Valerian Zorin, and U.S. Ambassador to the UN Adlai Stevenson are well known . Also well known is the dramatic confrontation between Russia and the United States .
 The U.S. put incriminating photographs on an easel in the Security Council chamber . Zorin balked, Stevenson pronounced that Russia was “in the court of world opinion”
 On October 27, what the White House called “Black Saturday,” things seemed to spin out of control . The White House was hosting a White House rally in Washington, D.C. on October 27 .
 The U-2 eluded Russian interceptors and by a major miracle made it back to friendly territory . But for a while the ‘Fail Safe” scenario of accidental war looked as too real .
 A Russian submarine carrying a torpedo with a 10-kiloton warhead was depth-charged by an American destroyer . The charges were intended not to sink the sub but to force it to the surface . But the Russian commander, unable to communicate with Moscow, considered firing the torpedo .
 News of nuclear warheads and types of nuclear-capable delivery systems were on the island . And then there is the news about just how many nuclear warheads, delivery systems .
 An estimated 150,000 troops were to be sent to take the island . 1,397 separate targets had been marked for destruction as part of the invasion .
 The carnage that would have been inflicted by a nuclear-capable Russian force of some 45,000, plus a much larger volunteer Cuban contingent on the invasion force . Even without nuclear missile strikes on American soil, the carnage would be the worst in American military history .
 Weapon security on Cuba was dicey; there was hardly anyone on guard, and the island heat made storage hotter than was safe for the warheads . Accidental megaton-level ground detonation was a serious possibility .
 The truth was that virtually every nuclear weapon on Cuba could, in a pinch, be released by the local commander, ignoring orders to the contrary from Moscow . There were no trigger locks on Cuba's nuclear weapons, as there were no triggers locks .
 Russian ex-soldier: "You have to understand the psychology of the military person" Had an invasion come, as one Russian former soldier stationed in Cuba then put it, “You have a psychological advantage .”
 CIA analysts concluded that the Bejucal nuclear storage bunker would not house nuclear weapons . The minimal level of perimeter and site security at the bunker led CIA analysts to conclude that the facility would not be used as a nuclear weapon .
 Pilots had unilateral release discretion for nuclear-armed air-to-air missiles . The missiles were designed to vaporize strategic bomber squadrons . Pilots were also given discretion for release of nuclear weapons .
 F-100 Super Sabres based in Europe carried hydrogen bombs to drop inside Russia . F-102 interceptors had similar armament, and F-103 interceptors were based in Russia .
 Russian ambassador in Washington sent telegrams via Western Union, complete with pick-up via bicycle messenger . Poor communications led to establishment of Washington-Moscow Hot Line in 1963 .
 The Crisis ended on October 28, 1962, with a whimper rather than a bang . The crisis ended in 1962, but the crisis was not a major event .
 Contrary to popular myth, America and Russia were never literally “eyeball to eyeball” The Kennedy administration was only too happy to promote that version, to dramatize its public triumph .
 Kennedy deserved credit for reining in while not caving completely, considering some of his more hawkish advisers . Kennedy deserves credit for not giving in to some of those advisers .
 Strategic Air Command chief General Curtis LeMay was the model for the hilarious, insane General Buck Turgidson played by actor George C Scott in Stanley Kubrick’s Dr. Dr. Stanley Kubrick's Dr. Barry Barrymore .
 Asked to define victory in a nuclear exchange, LeMay answered that whoever had the most nuclear weapons left wins . LeMay: "Whoever has the most nukes left wins"
 Air Force chief General Thomas Power said that if at the end of an exchange there were two Americans and one Russian, we win . In the same vein, Air Force Chief Thomas Power also said if there were no Americans and a Russian exchange, it would be a win .
 Dobbs notes that in 1945 one of LeMay’s analysts who helped plan the March 1945 fire raid that destroyed one quarter of Tokyo and killed at least 100,000 civilians was Robert Strange McNamara .
 Kennedy was fortified by knowledge that his vast arsenal — nearly 3,000 nuclear weapons, deliverable via ICBM, submarine launch or manned bomber — dwarfed the Soviet Union's estimated few hundred deliverable missile and bomber nukes .
 Kennedy’s weakness at Vienna nearly led to nuclear war . His flinching caused his adversary in Moscow to take a gamble, confident that no major confrontation would ensue .
 We may see a replay of this with the new President — like JFK, young, charismatic, untested — leading foreign adversaries to see him as too weak and intellectual .
 Betraying allies like Poland and the Czech Republic by caving to Moscow on missile defense could lead to future conflict, possibly nuclear, involving America or Israel . Failure to apply sufficient pressure on Iran would lead to a conflict involving the U.S. or Israel, Israel .
 John McCain would be less likely to be tested, as his threats to use force would be far more credible . John McCain sat in his A-4 Skyhawk carrier plane on the flight deck of the USS Enterprise, armed with nuclear bombs .
 CNN.com's John Sutter says he is the most important person in the crisis . Sutter: "The crisis is not over and over, but it's over and around"
 Fidel Castro was the Cuban leader of Cuba in the 1960s and '60s . Fidel Castro's success was partly due partly to the efforts of the Kennedy administration to get rid of him . Castro was a major figure in Cuba's struggle for freedom .
 As recently as the summer of 1955, less than four years before he marched victorious into Havana in January 1959, Fidel’s comrades had dwindled to seven diehards . Less than 4 years before his triumph in Havana in 1959, the number of comrades in Fidel's comrades dwind
 Fidel wanted the Russians to incinerate the United States, and was willing, even eager, to sacrifice his six million subjects in a nuclear holocaust . Fidel was willing to sacrifice six million people in a holocaust, he says .
 Religious messianism can be as lethal as romantic revolutionary fervor, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "Religion is a weapon of war"
 Iran’s march towards the nuclear club is triggering an arms race . Compound this with several new Mideast nuclear powers, the recipe for accidental nuclear war is cooking in the regional pot .
 Fidel may well be the future augury of nuclear crises — and wars — to come . But it is Fidel who may . well be . the future of nuclear . crises .
 President Ronald Reagan nominated Judge Robert Bork for a Supreme Court opening on July 1, 1987 . Judge Bork was nominated by President Reagan for an opening on the Supreme Court . President Reagan nominated Bork in 1987 for a position on the court .
 But we do not have to look back 32 years to see how unruly the leftwing mob can be, it has been said .
 The simple fact is that the conservatives are often slow on the draw against the American left, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Conservatives are slow to draw against American left .
 The coming battle would be a lot less bloody if the conservative movement were to take the field on Moore’s behalf . The conservative movement would make it clear that from now on they are going to wage war for the President’S nominees .
 The American Spectator and Spectator World are independent publishing companies that are not affiliated in any way with American Spectators .