 This book is dedicated to our son, Russell, currently serving in Iraq, and our beloved daughter, Jennifer Willbanks Schaad, whom we lost this year; she will live in our hearts .
 The United States became involved in Vietnam within the larger context of the cold war and its containment policy . The U.S. was involved in the Vietnam War within a larger context .
 Vietnam was of no intrinsic value to the U.S. national interests, but according to the domino theory, its control by the Communists threatened all of Southeast Asia . Vietnam itself was not of any intrinsic importance to the United States national interests . Vietnam's control of Vietnam threatened Southeast Asia
 Previous U.S. presidents believed that the struggle in Vietnam fitted the pattern of communism’s worldwide expansion . So responded with aid, first to the French and then to the Republic of Vietnam .
 Vietnam came to be seen as a test of American resolve, and it became harder to disengage . The credibility of the United States was at risk, the U.S. said .
 When the National Liberation Front and the leadership in Hanoi responded to the increased U.S. effort in Vietnam, the conflict rapidly escalated . The conflict evolved into a bloody war of attrition, evolving into the bloody conflict of attrition .
 The Tet Offensive of 1968 was a serious defeat at the tactical level for the Communists . It became a great psychological victory when it convinced many Americans that the war could not be won . Many Americans believed the war had not been won .
 President Lyndon Johnson decided not to run for reelection and paved the way for Richard Nixon’s victory in the 1968 election . This led to President Johnson deciding not to seek reelection .
 Under Nixon’s direction, the U.S. objective changed from winning the war to finding a face-saving way out of the conflict . Under Nixon, the United States . changed its objective from winning to looking to find a way out .
 This proved difficult to do, while still honoring the American commitment to its South Vietnamese ally . The U.S. was trying to keep the U.N. commitment to South Vietnam .
 Nixon launched a dual program of United States troop withdrawals and “Vietnamization” A comprehensive effort to bolster the combat capabilities of the South Vietnamese forces so they could assume responsibility for the war .
 At the same time, he launched an illegal, secret bombing campaign against Cambodia . The Cambodian government launched a secret, illegal bombing campaign .
 U.S. and South Vietnamese ground troops would be sent into Cambodia and Laos . Vietnam would also send ground troops into Cambodia .
 The South Vietnamese sustained a serious setback in Laos, but they withstood a massive North Vietnamese invasion in 1972 . The North Vietnamese invaded Laos in 1972, bolstered by United States advisers and American air support .
 Nixon’s national security advisor, Henry Kissinger, worked out a draff agreement to end the war with his counterpart, Le Due Tho . Kissinger had conducted secret negotiations with the Communists in Paris since 1969 .
 President Nguyen Van Thieu was alarmed that the agreement did not call for the withdrawal of North Vietnamese forces . Thieu demanded significant revisions to the Vietnam War Almanac .
 The North Vietnamese refused to accept these demands, and Nixon responded with what became known as the Christmas bombing . Nixon responded by bombing the North Vietnamese in Vietnam .
 The North Vietnamese returned to the negotiating table in late December . Kissinger and Le Due Tho worked out an agreement, the Agreement on Ending the War and Restoring the Peace in Vietnam in 1973 .
 Thieu’s protestations about the North Vietnamese troops left in the south were ignored . The agreement was essentially the same one that had been agreed to by the U.S. and North Vietnam before the bombing .
 The Paris peace accords ended the war for the United States, which withdrew all American troops by March 1973 . The cease-fire provided only the briefest respite before the fighting by North and South Vietnamese troops began again in earnest .
 During the bitter fighting that ensued, the South Vietnamese held their own throughout 1973, but in 1974 the tide began to turn against them . In 1974, the tide turned against them, and they began fighting again .
 At the same time, the United States Congress began to reduce the aid to the South Vietnamese . The U.S. Congress cut the aid .
 The South Vietnamese sustained another body blow when Richard Nixon resigned in disgrace in August 1974 . Richard Nixon's resignation was a body blow for the South Vietnamese .
 In December 1974, the North Vietnamese launched a major corps-level attack against Phuoc Long Province, north of Saigon along the Cambodian border, as a “test case” to determine how the Vietnamese would handle a large-scale attack . The U.S.
 Nixon’s unelected successor, Gerald Ford, was prohibited from direct intervention by law . Ford could only redouble efforts to secure additional aid for the South Vietnamese . The ARVN defenses were quickly overrun .
 Hanoi directed a new campaign designed to set the conditions for a final victory to be achieved by follow-on operations in 1976 .
 North Vietnamese forces quickly overran Darlac Province as the South Vietnamese forces fell back in disarray . The North Vietnamese government quickly fell back into disarray in the province . The South Vietnamese government was quickly overthrown by the North Vietnamese .
 When the North Vietnamese pressed the attack in the northern half of South Vietnam, the South Vietnamese forces disintegrated in panic . The North Vietnamese attacked in the north of Vietnam . When the attack was pressed, South Vietnamese troops disintegrated .
 The North Vietnamese pushed rapidly down the coast and on April 30, 1975, tanks crashed through the gates of the presidential palace in Saigon . The South Vietnamese surrendered unconditionally .
 The Republic of Vietnam, whose forces had been soundly defeated in 55 days, ceased to be a sovereign nation . The two Vietnams were reunited under Communist control .
 United States figures estimate 30,000 killed by U.S. bombing of North Korea . North Korea claim 2 million civilian casualties, but this has not been confirmed .
 The South Vietnamese lost more than 110,000 military personnel killed, with nearly a half-million wounded . Nearly a half a million were wounded .
 The Republic of Vietnam fell two years after the departure of the United States from Vietnam . Vietnam is now the most populous country in the world, with the U.S. Embassy in Vietnam .
 Although United States forces had not been defeated in the field, the nation had essentially lost the first war in its history . The U.S. was essentially lost in its first war .
 More than 58,000 Preface ix Americans died, more than 300,000 U.S. servicemen were wounded, many maimed for life . In the process, more Than Than Thanapies were wounded .
 War almost rent American society and forever destroyed the concept of cold war consensus in foreign policy . The war almost rent U.S. society and destroyed the idea of a Cold War consensus .
 It scarred the American psyche, caused many Americans to question America’s place in the world, and resulted in a national malaise that lasted for many years . The American psyche was scarred by the Vietnam War .
 The Vietnam War has been a source of intense study for scholars and policy makers . The Vietnam war has been an important topic for policy makers since Vietnam .
 Among the most crucial questions are why the U.S. committed itself to such a large military effort in Vietnam and why it failed to achieved its goals and objectives .
 The postwar debate continues, and much about the war is still misunderstood . Much of the war was still misunderstood, but much of it still is still understood .
 The purpose of this book is to examine the early history of Vietnam, the First Indochina War, how the U.S. became involved in Southeast Asia . The book also examines the events that led to the fall of South Vietnam .
 I wish to acknowledge the major sources used for this work . Acknowledgments include the authors of this work and the author of this article .
 All of them are referenced in the Selected Bibliography of the Almanac, but several require special mention . The Selected Bibliographical Bibliography is published by the Selected Almanac .
 There were several official multi-volume service histories that proved invaluable . There were also several official service histories .
 These include the United States Marines in Vietnam, United States Army in Vietnam . The United States Air Force in Southeast Asia, the Air Force History Office, and the Navy and the Vietnam Conflict, Naval History Division .
 Indochina Monograph series written by former South Vietnamese senior officers and published by the United States Army Center of Military History were useful .
 Among the primary sources consulted were those found at the Military History Institute, Carlisle, Pennsylvania; the Gerald R Ford Presidential Library, Ann Arbor, Michigan; the Lyndon Baines Johnson Presidential Library in Austin, Texas .
 A special note of thanks goes to the staff and administration of the Combined Arms Research Library, Fort Leavenworth .
 "As in all my endeavors, I am indebted to Diana, my wife and best friend of more than 40 years, for her unstinting support and encouragement," he says .
 The last U.S. forces departed Saigon in 1973, but the war did not end for the Vietnamese . Even though the last United States forces left Saigon, the war didn't end in 1973 .
 The fighting extended into 1974, when the North Vietnamese began the offensive that would culminate in the fall of Saigon in April 1975 . The fighting continued until April 1975, when Saigon fell .
 With the emergence of the cold war, the U.S. turned to a policy of containment to counter the perceived spread of communism . The United States turned to containment in the 1950s to counter perceived communism .
 Between 1950 and 1954, the United States provided France more than $2.2 billion in military aid . This policy led President Harry Truman to provide aid to France in its war against the Viet Minh .
 From the beginning, United States policy supported the development of an independent Vietnamese army . U.S. role in the organization and training of the army was crucial to the success of the Vietnam War .
 The French were defeated at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954 . Ultimately, however, they were defeated by the French in the battle of the same year .
 Geneva Accords temporarily partitioned Vietnam at the 17th parallel, but essentially established two Vietnams . Ho Chi Minh and Communists were in charge in the north and a noncommunist state in the south under Emperor Bao Dai .
 For the better part of 10 years, the U.S. supported the government of Ngo Dinh Diem, Bao Dai’s prime minister . This resulted in the next phase of the war in which the United States would support Diem's government .
 President Eisenhower and his successor, John F Kennedy, threw their support behind Diem in the hopes that he and a nonCommunist Republic of Vietnam would act as a counterweight to the Communist North .
 This period was marked by a significant American effort to build South Vietnamese forces capable of defending against the growing insurgency . The U.S. built forces in Vietnam in the early 1960s .
 Diem refused to institute meaningful reforms that might have won him the support of the people . Diem's refusal to institute reforms may have won his support in Vietnam .
 He attempted to suppress any opposition, which led to a major confrontation with Buddhists . Instead of suppressing any opposition he tried to suppress, he attempted to silence any opposition .
 U.S. lost faith in Diem and gave tacit approval for a coup that resulted in the deaths of him and his brother . The coup was carried out by several South Vietnamese generals in early November 1963 . Diem's brother died in the coup .
 Less than a month later, President Kennedy was assassinated and Lyndon Baines Johnson inherited the conflict in Vietnam .
 This issued in the third phase of XI xii Vietnam War Almanac the war, which initially saw the use of American airpower against North Vietnam in retaliation for an escalation of the war in the South .
 Johnson ordered the deployment of United States ground troops to South Vietnam . When this proved insufficient, Johnson ordered a troop deployment of ground troops .
 By the end of 1966, there were over 190,000 U.S. combat troops in Vietnam . The Vietnam War was the first major conflict in the country to be fought in Vietnam.
 The fourth phase of the war began when General William Westmoreland launched a series of large-scale search and destroy operations to find and kill the enemy . The fourth stage of the Vietnam War began in 1968 .
 Hanoi forces had settled in for a protracted war designed to exhaust the Americans . Meanwhile, the Communist forces, directed by Hanoa, had settled into a protracted battle .
 The result was a bloody war of attrition that caused heavy casualties on both sides . The result of the war was heavy casualties for both sides of the line .
 Although the offensive was a significant defeat for the Communists at the tactical level, it proved to be a great psychological victory that changed the nature of the United States commitment in Vietnam and issued in the next phase of the war .
 American objectives shifted from winning the war to a prolonged disengagement . U.S. forces were gradually withdrawn as responsibility for the war was shifted to the South Vietnamese .
 The signing of the Paris peace accords in January 1973 signaled the end of the war for the U.S. and a new phase of the Vietnam War for the Vietnamese . The Paris peace agreement was signed in 1973 .
 Bitter fighting lasted for two years until the South Vietnamese fell apart in the face of a new North Vietnamese offensive in the spring of 1975 . The fighting lasted until the end of the two years .
 The North Vietnamese triumph was perceived as the first loss of a war by the United States . Although United States forces had been gone for two years when South Vietnam fell, the U.S. forces had already been gone two years .
 To understand how this happened, it is useful to look at the country in some detail . Consider a brief review of the early history of the country .
 Vietnam stretches for over 1,650 kilometers along the eastern coast of the Indochinese Peninsula . Vietnam is slightly larger than Italy and a bit smaller than Japan . The Country Vietnam stretches along the east coast of Vietnam .
 It is bounded on the north by China and on the west by Laos and Cambodia . It is also bounded by Laos, Cambodia and Laos, which borders China .
 Vietnam has over 2,500 kilometers (1,500 miles) of coastline . Vietnam is on the South China Sea and has over 1,500 km of coastline. Vietnam is the largest country in the world, with over 2.5% of its coastline .
 Three-quarters of the country consists of mountains and hills . However, the majority of the population is mountainous .
 The Hoang Lien Son mountain range is in the province of Lao Cai, near the Chinese border in the northwest . The highest summit is the 3,160-meter-high Phan Si Pan, in the region . The range is located in the Hoang .
 Truong Son Mountains run almost the full length of Vietnam along its borders with Laos and Cambodia . The Central Highlands form the Central Highlands .
 The country is S-shaped, broad in the north and south and very narrow in the center, where at one point it is only 50 kilometers wide . At one point, the country was only 50km wide .
 Some geographers have likened the country to a bamboo pole supporting a basket of rice at each end . The country's three regions are called Bac Bo, Trung Bo and Nam Bo .
 These baskets represent the country’s two main cultivated areas, the rich deltas of the Red River and the Mekong River in the south .
 The Mekong River is one of Introduction xiii the longest in Asia, flowing from its source in the mountains of Tibet, across China, through Burma into Laos and northern Thailand, and then across Cambodia before flowing through southern Vietnam into the South China Sea .
 In 1960, the two largest cities in Vietnam were Hanoi (population about 600,000) in the north and Saigon in the south . Saigon was the second largest city in Vietnam, with about 1,500,000 people .
 The next largest cities were Danang, with a population of 240,000, and Hue, with 140,000 in 1960 . Danang was the largest city in Vietnam . Hue was the second largest in Vietnam in 1960, with an estimated population of 140,500 .
 At that time, of the approximately 30. million people living in Vietnam (16. million north of the 17th parallel and 14 million south of it), close to 29 million lived on only about 20 percent of the land . At the time of the Vietnam War, there were only about
 The remaining 1.1 million people, mostly indigenous tribes, lived in the mountains and plateaus of the Chaine Annamitique . The range extends south to about 50 miles north of the city formerly known known as Saigon .
 The people of Vietnam developed as a distinct ethnic group between 200c. andd. through a fusion of people of Indonesian stock with Viet and Thai immigrants from the north and Chinese who arrived around 200.8.8 .
 Vietnamese civilization was profoundly influenced by both China and India . Vietnamese civilization also influenced by India and China .
 When European missionaries arrived, the Vietnamese people were predominantly Mahayana Buddhist . They were also strongly influenced by Confucianism, Daoism, and animism .
 Vietnam was home to ethnic minorities living in the mountainous regions in central and southern Vietnam . These were called “montagnards” by the French . The majority of Vietnam’s population when the Europeans arrived were Kinh .
 Hung Vuong was the king of Van Lang, a kingdom that encompassed most of Vietnam's present-day northern and central Vietnam . According to legend, he was crowned the king 5,000 years ago, according to legend .
 Van Lang was governed by 18 successive Hung kings . It fell to Thuc Phan, king of neighboring Au Viet, in 258c. Van Lang fell out of control in the early years of its reign . Van Lang is one of the world's most important cities .
 Au Lac fell to Trieu Da, a warlord from the south of China who established the independent kingdom of Nam Viet . 50 years later, the kingdom of Au Lac was established by Nam Viet, an independent kingdom .
 Less than a century later, the Han emperor Wu Di sent his army to conquer Nam Viet . The Han emperor's army was defeated by Nam Viet.
 Despite Nam Viet’s fierce resistance, the Chinese prevailed and Nam Viet became a Chinese protectorate under the name of Giao Chi . Nam Viet was the last place in Nam Viet to become a protectorate of China .
 The Chinese ruled Vietnam almost continually for the next one thousand years . They ruled the country for almost one hundred years .
 Periodically, there were revolts by the Viet people, like the one by the Trung Sisters ind., but the success of these uprisings was short-lived and the Chinese maintained control of the territory untild .
 The decline of the Tang dynasty in China gave the Viets an opportunity to throw off the Chinese yoke . During this period, the Chinese made concerted efforts to establish their culture and civilization in Nam Viet .
 They conducted a protracted war that culminated with the defeat of the Chinese ind. at the naval battle of Bach Dang, east of Haiphong . The battle took place in the early 1900s .
 The defeat of the Chinese only resulted in a period of chaos as the Vietnamese warlords fought among themselves . The victor, Ngo Quyen, renamed the country Dai Viet, but the country never recovered .
 The situation stabilized somewhat ind. when the most powerful of the feudal lords, Dinh Bo Linh, reunited the fragmented country under the name of Dai Co Viet, taking the imperial title of Dinh Tien Hoang De .
 A succession of emperors from a series of dynasties pacified the countryside and began the process of “nam tien,” the movement south . They launched a military campaign against the Chams, a Hindu kingdom that had appeared around present-day Danang in the
 The monk Khuong Viet managed to establish Buddhism in the ensuing period, which served as a long-overdue stabilizing factor in the kingdom . The monk was the first Buddhist monk to set up Buddhism .
 Ly dynasty reigned over the country for more than two centuries . The Ly dynasty was the first of the enduring national dynasties .
 During this period, the independence of the Vietnamese kingdom was consolidated, but it was marked by constant conflict with the Chinese, Khmers, and Chams . During this time, the Chinese and Khmers ruled Vietnam .
 The continuous confrontation with the Chams resulted in the annexation of new territory to the south, which the Vietnamese aggressively colonized . The Vietnamese annexation of the territory was the result of a continuous confrontation .
 After a period of civil strife, the Tran dynasty overthrew the Ly dynasty in 1225 . The Tran and Ly dynadoms overthrew each other in the 1225-1225 period .
 During the Ly dynasty, Vietnam was beset by Kublai Khan and the Mongols . The Mongol fleet was defeated at the Battle of Bach Dang River in 1288 . The Mongols were defeated by the Ly Dynasty in the battle .
 The Tran loyalists and the Chams encouraged the Chinese to intervene, which they did in 1407 . In 1407, the Chinese were forced to intervene in order to protect the Chinese .
 During the brief period in which they once again controlled Vietnam, the Chinese imposed a harsh rule that attempted to destroy the Vietnamese national identity . The Chinese tried to destroy Vietnam's national identity during their reign in Vietnam .
 This resulted in a resistance movement, known as the Lam Son Uprising, which was organized and led by Le Loi, who was renowned for his courage and generosity . The Lam Son uprising was led by a man known for his bravery and courage .
 He led a guerrilla war against the Chinese rulers, which proved ultimately successful in 1428 . He led the war against China's rulers, ending their ruleless reign .
 Le Loi and his successors instituted a vast program of agrarian reform and land redistribution in France .
 In 1471, the army of Le Thanh Tong won a victory over the southern Champa army . The army won the battle in 1471 against the Champa .
 The national territory was gradually expanded to the southward, until finally the Champa kingdom was completely absorbed and assimilated . The country was gradually absorbed and absorbed by the kingdom .
 By the late 16th century, the decline of the Le dynasty resulted in a period of internal strife that eventually led to the division of Vietnam . The Trinh lords ruled in the north, and the Nguyen lords, who controlled the south .
 This division of Vietnam would indirectly pave the way for the French to gain a foothold in Indochina . The French would have been able to gain control of Vietnam . This division would have paved the way to the French .
 According to Chinese records, the first recorded Vietnamese contact with Europeans occurred ind. when Roman travelers arrived in the Red River Delta . Roman travelers came to the region in the early 2000s . The first recorded contact between the two nations was recorded in China .
 First Portuguese sailors landed near Danang in 1516, followed by Dominican missionaries 11 years later . First Portuguese missionaries landed in Danang, Vietnam, in the 15th century .
 Franciscan missionaries from the Philippines settled in central Vietnam in 1580, followed in 1615 by the Jesuits . Jesuits arrived in Vietnam in 1616, followed by Franciscans in the Philippines .
 One of the most influential of the early Jesuits was French priest Alexandre de Rhodes . He transliterated the Viet language into quoc nhu, a Latin-based written alphabet that came to be used in Vietnamese writing .
 By the late 17th century, most of the European traders had departed because trade with Vietnam had not proved sufficiently profitable . European traders left Vietnam in the 17th Century .
 The Vietnamese, particularly in the north, proved receptive to Catholicism . Vietnamese officials restricted the activities of the missionaries and persecuted their followers .
 Missionaries campaigned for a greater French political and military role in Vietnam . Determined to convert the Vietnamese to Catholicism, missionaries campaigned for the French role in the country .
 By 1773, the Tay Son rebels controlled the whole of central Vietnam . In 1783 they captured Saigon and the rest of the south of Vietnam .
 Prince Nguyen Ahn, the only survivor of the defeated Nguyen clan, fled to Thailand where he requested military assistance from the Thais . The Thais responded to his request for military assistance .
 He met with the French Jesuit missionary Pigneau de Behaine, bishop of Adran, who saw an opportunity to expand the Catholic Church's influence .
 De Behaine agreed to act as Nguyen Ahn’s intermediary in seeking military assistance from the French . He agreed to be an intermediary for the Vietnamese leader .
 After de Behaine arrived in Paris, Louis XVI agreed to send a military expedition to Vietnam, but then, beset by his own internal concerns, reversed his decision . Louis XVI was beset with internal concerns when he made the decision .
 de Behaine convinced French merchants to finance a mercenary force in India . He returned to Vietnam, on the way stopping in India, where he convinced merchants to fund the force .
 Nguyen Ahn subdued the Tay Son rebels, proclaiming himself Emperor Gia Long in 1802 . With the aid of the French mercenaries, Nguyen Ahs subdued the rebels and proclaimed himself Emperor Long . The French-backed government overthrew the rebels .
 Vietnam united for the first time in two centuries, with Hue as its new national capital . Hue was Hue as Vietnam's first national capital, and Hue was the capital of Vietnam's capital .
 Nguyen Ahn had achieved victory largely through French assistance . As emperor, he remained suspicious of France’s designs on the country .
 His successors would become increasingly anti-French and anti-Catholic, setting up a confrontation that would have disastrous consequences for Vietnam . Vietnam's future would be disastrous for the country .
 Seven French missionaries and a number of their Catholic converts were executed in the 1830s . French Catholics demanded that their government intervene .
 France’s military activity in Indochina began in 1847, when the French navy attacked Danang harbor in response to Emperor Thieu Tri's oppression of French missionaries . It was not until 1858 that the French military effort began in earnest .
 The French did not withdraw from Danang after the killing of several missionaries . This time, the French landed forces to occupy the city . That year, a joint force of 14 ships from France and the Spanish colony of the Philippines stormed Danang .
 The occupation of Danang was followed by successive French advances over the next 40 years . French forces occupied Danang in Vietnam in the early 1950s . Danang is now one of the world's most important cities .
 The entire southern part of the country, rechristened by the French as Cochin China, was annexed as a French colony . Six year later, the entire southern region of India was annexed . The French annexed the area as a colony .
 The central part xvi Vietnam War Almanac of Vietnam, renamed by the French as Annam, and the north, or Tonkin, became French protectorates . The north of Vietnam was renamed Annam and became French protectors .
 In 1887, the French announced the creation of the Indochinese Union, made up of Cochin China, Annam, Tonkin, and Cambodia . In 1893, they also added Laos to the Union .
 From the beginning, French colonial rule was, for the most part, politically repressive and economically exploitative . From the start of the colonial period, French rule was politically repressive, economically exploitive .
 Vietnamese nationalist resistance movements became increasingly active in Vietnam . Not surprisingly, this resulted in the organization of various Vietnamese nationalist movements .
 There were periodic uprisings, but the French responded quickly and brutally, maintaining their stranglehold on the colonies . The French response was swift and brutally and brutally . In 17th and 19th century, the colonies were the colonies of France .
 Anti-colonialist movements, including the Communists, continued their resistance efforts against the French . However, they were unsuccessful in stamping out nationalist sentiment .
 The outbreak of World War II proved an unexpected opportunity for the anti-colonialists . Anti-colonialism was an opportunity to take advantage of the outbreak of WWII .
 The pro-Nazi Vichy government of France accepted the Japanese occupation of Indochina . In exchange, the French government was allowed to continue administering Vietnam .
 The Viet Minh, as it became more popularly known, portrayed itself as a broad nationalist organization, but was dominated by the Communists .
 During the war, the Viet Minh resisted the Japanese occupation and aided the Allies . During the 1950s and 1960s, the Vietnamese government fought against the Japanese .
 In 1945, Japan overthrew the French in Vietnam, declared Vietnam “independent” under Japanese “protection” with Emperor Bao Dai as head of state .
 When Japan surrendered later in the year, this provided the opportunity that Ho had been waiting for, and he called for a general uprising . Ho called for the uprising, which later became known as the August Revolution . The revolution was the first of its kind .
 The Viet Minh quickly seized power and Bao Dai abdicated in favor of the new government . The new government took over the throne of Vietnam in March 1968 .
 On September 2, Ho declared the independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam . Ho declared his country's independence on September 2 .
 This set up a confrontation between Ho and the French, who wanted to re-establish control in Vietnam . Ho was the prime minister of Vietnam's first government . The French wanted to take back control of Vietnam .
 Ho attempted to negotiate Vietnam’s status with the French, but relations quickly deteriorated . Ho was the first president of Vietnam to visit the French to negotiate with them .
 French shelled Haiphong after an obscure customs dispute, killing hundreds of Vietnamese civilians in 1946 . Hostilities continued to mount, reaching a peak in November 1946 .
 Ho ordered a general offensive against the French in Hanoi and at French garrisons in northern and central Vietnam in December . Ho ordered the offensive in December against French forces in Vietnam .
 This proved to be the beginning of the First Indochina War between France and the Viet Minh . France and Vietnam fought in Vietnam in the early 1950s .
 Vietnam would become a cold war battlefield when Ho turned to the Chinese and the Soviets for assistance and support, leading the United States to support France . The U.S. involvement in Vietnam would result in America’s longest war with the Soviets .
 The purpose of this almanac is to provide a day-to-day account of the Vietnam War . The almanac provides a review of the major events of the First Indochina War that led to U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia .
 The sequence of events becomes very complicated, with a number of different actions happening on each day . Once the U.S. becomes fully committed in Vietnam in 1964, the sequence becomes complicated .
 USA Government All matters related to U.S. government decisions and actions . Includes those of the executive and legislative branches of the federal government .
 Politics, media, public opinion, and other matters having to do with the home front . This week's top 10 news stories will feature CNN iReport . Follow CNN Living on Facebook and Twitter at CNN Living .
 Diplomatic discourse between sovereign states and international governmental organizations . The Diplomatry of the United States and the Organization of Nations .
 This category will also include air operations in support of U.S. and South Vietnamese ground troops . This category also includes air operations to support ground forces .
 Operations meant to terrorize primarily noncombatants in order to make a political point . Terrorist operations were meant to target primarily non-combatants . Terrorists are terrorizing noncombatant non-military members of the United States .
 The Republic of Vietnam was founded in 1968 . It was the country's largest state of its own . It is now the most populous country in the world .
 The Vietnam War is Vietnam's first major conflict in the country's history . It was the Vietnam War, which ended in 1968 . Vietnam was the first country to enter the U.S. Vietnam War .
 Cambodia is a sovereign state of Cambodia . It is also known as the birthplace of the Khmer Rouge . Cambodia is the only country in the world that has sovereignty .
 Activities of and within the sovereign state of Laos, including warfare within its boundaries, are banned in Laos . Laos is a sovereign nation of Laos .
 The actions and interplay among the belligerents in their attempts to bring an end to the war . USSR China Thailand xviii Vietnam War Almanac . Korea Australia New Zealand The Philippines The Philippines Negotiations .
 It should be noted that preparing a chronology of this type of chronology is a problem .
 Not every event can be reported, but an effort was made to include as much as possible . Most important events and those that provide a feel for the rhythm of the conflict over time .
 The date of some events depends on how one defines the start and completion of that event . Also, assigning exact dates to some events is difficult to do .
 The United States and Vietnam are in different time zones and are separated by the International Date Line . The convention used will be one that is commonly used in this series . As much as possible, the dates presented are listed at the time of the event .
 In most cases, unless otherwise stated, the 24-hour military clock is used to denote specific times .
 The author is solely responsible for any errors or omissions in this article .
 Trung sisters lead unsuccessful revolt against Chinese rule, but eventually become legendary martyrs after the Chinese regain control . During this time, the Viet people will develop a fierce resistance against outside rule .
 This first wave of Europeans to reach Vietnam fails to achieve a foothold in the area . First wave of European migrants to reach the region fails to reach a foothold .
 The Dutch, English, and French are no more successful at this time . They are followed by the Dutch and English, who are no longer successful .
 The uprising will last for seven years and result in deposing both the Nguyen family and the Trinh family in the north . The uprising is expected to last seven years . The Nguyen family will be deposed .
 He takes control of a reunified Vietnam that extends from Hanoi to Saigon . He declares himself Emperor Gia Long, founding the Nguyen dynasty . The Nguyen dynasty is one of Vietnam's most successful dynastates .
 Gia Long allows French missionaries to remain in Vietnam, but regards Christianity as potentially subversive . Long allows missionaries to stay in Vietnam but considers Christianity subversive .
 The fleet bombards the city and lands troops, capturing Danang and gaining control of the area by 1858 . The fleet then lands troops and captures Danang .
 These colonies are to be administered by a governor-general under the Ministry of Colonies in Paris .
 France imposes protectorate on Laos, which becomes part of the Indochinese Union . France imposes a French protectorate of Laos . Laos is part of Vietnam, which is now a member of Vietnam's communist regime .
 Nguyen Ai Quoc unsuccessfully tries to meet with President Woodrow Wilson to plead the Vietnamese case . One of them is a Vietnamese leader who was assassinated by the White House .
 The Vietnamese petition for independence was never given serious consideration by the conferees at Versailles . Vietnam's petition was never considered serious consideration at the time .
 In Canton, China, Nguyen Ai Quoc founds the Revolutionary Youth League of Vietnam, the first truly Marxist organization in Indochina . Nguyen Ai quoc found the revolutionary Youth League in Canton .
 Nationalist groups of various political persuasions continue to organize and resist French rule from within and outside of the country . Nationalists continue to fight for independence from France .
 Japanese occupy and control Vietnam for the course of the war . Ultimately, the Japanese occupy Vietnam .
 Under the direction of Vo Nguyen Giap, the Viet Minh organize guerrilla and intelligence networks to operate against the Japanese and the French . The Vietminh organized guerrilla and . intelligence networks .
 Promising to work to further Chinese interests, which include designs on Vietnam, he returns to Vietnam in the spring of 1943 . Promises to work for Chinese interests .
 Ho Chi Minh and the Viet Minh assist the OSS in rescuing downed American and other Allied pilots, sabotaging Japanese efforts and generally keeping them off balance in Vietnam . Taking the name of Ho Minh , he and the Vietnamese help to rescue downed Allied pilots .
 Charles de Gaulle appoints Admiral Georges Thierry d’Argenlieu as high commissioner for Indochina . The high commissioner was tasked with restoring French sovereignty over France’s colonies in Southeast Asia .
 On the 18th, the Japanese transfer power in Indochina to the Viet Minh . On the same day, the government of Vietnam was assassinated .
 Bao Dai, thinking that the Viet Minh are still working with the OSS and can guarantee independence for Vietnam, abdicates his throne and becomes First Citizen Vinh Thuy . On the 23rd, he abdicated his throne thinking that he could guarantee independence .
 Ho writes at least eight letters to President Harry S Truman and the United States State Department asking for recognition of the new government and American aid in gaining Vietnam’s independence from France .
 There is no evidence that Ho’s letters were ever answered . The U.S. government is not excited about supporting French colonialism, but also does not want to turn Vietnam over to Communist control .
 British troops arrive in Saigon to accept surrender of the Japanese . September 12 British troops arrived in Vietnam . British troops accepted surrender of Saigon .
 In accordance with the Potsdam Agreements, 5,000 troops of the 20th Indian Division, commanded by General Douglas Gracey, arrive in southern Indochina .
 Gracey, who detests the Viet Minh, begins to turn over control to French authorities . Gracey: "I don't want to see any more of the Vietnamese government in Vietnam."
 Chinese troops enter North Vietnam to disarm Japanese troops north of the 16th parallel . September 14 Nationalist Chinese troops entered North Vietnam . Nationalist troops enter the country to disarm Japan troops .
 The new government under Ho Chi Minh organizes Tuan Le Vang . Appeals to the people to turn in gold and other valuables so that the government might purchase arms from the Chinese . September 16 .
 Much of the money goes to bribe Chinese commander Lu Han to secure his support and end aid to the nationalist parties . The money is used to bribe Lu Han, who is a Chinese commander .
 Thousands of Nationalist Chinese troops move into the north, while General Gracey attempts to assert control in the south . Thousands of Chinese troops join forces in the north .
 He declares martial law and subsequently rearms some 1,400 French soldiers imprisoned by the Japanese . He also rearmns some French soldiers who were imprisoned by Japan .
 Japanese troops will assist British, Indian and Gurkha troops to help maintain order . He will even use Japanese troops to assist his British and Indian troops .
 On September 22, the French troops remove the Viet Minh’s executive committee from Saigon city hall and go on a rampage .
 The Viet Minh respond by organizing a general strike in Saigon on the 24th, shutting down all commerce along with electricity and water supplies . The general strike shut down commerce and electricity along with water supplies.
 In a suburb of Saigon, members of Binh Xuyen, a Vietnamese criminal organization, massacre 10 French and Eurasion civilians . The massacre took place in Saigon suburb of the city, a suburb known as Saigon . The victims were French and Vietnamese civilians .
 The resulting clash between the Viet Minh and French troops is considered by many Vietnamese to be the beginning of the First Indochina War . The resulting bloody clash is seen as the start of the war in Vietnam .
 Lieutenant Colonel Peter Dewey was head of the OSS mission in Vietnam . He was shot by Viet Minh troops on the road to the airport in Saigon in September .
 The Viet Minh immediately begin a guerrilla campaign to harass the French troops . The French troops were attacked by the Vietnamese government in Vietnam .
 In February the Chinese will sign a treaty with the French, agreeing to withdraw Chinese troops from Vietnam and allow the French to return in exchange for French concessions in Shanghai and other Chinese ports . The treaty is expected to be signed in February .
 This agreement effectively negates any possibility of Chinese support for the Vietnamese . This agreement also negates the possibility of any Chinese support in Vietnam .
 Ho signs an agreement with the French that allows French forces back into northern Vietnam to replace Nationalist Chinese forces . In exchange for French recognition of his Democratic Republic of Vietnam as a “free” Vietnam within the French Union .
 Status of the new state is not clearly defined and specifics are deferred to future negotiations . However, the status of the state of New Mexico is unclear .
 A conference begins at Fontainebleau with Ho Chi Minh and a delegation of Vietnamese in attendance . The conference begins June 1 . Ho-Chi Minh is a Vietnamese leader .
 They are hoping to clarify the status of the ‘new state’ and negotiate full independence and unity for Vietnam . They hope to clarify status of ‘New State’ They are also hoping to negotiate full sovereignty and unity .
 High Commissioner Georges Thierry d’Argenlieu declares Republic of Cochin China a separate autonomous state, violating the March agreement . However, progress is stymied by the declaration of the Republic of cochin China as an autonomous state .
 French president Charles de Gaulle declares, “France is a great power.” August 27 . August 27 French President Charles De Gaulle declared France was a ‘great power’
 The agreement covers a cessation of hostilities and facilitates French resumption of economic and cultural activities in return for a more liberal regime .
 French commander in Haiphong gives the Vietnamese an ultimatum, telling them they have two hours in which to withdraw from the French section of the city, the Chinese quarter, and the port . Wanting to teach the Vietnamese a “lesson,” the French commander
 When the Vietnamese do not comply, the French launch an air, sea, and land bombardment, with the preponderance of the fire coming from the French navy cruiser Suffren . The French launched an air and sea bombardment when the Vietnamese refused to comply .
 Fighting in Haiphong will be over by November 28, but Vietnamese-French relations are at an all time low . Fighting in Vietnam will end by November 29 .
 The French demand the disarming of the Vietnamese militia, which has been steadily sniping at French troops . December 19 The French demanded that the militia be disarmed . The Vietnamese militia has been killing off French troops in Vietnam .
 In Hanoi, the Viet Minh launches its first largescale attack against the French, beginning what comes to be known as the Indochina War, which will last for eight years . The war is the first of its eight years in Vietnam .
 36 percent of French people favor use of force in Vietnam, while 42 percent favor negotiations . 8 percent believe that France should leave Indochina altogether . French public opinion poll reveals that 36 percent favor force, 42 percent for negotiations .
 The Viet Minh forces withdraw into the mountainous region north of Hanoi, to organize and train for the coming conflict . Having lost almost all towns in Tonkin and northern Annam, they withdraw into Viet Bac .
 Giap adopts a policy of avoiding all-out confrontation and prepares to fight a protracted war . The South Korean leader is preparing to fight for his country's first time .
 August 15 High Commissioner Emile Bollaert devises a plan to offer independence for Vietnam within the French Union . The plan would be accompanied by a unilateral cease-fire and an offer to negotiate with all Vietnamese parties and groups .
 The plan is never implemented, because the French do not go far enough in granting real independence to Vietnam . The plan was never implemented because of the French' failure to grant real independence .
 October General Etienne Valluy, leading the largest French military operation to date, fails to wipe out the Viet Minh in one stroke . October . October General Valluy leads the largest military operation in the history of Vietnam .
 The Viet Minh bide their time and conduct guerrilla warfare designed to wear down French forces until they are able to meet the French in large-scale open warfare . The Vietnamese are determined to wear the French forces down until they meet them .
 Operation involves 12,000 men during a three-week period over some 80,000 square miles of nearly impenetrable terrain northeast of the Viet Bac region . Directed by General Raoul Salan, the operation will take place over three weeks . The operation is part of a
 Most of the 40,000 guerrillas slip away through gaps in the French lines . Operation results in more than 9,000 casualties, but most escapees through gaps .
 Fligh Commissioner Bollaert and General Nguyen Van Xuan sign the Baie d’Along Agreement . The agreement recognizes the independence of Vietnam within the French Union . It names Bao Dai chief of state .
 Vietnamese from all sides condemn the Bao Dai government as a French puppet . Vietnam's government has been accused of being a puppet of the French government .
 France recognizes an ‘independent’ state of Vietnam with Bao Dai as its leader . France recognizes the state as an independent state and promises to help build an anti-Communist army . France also recognizes an 'independent' state with the leader of Vietnam .
 Mao Zedong's Communist forces defeat Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalist army, ending the decades-long Chinese Civil War . October 1, 1945, was the end of the Chinese civil war .
 China begins sending military advisers and modern weapons and equipment to the Viet Minh . Shortly thereafter, China begins to send military advisers to the country .
 With supplies coming in, General Giap declares that the guerrilla phase is over and that the counteroffensive can begin . The counteroffensive will begin with the arrival of supplies and troops .
 He will transform the guerrillas into a conventional army that will include five light divisions and one heavy division . He will then transform the guerrilla army into an army of conventional forces .
 Soviet Union extends diplomatic recognition to the Democratic Republic of Vietnam . January 30 The Soviet Union extended diplomatic recognition of Vietnam to the country .
 The National Security Council signs NSC 64, a memorandum recommending “that all practicable measures be taken” to block further Communist expansion in Southeast Asia . February 27 The memorandum recommends “all practicable measures” be taken to block Communist expansion .
 Agreement reached with France for aid to aid pro-French regimes of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia . U.S. will provide military and economic assistance to aid the pro-France regimes .
 The French defenders are overwhelmed by Viet Minh artillery and human wave attacks . The French are forced to withdraw when the French surprise them by dropping a battalion of paratroopers on the town .
 June 25 Korean War begins when North Korean People’s Army attacks south across the thirty-eighth parallel . June 25 is the date of the first Korean War .
 Truman announces that he is increasing the military aid program for Vietnam that he initiated earlier in the year . Truman: Increase in military aid is part of a larger effort to help Vietnam .
 U.S. commits $15 million in military aid to the French for the war effort in Indochina . July 26 United States commits $10 million to French for war effort . August 26, 1958, United States committed $15million to French forces in Vietnam . August 27,
 American military advisers will accompany the flow of U.S. tanks, planes, artillery, and other equipment and supplies to Vietnam . The United States plans to send tanks and planes, planes and artillery to Vietnam.
 Over the next four years, the United States will spend $3 billion on the French war . By 1954, the U.S. will provide 80 percent of all war supplies used by the French .
 August 3 A United States Military Assistance Advisory Group Indochina was formed in Saigon . August 3 was August 3 a United States military assistance group in Vietnam. August 3 is August 3 .
 The mission of the 35-man group is to screen French requests for U.S. military aid . It will also assist in the training of South Vietnamese troops, and advise on strategy .
 As part of General Giap’s first major counteroffensive against the French, the Viet Minh launch second attack on Dong Khe . September 16 As part . of General . Giap's first major . major counter offensive against the . French, it was part of . General Gi
 The Viet Minh overrun the position, cutting French communications with Cao Bang and French garrisons to the northwest . Vietnamese forces cut communications with French forces in the area .
 October 7-17 French garrison at Cao Bang wiped out by Viet Minh . The French garrison is evacuated, leaving northern Tonkin from the sea to the Red River in hands of the Vietnamese government . The fall of Cao Bang forces the French to Vietnam .
 The French sustained 6,000 casualties and lost large stores of military equipment to the Viet Minh . In the battles in September and October, the French lost large amounts of military supplies .
 He will adopt a more offensive approach to defeating the Viet Minh . Upon his arrival in Vietnam he will invigorate the morale of the French forces .
 Napalm is used for the first time in Vietnam, against Viet Minh forces at Tien Yen . December 22 Napalm was used in Vietnam's first ever use of napalm .
 French air support plays a major role in the first attack at Vinh Yen near Hanoi, Vietnam . French air assistance is a major part of the attack .
 Viet Minh forces attack French positions in the Day River area southeast of Hanoi . French reinforcements combined with air strikes and gunboat support result in resounding defeat for the Vietnamese .
 Giap’s leadership is questioned by the Viet Minh leadership, but he retains his post as head of the army . He will subsequently begin a general withdrawal of his forces from the Red River Delta . Giap will then begin to withdraw from the region .
 Bernard de Lattre, the son of the French commander and high commissioner, is among the casualties . The son of a French high commissioner is among those killed in the battle .
 September General de Lattre travels to Washington seeking more aid from the U.S. September general de lattre meets with President Obama to seek more aid .
 The United States signs an agreement with Saigon for direct aid to South Vietnam . September 7 The U.S. signs a deal to provide direct assistance to the country's enemies .
 American presence in Saigon increased as civilian government employees join the U.S. military personnel already there . American presence increased as civilians join the United States .
 The French reinforce the threatened position with paratroopers . Giap’s forces withdraw from the situation .
 November De Lattre initiates a “meat grinder’s battle at Hoa Binh, a city on the Black River 80 kilometers southwest of Hanoi . The battle took place on November 11, 2012 .
 He wants to lure Giap into a major battle of attrition designed to inflict the maximum punishment on the Viet Minh . The South Korean government wants to inflict maximum punishment .
 de Lattre overextends his forces by setting up too many outposts, he says . However, he also overspires his troops by setting them up too far .
 Giap takes advantage and inflicts heavy casualties on the French, but his forces are hit hard as well . During the battle, which lasts until February 1952, Giap inflicted heavy casualties . Giap's forces were hit hard by the French .
 De Lattre returns home and dies in Paris two months later, just after being promoted to the rank of marshal . He dies just two months after returning to France .
 Giap’s forces attack French outpost at Tu Vu on the Black River . Giap's forces attacked French outpost on Black River on December 9, 2009 . December 9 Giap forces attack .
 Giap now avoids conventional warfare and instead wages hit and run attacks followed by a retreat into the dense jungles . Giap is now using hit-and-run attacks and retreats into the jungles.
 General Giap’s forces continually ambush French forces during the retreat and destroy many elements of the French rear guard . Giap's forces continually ambushed French forces in the retreat .
 Casualties for each side surpass 5,000 during the Black River fighting . Casualties from each side surpassed 5,500 during the fighting .
 During this period both sides focus on preparing for future operations . Summer is when both teams focus on their future plans .
 The Viet Minh bring their divisions up to full strength and concentrate on training with new weapons supplied by China . The new weapons will be used to train with new forces .
 The French prepare for an all-out offensive and receive more American supplies, small arms, tanks, and aircraft . The French receive more U.S. supplies .
 President Truman promotes the American Legation in Saigon to Embassy status . Truman promoted the embassy to Saigon in July 1945 .
 General Giap orders troops into the delta area between the Black and Red Rivers . In preparation for a new offensive, he orders his troops to the delta .
 General Salan launches Operation Lorraine, which involves 30,000 troops in the largest French military operation of the war . The operation takes place October 29-November 30 in Lorraine . It is the largest military operation in the French military history .
 Salan hopes that by striking Giap’s base areas around Nghia Lo in the Viet Bac region, he can compel the Communists to abandon the effort to conquer the Thai Highlands . But the operation will be largely unsuccessful because Giap ignores the French maneuvers and keeps his forces
 The new president will greatly increase U.S. military aid to the French in Vietnam . New president will also increase United States military aid .
 For many of Eisenhower’s closest advisers, the possibility of direct Chinese intervention in Vietnam becomes a matter of urgent preoccupation . John Foster Dulles and Vice President Richard Nixon were among those who were concerned .
 After initially deploying his divisions, General Giap, realizing that he cannot sustain his primitive supply lines, withdraws his forces . After initial deploying his . divisions, Gen. Giap realized that he . realized he . cannot sustain . supply lines .
 The Viet Minh now have freedom of movement through a large part of northern Laos . However, the French are still tied down in the region west of the Black River .
 He focuses his attention on the grave deterioration of the French military position, particularly in the North, devising a plan for a major buildup of French forces . French forces are preparing for a massive attack against the Viet Minh .
 Chinese aid to Vietnam, such as trucks, artillery and antiaircraft guns, increases . July 27 With the signing of the Korean armistice at Panmunjom, Chinese aid increases .
 By April 1954 aid to Indochina will reach $1,133,000,000 out of a total U.S. foreign aid budget of $3,497,00,000 .
 French begin Operation Castor, which includes the occupation of a series of entrenched outposts protecting a small base to be established in the isolated jungle valley at Dien Bien Phu in northwest Vietnam . French begin operation Castor in November .
 November 20 General Giap’s forces take the last French stronghold in northwest Tonkin, and soon the entire Chinese border is open . November 20 general Giap takes control of Tonkin and takes over the entire border .
 He immediately begins massing his troops and artillery in the Dien Bien Phu area, sensing the potential for a decisive blow against the French . He immediately masses his troops .
 Foreign ministers of the Big Four meet in Britain January 25-February 18 . The United States, Britain, France, France and the Soviet Union meet .
 In February they agree to hold a conference on Korea and Indochina in Geneva in Geneva . In February, they agreed to hold the conference in Geneva, which will take place in April .
 Three main bastions form the defense of the larger airstrip, while the main stronghold includes the village itself . The main stronghold of the airstrip is the town itself .
 A force of 40,000 to 50,000 Viet Minh armed with heavy artillery attacks the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu. March 13 . March 13 a force of40,000-50,000 Vietnamese troops attacked the French .
 Viet Minh pound the French positions and shut down the airstrips . After five days it is clear that the French are in serious trouble, for they are forced to rely on parachute drops for resupply .
 Giap’s troops begin construction of a maze of tunnels and trenches . They slowly inching their way toward the main French positions . Giap's troops began construction of the tunnel and trenches in April .
 John Foster Dulles, a firm believer in General Navarre’s plan, is shocked by the idea . Dulles: ‘I’m shocked. I’ll be shocked. We’re going to be surprised,’ says Dulles .
 President Eisenhower wants to consult with the British before making a decision to launch the airstrikes . President Eisenhower said he would consult with British officials before making the decision .
 President Eisenhower espouses what will become known as the ‘domino theory’ Eisenhower: “You have a row of dominoes set up, and you knock over the first one and what will happen to the last one is the certainty that it will go over quickly.
 Admiral Radford and Secretary of State John Foster Dulles meet Anthony Eden in Paris to convey a message from the president that he is prepared to ask Congress for a joint resolution approving U.S. air strikes in support of the French .
 Eden is opposed to the idea, but promises to convey the message to the British government . Eden says he will send the message back to the UK government .
 Far Eastern Conference opens in Geneva while the Viet Minh continue to lay siege to the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu . April 26 The Far East Conference opens while the French are still at war's end .
 Delegations from the United States, Britain, China, Soviet Union, France, Vietnam (Viet Minh and representatives of Bao Dai) Cambodia, Cambodia, and Laos begin negotiations to end the war in Vietnam .
 The Viet Minh, now certain of victory at Dien Bien Phu, are in no mood to compromise . The Vietnamese are now confident of victory in the battle .
 The United States delegation, under orders from Dulles not to negotiate with or recognize the Chinese delegation, does not participate in the discussions and acts only as observers . The U.S. delegation is only observers .
 President Eisenhower denies that there is a U.S. plan for massive air strikes in support of the French at Dien Bien Phu . Eisenhower denies there is an air strike plan . Eisenhower: "There is not a plan to engage in massive military action"
 President Eisenhower rejects French request for U.S. military intervention and dismisses the conventional air raid option . Unwilling to go it alone without Great Britain’s support, Eisenhower rejects the French request . Vietnam War Almanac 1954 .
 At 5:30m., the remnants of the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu surrender to the Viet Minh after suffering 1,600 killed, 4,800 wounded, and 1,800 missing . At 5.30m. May 7 at 5:00m.,
 During the battle, two U.S. civilian fliers, James “Earthquake McGoon” McGovern, Jr., and Wallace Buford, are shot down and killed . Two United States civilians were also killed .
 French are publicly opposed to any solution that involves a partition of Vietnam . But behind the scenes they are considering this as a compromise . The French are considering a compromise as a way to avoid a partition .
 The Chinese indicate a willingness to support partition, for they have no desire to continue a war that might spill over into China . They also do not want the Vietnamese to become too strong, especially in Vietnam .
 French reject demands made by the Viet Minh’s chief delegate, Pham Van Dong . Negotiations will drag on for six weeks as the French reject the demands .
 Colonel Edward G Fansdale arrives in Vietnam to assume the duties of chief of the Saigon Military Mission . June 1 Colonel Fansdale arrived in Vietnam .
 Lansdale was sent to Vietnam to run covert operations aimed at disrupting the government of North Vietnam . Lansdale, actually a member of the CIA, has been sent to the country .
 At Geneva, China’s Chou En-lai suggests that the Viet Minh withdraw their troops from Laos and Cambodia . June 16, China suggested that the Vietnamese withdraw their forces from Laos .
 China and Soviets bring pressure to bear on the Viet Minh not to disrupt the conference . China and the Soviets urge the Vietnamese government to not disrupt the talks .
 The Viet Minh delegation will later complain that their Communist brethren sold them out, but they cannot afford to offend the Chinese . They cannot be certain of expelling the French without Chinese support . The Vietnamese delegation will eventually complain that they sold out .
 France’s newly elected prime minister, Pierre Mendes-France, declares that he will resign as head of the French government if he is unable to obtain a cease-fire in Indochina by July 20 .
 At his chateau in Cannes, France, Bao Dai appoints Ngo Dinh Diem prime minister of the state of Vietnam . June 18 at his . chateaux in Cannes in France, Vietnam .
 Ngo Dinh Diem, newly chosen premier of South Vietnam, flies into Saigon, where only a few of his Catholic supporters meet him . Diem was chosen as Vietnam's premier of Vietnam in March .
 July 7 Diem formally assumes office as premier . Diem has completed the organization of his cabinet, formally assuming office . July 7
 The “Final Declaration of the Geneva Conference’s ‘Final Declaration’ calls for temporarily partitioning Vietnam at the 17th parallel . The document recognizes the independence of Laos and Cambodia .
 The agreement provides for a national election to be held in two years to address the issue of reunification . The agreement also provides for national elections to address reunification of the two nations .
 Hundreds of thousands of refugees, mostly Catholics, begin moving from North Vietnam to South Vietnam under terms of the Geneva Accords . Refugees, mostly Catholic refugees, began moving from N. Vietnam in August .
 Colonel Edward Lansdale and his CIA team play a key role in encouraging Catholics and others opposed to the Viet Minh to leave the north of Vietnam . Lansdale's CIA team played a key part in the efforts to get Catholics and other people to leave Vietnam .
 The United States and France provide aircraft and ships to move refugees south . The U.S. and France move the refugees south with planes and ships .
 Catholics will provide a firm base of support for Ngo Dinh Diem, himself a Catholic . Once resettled in the south, Catholics will support Diem .
 Eisenhower approves paper titled “Review of U.S. Policy in the Far East’s Far East,” which supports Secretary of State Dulles . Eisenhower: The United States should support Diem while encouraging Diem to broaden his government and establish more democratic institutions .
 Southeast Asia Treaty Organization is aimed at checking Communist expansion . September 8 an agreement is signed at Manila establishing a military alliance . The alliance is the first of its kind .
 Signatories pledge themselves to “act to meet the common danger” in the event of aggression against any signatory state . Signatories are France, United States, Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Pakistan, and the Philippines .
 A separate protocol to SEATO designates Laos, Cambodia, and “the free territory under the jurisdiction of the State of Vietnam ” as areas subject to the provisions of the treaty .
 This agreement provides a justification for U.S. support of anti-Communist regimes in Southeast Asia . It also provides a rationale for United States support of S.E. Asian regimes .
 Prime Minister Diem suspends the chief of staff, General Nguyen Van Hinh, and orders him to leave for France . September 11 PM Diem suspended his chief of Staff . General Nguyen van Hinhh was ordered to go to France .
 This is an attempt to consolidate Diem’s control of the military following the earlier arrest of two other officers charged with plotting 20 Vietnam War Almanac 1954 against government .
 Hinh refuses to relinquish his command or obey Diem’s order to leave the country . Diem says he will not obey his orders to leave Vietnam .
 Diem accuses General Hinh of rebellion after Hinh released a statement demanding that the country be given a “strong and popular” new government . Diem: "I want a strong and popular" new government, not a strong, strong government"
 A few days later Hinh stations tanks around the presidential palace, which is guarded by police controlled by Diem’s enemies, the Binh Xuyen . The palace was guarded by a police unit controlled by the enemies of the former president .
 Diem stalls for time until loyal militia units can be brought up from Annam . Diem: "Diem stalls until loyal militias are brought up" Diem says he wants loyal militias brought up to help .
 Hoa Hao and Cao Dai sect leaders send the Binh Xuyen’s Le Van Vien to Paris to seek permission from Emperor Bao Dai, nominally head of state, for a coup against Diem .
 Nine of Diem’s 15 cabinet members resign, apparently convinced that his government will be overthrown . September 20 Nine of the 15 Cabinet members resigned, apparently believing his government was overthrown. September 20
 In response, Diem turns to his family and friends, whom he will install as members of his cabinet . Diem: "I'm going to install my cabinet. I'm looking forward to it"
 Forty-eight hours before the projected joint action of the sects against Diem, he announces the formation of a coalition government including four Hoa Hao and two Cao Dai leaders, effectively ending the first great test .
 The Vietnamese Marine Corps is formally organized with U.S. marine colonel Victor J Croizat as its senior American adviser . The Vietnamese Marines are now formally organized .
 At two-battalion strength by the end of the year, the VNMC will become a well-disciplined unit that will form the nucleus of a force that will eventually expand and become part of South Vietnam’s strategic reserve forces .
 Ho Chi Minh and the Viet Minh return after eight years in the jungle and formally take over Hanoi and North Vietnam . October 11 Following the French departure from Hanoa, Ho . Minh returned after eight . years .
 The long war with the French has devastated the North, which is plagued by severe economic problems . The North has been devastated by the war, which has devastated its economy .
 On Diem’s instructions, departing anti-Communist Vietnamese heading south dismantle public facilities and loot factories, crippling some essential services in Hanoi . In addition, on Diem's instructions, leaving anti-communist Vietnamese dismantling public facilities .
 Eisenhower advises Ngo Dinh Diem that the United States will provide support and assistance directly to South Vietnam, instead of channeling it through French authorities . The U.S. will only provide assistance only if democratic reforms continue uninterrupted . Diem: "The United States is committed to
 Collins warns that the South Vietnamese army will receive aid only if it supports Diem . United States military personnel will be assigned to help train that army November 20 . Premier Mendes-France visits Washington.
 France will relinquish control of the economy, commerce and finances of Vietnam . Command of the National Army will be transferred to the Vietnamese government . Training responsibility for training the Vietnamese army will be given to the U.S.
 The People's Republic of China and Hanoi conclude an aid agreement . The PRC agrees to provide technical assistance and equipment for improving North Vietnam’s roads, railroads, postal and telegraph systems .
 Chinese technicians will supervise the repair of the Hanoi-Lang Son railroad . Under this agreement, Chinese technicians are supervising the repair . The agreement was reached by Chinese officials in March .
 Lieutenant General John W O’Daniel assumes duties as chief of the U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group-Indochina . The focus of his efforts will be to assist the South Vietnamese government in organizing and training the South Vietnam army .
 The Franco-American Training Relations and Instruction Mission is established to conduct the training of South Vietnamese forces by U.S. and French military advisory personnel . February 1 The mission was established to train South Vietnamese troops .
 President Diem introduces the first of a series of agrarian reform measures urged by his U.S. advisers with a decree governing levels of rent for farm land . The decree will govern levels of farm land rent .
 Diem’s land reform program ends up by taking back what the peasants were given by the Viet Minh and returning it to the landlords . Instead of redistributing land to the poor, the land was given back to landlords .
 75 percent of land will be owned by 15 percent of the people in 1960 . By 1960,75 percent of of the land was owned by the people .
 The Communists will capitalize on unresolved peasant unrest throughout Diem’s regime . The Communist Party Party will take advantage of unresolved peasants unrest throughout the regime .
 The United States and Vietnam sign a new agreement supplementing the earlier economic cooperation agreements of September 1951 . March 7 The U.S. and Vietnam signs a new economic cooperation agreement . The agreement was signed in 1951 .
 March 28 Diem launches a campaign against the Binh Xuyen, a private armed group of 40,000 that controls the Saigon-Cholon police and national security police . Diem launched a campaign in Vietnam against the group, which controls the police and security forces .
 Hoa Hao sect forces under Generals Ba Cut and Tran Van Soai join Binh Xuyen in a blockade of Saigon . The Hoa-Hoa sect forces are under attack in Saigon, Vietnam, in 1968 .
 Fighting renews in Saigon when Diem dismisses Lai Van Sang, director-general of the national security police, and orders the Binh Xuyen to cease operations . Diem orders BinhXuyen forces to stop operations, but they refuse and Saigon turns
 As the situation worsens, Bao Dai summons Diem to Cannes, but he refuses . Diem refuses to go to Cannes . The situation gets worse .
 Secretary of State Dulles agrees to withdraw support from Diem . Diem has refused to institute meaningful reform programs and is beset by the Binh Xuyen .
 Colonel Edward Lansdale of the CIA, a staunch supporter of Diem, presses the embassy to support Diem . Lansdale was a staunch CIA supporter of the President of Vietnam .
 Diem orders a counterattack against the Binh Xuyen, which succeeds in expelling them from their Saigon strongholds . April 28, Diem ordered the counterattack, which ends in defeat .
 The U.S. embassy is instructed to destroy the earlier communication from Washington . The United States embassy is told to destroy earlier communication .
 Three-power talks on the South Vietnamese question are held in Paris between French premier Edgar Faure, Foreign Minister Pinay, British foreign secretary Harold Macmillan, and U.S. secretary of state John Foster Dulles . May 7-13 talks were held in France between French
 Faure announces that neither France nor the U.S. intend to interfere in South Vietnam’s internal affairs . Both countries will support Diem's government and urge that it become more representative .
 The next day Diem declares that as a sovereign country South Vietnam will not be bound by decisions taken at conferences in which it was not a participant . Diem declared that as the next day he was not bound by the decisions made at conferences .
 South Vietnam formally requests U.S. instructors for its armed forces . May 10. May 10 South Vietnam . formally requests United States instructors for . Its armed forces are based in Vietnam .
 U.S. agrees to furnish direct military aid to Cambodia . Cambodia is the only country to have direct military assistance to the United States . Cambodia has a long history of human rights violations .
 June 5 Diem initiates a new offensive against the remaining Hoa Hao forces . Within two weeks, sect forces will have been routed and most sect leaders flee into Cambodia . Diem initiated the offensive .
 North Vietnamese foreign minister Pham Van Dong announces that his government is prepared to open consultations with South Vietnam in preparation for holding the nationwide elections in 1956 as called for in the Geneva Accords .
 Diem declares in a broadcast that since the state of Vietnam did not sign the Geneva Accords, South Vietnam is not bound by them . The elections called for by the accords will not be held, Diem says . Diem: South Vietnam does not agree to sign the acc
 This grant will finance an ambitious industrialization program in North Vietnam . It will finance the ambitious industrial program in the country .
 Diem rejects North Vietnam’s invitation to discuss nationwide elections on the grounds that the people will not be able to express their will freely . Diem rejected North Vietnam's invitation on July 20 to discuss national elections .
 Diem reaffirms announcement he made in broadcast of July 6 in which he stated that South Vietnam was not bound by the Geneva Accords, which it did not sign . Declaring that the State of Vietnam is “the only legal state” and charging that free elections are impossible
 Secretary of State John Foster Dulles announces U.S. supports Vietnam's refusal to hold national elections to reunify the two Vietnam states . Vietnam's government has refused to hold elections for reunification of the two states .
 October 6 Diem’s Ministry of the Interior announces that a referendum is scheduled for October 23 to decide whether Bao Dai or Diem will be the rightful head of state . October 23 is the date for a referendum to decide who will be head of country .
 The national referendum results in a 98 percent vote against Bao Dai and for Diem, who becomes chief of state . October 23 The national vote results in the national referendum .
 The election is by all accounts rigged, with the CIA’s Colonel Lansdale once again playing an important role . The election will be held in the U.S. for the first time since Watergate .
 In Saigon, Diem receives one-third more votes than there are registered voters . In Vietnam, the former prime minister receives one third more votes .
 Under his command, the MAAG will concentrate on preparing the South Vietnamese armed forces for a conventional attack from North Vietnam . Under his control, he will prepare South Vietnamese forces for an attack .
 October 26 Diem proclaims the Republic of Vietnam with himself as its first president . Diem proclaimed himself as the first president of the Vietnam .
 The new regime is recognized immediately by France, the United States, Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand, Italy, Japan, Thailand, and South Korea . France, U.S. and Great Britain are among the countries recognized immediately .
 The United States consulate in Hanoi is closed, effectively severing diplomatic relations with North Vietnam . December 12 The U.S. consulate in Vietnam is closed . North Vietnam has closed its diplomatic ties with the United States .
 By this date more than 100,000 people have taken part in the People’s Agricultural Reform Tribunals, which began in 1953 . The tribunal was temporarily halted until after the French were defeated .
 During these tribunals, “landlords” in villages near Hanoi were tried for their “transgressions” Many of those charged as landlords own only two to four acres .
 Thousands are executed or sent to forced labor camps during this period of ideological cleansing ordered by Ho Chi Minhh . Thousands of people were executed or forced to be held in a forced labor camp during the period .
 Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty officially goes into effect December 19 . Treaty has been ratified by the Senate and President Eisenhower . Treaty was ratified by Senate and signed by Eisenhower .
 This marks the beginning of Diem’s campaign to eliminate the Viet Minh cadres who had remained in the South to prepare for the planned national elections . Diem: “This is the start of a campaign against the Vietminh cadre. This is the beginning
 Cambodia’s Prince Norodom Sihanouk renounces SEATO protection for his nation . February 18 While visiting Beijing, he renounces SeATO support for his country . February 19. February 18
 April 13 Hoa Hao guerrilla commander Ba Cut was captured by General Duong Van Minh. April 13 was captured . April 13 is the anniversary of the capture of Ba Cut by General Hoa Ha .
 He is publicly executed on July 13, signifying the end of Hoa Hao resistance . His execution is the last of the resistance movement in Vietnam .
 With the Cao Dai already subdued, Diem has successfully neutralized two groups that had long defied his regime . The Cao Dai has already been subdued .
 April 28 The last French soldiers depart and the French Military High Command disbands . The United States MAAG assumes full responsibility for the training of South Vietnamese forces . April 28
 A new constitution, written at Diem’s direction, is officially announced on the second anniversary of his accession to power . July 7 is the anniversary of the second birthday of Diem's reign .
 The new constitution gives the president veto power over the unicameral legislative assembly . The president, with a term of office of six years, has veto power of veto power .
 Freedom of speech and assembly are guaranteed, but may be suspended during the next four years if the president declares a state of emergency . The president may be able to use the power of the state to suspend speech rights and assembly .
 July 20 Deadline set by Geneva Accords for nationwide elections passes passes . July 20 deadline set for July 20 elections passes . National elections to be held on July 27 .
 From this point on, an initially disorganized and uncoordinated insurgency begins in the South . The insurgency began in the early 1980s .
 Between 10,000 and 15,000 persons are estimated to have been killed, with another 50,000 to 100,000 imprisoned . November 8 North Vietnam's People’s Agricultural Reform Tribunals are officially abolished .
 The Viet Minh blame the Chinese for pushing them to institute the disastrous land reform campaign . The Vietnamese government blames China for pushing the land reform .
 President Diem has eliminated 90 percent of former Viet Minh cells in the Mekong Delta . But his ruthless drive against dissidents does little to enhance his popularity, and he loses many potential allies .
 The Soviet Union proposes a permanent division of Vietnam into North and South . The two nations would be admitted separately to the United Nations .
 The United States rejects the proposal, unwilling to recognize Communist North Vietnam . The U.S. has never accepted the proposal . North Vietnam is a communist state .
 Presidents Diem and Eisenhower issue a joint communique that reaffirms the United States’ continuing support of South Vietnam in its stand against communism . Diem: U.S. continues to support South Vietnam’s continuing support .
 The United States Army’s 1st Special Forces Group is activated on Okinawa . The U.S. Army is activated in Okinawa, Okinawa .
 This unit will send advisers to Vietnam to help organize and train the initial contingent of South Vietnamese Special Forces at the commando training center in Nha Trang . The unit will train and organize the South Vietnamese special forces .
 Communist insurgent activity in South Vietnam begins in earnest in October . Decision to organize 37 armed companies in the Mekong Delta is made in Hanoi .
 The remaining Viet Minh cadres in the South have been conducting a somewhat uncoordinated program of assassination and sabotage directed against the Diem regime .
 Captain Harry Cramer, Jr., dies in a munitions handling accident . Cramer was the first American killed in the Second Indochina War .
 Thirteen U.S. military personnel were wounded in three terrorist bombings of MAAG and United States Information Service installations in Saigon . Thirteen United States military personnel are wounded in the bombings .
 28 Vietnam War Almanac 1958 activity in South Vietnam reaches an estimated 30 terrorist incidents . At least 75 local officials are assassinated or kidnapped in the last quarter of 1957 .
 The fledgling insurgency continues with an ongoing program of harassment, sabotage, and assassination meant to disrupt social, political, and economic progress in South Vietnam .
 North Vietnam’s Pham Van Dong proposes in a letter to Diem that representatives of North and South Vietnam meet to discuss a reduction in the number of troops on both sides and the establishment of trade relations with a view toward eventual reunification .
 The letter strongly criticizes the U.S. for meddling in the internal affairs of Asian countries, particularly Vietnam . The letter also criticizes Vietnam's involvement in its internal affairs, particularly in Vietnam .
 South Vietnamese government also desires normalization of relations aimed at reunification . South Vietnamese statement provides a list of conditions necessary for opening North-South discussions .
 Communists form a coordinated command structure in the eastern Mekong Delta . Communists form coordinated command structures in the region . The Communist Party of Vietnam formed a state of power in the 1980s .
 37 companies organized in October 1957 are located in the western Mekong Delta . Most of the 37 companies were organized in the Mekong delta .
 Cambodia charges that South Vietnamese troops have violated Cambodian territory since 1957 . The allegation is denied by South Vietnam’s foreign minister . South Vietnam denies the allegation . Cambodia says it has violated Cambodia's territory for decades .
 Resolution 15 states that the decision has been made to “open a new stage of the struggle” and increase the level of the armed insurgency in the South . Resolution 15 says the decision was made to open a “new stage” of the conflict .
 This operation marks the beginning of the effort that will result in the building of the Ho Chi Minh Trail through Laos and Cambodia . This military unit will be responsible for providing men and supplies to support the armed struggle in South Vietnam .
 The trail will eventually expand into a 1,500-mile-long network of jungle and mountain passes extending from North Vietnam along Vietnam’s western border through Laos and parts of Cambodia . The trail is funneling a constant stream of soldiers and supplies into South Vietnam .
 President Eisenhower makes a commitment to maintain South Vietnam as a free and independent state . April 4 In an address at Gettysburg College in Pennsylvania, President Eisenhower promises to maintain a free state .
 He asserts that our own national interests demand U.S. support of South Vietnam . He asserts the “inescapable conclusion” that our interests demand” support .
 In South Vietnam, the CIA begins to pick up indications of large-scale infiltration from the North, which had begun in 1955 . The CIA picks up indications that the North had begun to infiltrate South Vietnam in 1955.
 Intelligence analysts in Washington see indications of North Vietnamese intervention in the South . These indications are viewed by Washington as the beginning of North Vietnam intervention .
 United States Commander in Chief, Pacific, Pacific authorizes U.S. military advisers down to the regimental level of South Vietnam’s armed forces . United States commander in chief authorizes United States military advisers to South Vietnam .
 Communist Pathet Lao forces attempt to gain control over northern Laos . They receive some Vietnamese Communist assistance from Vietnamese Communist forces .
 Major Dale R Buis and Master Sergeant Chester M Ovnand are killed when guerrillas strike the MAAG compound in Bien Hoa, 20 miles northeast of Saigon . They are the first two Americans to die from hostile fire .
 August Diem passes a law authorizing severe repression of Communists and other dissidents . Diem passed the law in order to repress the Communists . The law was passed by Diem's government in Vietnam .
 Between 1959 and 1961, the number killed rises from 1,200 to 4,000 per year . The insurgent campaign of assassination of local officials accelerates dramatization .
 General elections are held in South Vietnam and result in an overwhelming victory for the Diem government . August 30 General elections were held in the country's capital Vietnam .
 Phan Quang Dan and Nguyen Tran are elected as independents when their party, the Democratic Bloc, is refused registration . The two women are elected independents when the party, which is refusing to register, is not registered . The pair are both Vietnamese .
 They are refused seats when the assembly meets and later found guilty and fined on trumped up charges of electoral law infractions . However, they are often refused seats at the assembly and later fined . They are found guilty of election infractions and fined .
 The comments are passed on to the United States embassy in Saigon, which forwards the remarks to Washington as evidence of the intentions of North Vietnam in the worsening situation in the South .
 The 2nd Liberation Battalion ambushes two South Vietnamese companies from the 23rd Division, killing 12 men and capturing most of their weapons . 12 men were killed in the ambush .
 October 26 New South Vietnamese constitution, heavily weighted toward control by the executive branch, goes into effect . New South Vietnam constitution is heavily weighted towards control by executive branch . October 26 constitution, heavy weighted toward power of executive, goes to effect .
 The Republic of Vietnam is divided into 41 provinces, then subdivided into districts and villages . The Republic is also divided into districts, villages and districts . Vietnam is one of the world's most populous countries .
 Villagers armed with mattocks, machetes, spears, swords, and sharpened bamboo sticks have joined better armed dissidents to storm civil guard posts and overthrow village administrations . Villagers have joined slightly better armed dissident dissidents to topple government .
 1960 Chronology 31: The peasants organize a defense and survive a counterattack . For the first time under the direction of former Viet Minh cadres, the peasants organized a defense . The peasants were mobilized in response to oppressive measures employed by the Diem regime .
 For the first time, a popular armed insurrection achieves victory on a provincial scale . The first time in history, the victory was achieved on a province scale .
 North Vietnam imposes universal military conscription and begins infiltration of cadres into South Vietnam in April . North Vietnam imposed universal military conscription and begins infiltration into South Vietnam .
 In South Vietnam, 18 distinguished nationalists send a petition to President Diem urging him to reform his family-run and increasingly corrupt government . The petition was sent to Diem by a group of distinguished nationalists in Vietnam .
 Diem ignores their advice and instead closes several opposition newspapers and arrests journalists and intellectuals . Diem ignored their advice, instead closing several newspapers and arresting journalists .
 A U.S. intelligence estimate notes that areas under Communist control in South Vietnam will continue to expand . The South Vietnamese government must protect the peasants and win their cooperation and support .
 In Laos, Captain Kong Le occupies Vientiane and urges restoration of a neutral state under Prince Souvanna Phouma . This is effectively the beginning of the Laotian civil war .
 Samuel T Williams as commander, Military Assistance Advisory Group-Vietnam . Williams had served since October 1955 . Williams was commander of the MAA Advisory Group in Vietnam, Vietnam .
 November 8 John F Kennedy defeats Richard M Nixon in election for president of the United States. November 8 . November 8 JFK defeated Nixon in presidential election . November 12, 1963 .
 From this time on, many in the military, including Diem’s former allies, plot against him . Many in the army, including former allies of Diem, plotted against him, says CNN.com.com .
 Despite U.S. diplomatic pressure, Diem continues to resist instituting economic and political reforms . December 4 is December 4 when Diem is forced to step down .
 Designed to replicate the Viet Minh as an umbrella nationalist organization, it reaches out to all those who oppose the Diem regime . It was designed to replicate Vietnam's anti-Diem regime as a nationalist organization .
 One hundred delegates representing more than a dozen political parties and religious groups are in attendance . The Cao Dai, Hoa Hao, and Binh Xuyen are among those in attendance.
 This label, created by Diem’s publicists, is designed to brand the rebels as Communists . The label will come to be applied generally to supporters and participants of the insurgency .
 Khrushchev declares that the Soviet Union will back all “wars of national liberation” around the world . January 6 Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchevski declares that all ‘wars’ are ‘national liberation’ January 6 .
 This pronouncement will greatly influence the incoming Kennedy administration in support of a strategy of “counterinsurgency” in Vietnam . It will be the first time a U.S. president has made such a statement .
 Outgoing president Eisenhower warns incoming president John F Kennedy that Laos is “the key to the entire area of Southeast Asia” and might require the direct intervention of United States combat troops . Eisenhower: Laos is the key to Southeast Asia .
 January 28 President Kennedy approves a Vietnam counterinsurgency plan . Plan calls for government reform and military restructuring as the basis for expanded U.S. assistance .
 March Republic of Vietnam Campaign Medal with ‘I960 Device’ is authorized by the government of Vietnam for members of the U.S. armed forces who serve in Vietnam for a minimum of six months . Members of the United States armed forces are required to receive the medal .
 President Kennedy warns of Communist expansion in Laos . Cease-fire must precede the start of negotiations to establish a neutral and independent nation there .
 An American SC-47 intelligence-gathering plane en route from Vientiane in Laos to Saigon is shot over the Plain of Jars . The plane checked radio frequencies used by Russian planes delivering arms to the Pathet Lao .
 At President Kennedy's suggestion, RT-33 aircraft borrowed from the Philippine Air Force and painted with Laotian markings are used for reconnaissance over Laos . Subsequently, at President Kennedy’s suggestion, at . President Kennedy, suggested, that the aircraft should be used as reconnaissance aircraft
 Report claims that more than one-half of the rural region south and southwest of Saigon is under Communist control . The report claims that discontent that gave rise to the barely failed coup against Diem has not been dealt with .
 The report concludes by questioning Diem’s ability to rally the people against the Communists . The report concluded that Diem was not a good leader .
 Frederick Nolting replaces Elbridge Durbrow as U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam . Frederick Noltting will be the new United States ambassador to Vietnam . Nolts replaces Elburbrow, who was appointed by the U.N. to Vietnam in 1961 .
 Viet Cong attack a village in Kien Hoa Province but are beaten back by South Vietnamese troops . April 1 Four hundred Viet Cong attacked a village, but were beaten back . South Vietnamese forces beat back the attack .
 More than a hundred Viet Cong guerrillas are killed in an attack on Ben Cat, north of Saigon . April 3 is the anniversary of the attack, which killed more than 100 .
 United States Military Assistance Advisory Group-Laos is created and directs Green Beret “White Star’s mobile training teams in support of Royal Lao forces . April 19 U.S. military Assistance Advisory group-Lao is created .
 South Vietnam’s forces by 40,000 and the deployment of 2,000 U.S. trainers and Special forces troops to prevent an invasion of South Vietnam from Laos . Additionally, he recommends quick expansion of S.Vietnamese forces .
 Admiral Harry felt to be prepared to send one brigade with air elements to northeastern Thailand and another to Danang, as a threat to intervene in Laos . In addition to what would be the first major input of U.S. troops, on April 29 the Joint Chiefs of Staff felt to
 Kennedy ultimately decides against these deployments, but will increase the number of U.S. advisers in South Vietnam . Kennedy ultimately decided against the deployments .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk reports that Viet Cong forces have grown to 12,000 men and have killed or kidnapped more than 3,000 persons in 1960 . At a press conference Secretary Rusk says the Viet Cong have killed more than three,000 people in 1960.
 The U.S. will supply South Vietnam with every 1961 Chronology 35 possible assistance . He refuses to say whether the United States will intervene militarily in Vietnam .
 President Kennedy says consideration is being given to the use of U.S. forces . At a press conference the next day, President Kennedy said that consideration was being given . The decision was made in a decision by President Kennedy .
 May 9 President Kennedy dispatches Vice President Lyndon Johnson to Vietnam to make a firsthand assessment of the situation . May 9 JFK dispatches LBJ to Vietnam on a tour of the country .
 On this day Kennedy orders the start of clandestine operations against North Vietnam . South Vietnamese agents directed and trained by the CIA and United States Special Forces troops .
 The orders also call for infiltration of South Vietnamese forces into Laos to locate and disrupt Communist bases and supply lines there .
 He finds Diem uninterested in the deployment of U.S. combat troops except in the event of an open invasion by the North Vietnamese . Diem is also wary of deployment of United States combat troops .
 Vice President Johnson recommends a “strong program of action” in Vietnam . May 23 Upon his return from Asia, vice President Johnson reports to President Kennedy, recommending a ‘strong program’ of action .
 Johnson feels that open attack would bring calls for U.S. combat troops . He says that Asian leaders do not want American troops involved in Southeast Asia .
 President Kennedy meets with Premier Khrushchev of the Soviet Union in Vienna to discuss the situation in Berlin . June 4 President Kennedy discusses the situation with Soviet leader in Vienna . President Kennedy met with Soviet Union's premier in Vienna, Vienna .
 During discussions, they agree to support a neutral and independent Laos . During their discussions, the two sides agree to back an independent Laos.
 Kennedy rejects neutrality for Vietnam even though Hanoi appears prepared to agree, believing that South Vietnam is the place to make a stand against the further spread of communism . While satisfied with this solution for Laos, Kennedy rejects neutralism .
 In August, Washington agrees to finance a 30,000-man increase but postpones a decision on the buildup of U.S. advisers . The U.N. Security Council agreed to finance the increase in advisers but not the buildup .
 The First Observation Group is the clandestine warfare unit ordered by President Kennedy in May 1961 . President Kennedy ordered the group to be part of a clandestine operation .
 The group’s activities were initially focused on the Viet Cong but soon shifted entirely to operations against North Vietnam . The group's activities were first focused on operations against the communist regime .
 Viet Cong forces carry out a series of attacks in Kontum Province . September 1 -4 -4 attacks in the province were carried out by the South Korean government .
 A VC battalion of over 1,500 besieges the provincial capital of Phuoc Vinh, 60 kilometers north of Saigon . September 18 A VC . battalion of . over 1 ,500 besieged the provincial . capital of . Phuo Vinh . The city is 60 kilometers
 During August there were 41 engagements between government troops and Viet Cong units in South Vietnam . During August, government troops were engaged with the Viet Cong in Vietnam .
 The United States Army’s 5th Special Forces Group is activated at Fort Bragg, North Carolina . The group is part of the Army's Special Forces Command .
 Eventually the group will deploy to South Vietnam and assume control of all Special Forces operations in-country . The group will take over control of the Special Forces from Vietnam .
 President Kennedy visits the Special Warfare Center to review the program . President Kennedy authorizes the Special Forces to wear the distinctive green beret that becomes their symbol .
 In Saigon, President Diem meets with Ambassador Frederick Nolting and Admiral Harry Felt, commander in chief of U.S. Pacific forces . September 29 in Saigon . Diem: "I am happy to have my country back in Vietnam"
 Diem expresses his desire for a mutual defense treaty with the United States and an accelerated American “buildup” to include tactical air squadrons to help break up the larger VC units that have recently been massing for attacks . Diem wants a treaty to be signed with the
 October 1 Southeast Asia Treaty Organization representatives meet in Bangkok to discuss guerrilla warfare in South Vietnam . October 1 S.A.O. meeting was held in Bangkok .
 U.S. intelligence estimates 80 percent to 90 percent of the 17,000 guerrillas in South Vietnam have been locally recruited . 80 percent-90 percent of those involved in the insurgency do not depend on external supplies, intelligence says . United States military intelligence estimates that 80 percent of
 In Laos, warring factions agree to form a neutral coalition headed by Prince Souvanna Phouma . October 8 in Laos, the government agrees to form an anti-government coalition . The coalition will be headed by the Prince of Laos .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff estimate 40,000 U.S. troops could clean up “the Vietcong threat” and another 120,000 could cope with possible North Vietnamese or Chinese Communist intervention . Joint Chiefs: 120,00 troops could be used to deal with North Vietnam or Chinese
 President Kennedy decides to send General Maxwell Taylor to Vietnam to study the situation and consider possible strategies . General Taylor was sent to Vietnam by President Kennedy to assess the situation . Taylor was killed in the Vietnam War .
 Diem government sends urgent request for U.S. combat units to be introduced into South Vietnam as “combat trainer units’s” Ambassador Frederick Nolting . Additional aircraft and a symbolic presence in the Central Highlands to prevent attacks .
 Diem declares a state of national emergency because of increased Viet Cong activity and the severe floods that have beset South Vietnam . Diem declared the emergency on October 18 . The state of emergency was declared in response to increased Viet-Cong activity .
 Despite the declaration of national emergency, Diem does not repeat the earlier request for American combat troops . Instead, he asks for tactical aviation, helicopter companies, coastal patrol forces, and ground transport .
 President Obama reiterates his desire for a bilateral defense treaty with the United States . He reiterates that he wants to see bilateral defense treaties with the U.S. He also reiterates the desire for an international defense treaty .
 November Special Forces medical specialists are deployed to Vietnam to provide assistance to the Montagnard tribes around Pleiku . From this beginning, the Civilian Irregular Defense Group program will evolve, whereby the CIA and Special Forces . organize and train paramilitary forces among the ethnic and religious minorities of South
 General Taylor reports that prompt U.S. military, economic, and political action can lead to victory without a United States takeover of the war . November 1 writing President Kennedy from Vietnam, General Taylor writes .
 The issue for the president becomes somewhat clouded when Secretary of State Dean Rusk, cabling from Japan, acknowledges the great importance of Southeast Asia . Rusk warns about the risks of making a military commitment without reciprocal political reforms .
 Taylor-Rostow report recommends change in U.S. role from advisory only to “limited partnership” with the South Vietnamese . November 3 President Kennedy receives the formal report, which recommends a change in role .
 Report urges increased U.S. economic aid and military advisory support to include intensive training of local self-defense forces and large increases in airplanes, helicopters and support personnel .
 A secret appendix recommends deployment of 8,000 American combat troops that could be used to support ARVN in military operations . The appendix also suggests deployment of more than 8,500 combat troops in Vietnam .
 Four U.S. F-101 jets are engaged in photo reconnaissance missions in South Vietnam focused on locating guerrilla units in remote areas vulnerable to air attack . November 12 It is reported that four F- 101 jets are engaging in photo . missions .
 November 15 United States Air Force 2nd Advanced Echelon is activated at Bien Hoa Air Base . November 15 U.S. Air Force has activated the 2nd advanced echelon . November 1 is November 15 . November 2 is November 1 . November 3 is November 14
 Air Force cargo planes begin shuttling in more U.S. instructors and advisers to South Vietnam . November 16 in accordance with President Kennedy’s earlier decision to increase military aid to the South Vietnam without committing United States combat troops .
 The United States will underwrite an increase in the RVNAF and provide advisers throughout the military structure down to battalion level and in each provincial capital . Although the president declines to send ground combat troops, the U.S. will provide advisers .
 In return, the Diem government will be urged to begin reform measures to win more support from the Vietnamese people . In return for reform measures, the government is urged to start more support for the people .
 Order applies to U.S. personnel serving in Vietnam after July 1,1958, and in Laos after April 19,1961 . The order applies to United States personnel in Vietnam and Laos .
 December 8 Washington issues a report accusing North Vietnam of aggression against the South . The report warns of a “clear and present danger” of Communist victory . Washington issues the report .
 The ferry carrier USNS Core arrives in Saigon with the 8th and 57th Transportation Companies . The first U.S. helicopter units were sent to Vietnam as part of the expanded military aid ordered by President Kennedy .
 The American decision on the U.S. troop build-up in South Vietnam is formally announced in a public exchange of letters between Presidents Kennedy and Diem . The decision was made public in the letters between President Kennedy and President Diem.
 President Kennedy renews the United States commitment to preserve the independence of Vietnam . He pledges American assistance to Vietnam’s defense effort .
 December 16 Joint Chiefs of Staff authorizes U.S. Air Force pilots serving as advisers engaged in Operation Farm Gate to undertake combat missions . Vietnam trainee must be carried on board the strike aircraft for training purposes .
 Specialist Fourth Class James T Davis was a cryptologist from the U.S. Army’s 3rd Radio Research Unit working with a South Vietnamese signals intelligence unit . Davis was killed in action during a firefight with the VC, making him the first American to die in direct combat
 The total number of U.S. military personnel in Vietnam reaches 3,200 . December 31: The total U.N. troops in Vietnam reach 3,000 . The United States has more than 3,300 troops in the country .
 Two army helicopter units are flying combat missions in support of ARVN; United States Air Force personnel are instructing VNAF and flying combat . United States aircraft from Thailand and Seventh Fleet carriers are flying surveillance and reconnaissance missions over Vietnam . Six C-123 aircraft equipped for support of
 $65 million of U.S. military equipment and $136 million in economic aid have been delivered to South Vietnam since 1961 . In 1961, $65. million of United States military equipment was delivered to Vietnam .
 January 8 An American civilian contractor was killed in a VC ambush near Saigon . January 8 an American civilian . contractor is killed in an attack on a VC compound .
 The United States Air Force launches Operation Ranch Hand, a “modern technological technological . Chronology 41 area-denial technique” designed to defoliate the roads and trails used by the Viet Cong . January 12 In South Vietnam, the U.S. Air Force launched Operation
 U.S. personnel will dump an estimated 19 million gallons of defoliating herbicides over 10 percent to 20 percent of Vietnam and parts of Laos in the years between 1962 and 1971 . Agent Orange, named for its metal containers, is the most frequently used herbicide .
 Operation kills vegetation but not in stopping the Viet Cong . Operation succeeds in killing vegetation but fails to stop Viet Cong in Vietnam .
 The herbicide has a small proportion of dioxin, a chemical that, at least in larger doses, is considered a carcinogen and/or otherwise dangerous to human beings . Dioxin is considered carcinogen or otherwise harmful to humans .
 Long after the war, thousands of veterans of Vietnam and Vietnamese citizens will attribute many medical, genetic , and psychological problems to exposure to Agent Orange .
 U.S. Air Force pilots fly T-28 fighterbombers on their first combat missions in support of a South Vietnamese outpost under attack . Operation Farm Gate is part of the ongoing operation to combat the Viet Cong in Vietnam .
 U.S. soldiers are serving as combat advisers with the South Vietnamese army . United States pilots are flying missions with South Vietnamese air force .
 January 27 memo from Joint Chiefs of Staff to President Kennedy urges deployment of ‘suitable’ United States forces to Vietnam . Secretary of Defense McNamara forwards a memorandum from the Joint Chiefs .
 The 39th Signal Battalion, a communication unit, is the first unit of regular U.S. ground forces to arrive in Vietnam .
 The first U.S. Air Force plane was lost in South Vietnam . February 2 is February 2 . The first United States Air Force aircraft was lost .
 The C-123 aircraft crashes while spraying defoliant on a Viet Cong ambush site as part of Operation Ranch Hand . The plane crashes during the attack on an ambush site .
 This program is essentially a resumption of Diem’s ‘agroville’ program . The program is designed to provide security and a better life for the rural populace by settling them in protected hamlets .
 The program is derived from British counterinsurgency expert Sir Robert Thompson’s experiences in quashing the 1950s Malayan emergency . Conceived in 1961, this program was developed in 1961 .
 The situation in Vietnam is more complex than in Malaya . The Strategic Hamlet program in South Vietnam proves to be ill-conceived, expensive, and ineffective .
 15 helicopters ferrying ARVN troops into battle near the village of Hong My . Helicopter was one of 15 that was ferrying troops to the battle .
 Two additional U.S. Army aviation units arrive, bringing American military strength in South Vietnam to 4,000 . February 7 Two additional United States Army aircraft units arrive in Vietnam .
 United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, is established with headquarters in Saigon . February 8 U.S. military assistance command, Vietnam is established under the command of General Paul D Harkins .
 The new headquarters will assume overall responsibility for the United States advisory effort and other U.S. military assistance to South Vietnam . The headquarters will also assume responsibility for other United States military assistance .
 The move stresses that “we intend to win” the struggle in Southeast Asia . A Defense Department spokesman said the move stresses the move . A spokesman said it stresses that the move is to win the struggle .
 The first Operation Farm Gate casualties occur when an SC-47 crashes about 70 miles north of Saigon, killing nine U.S. and South Vietnamese crewmen . February 11 The first operation Farm Gate casualty occurs when a South Vietnamese aircraft crashes .
 Administration officials in Washington tell the press that the war in Vietnam is being fought under a “counter-guerrilla strategy” in which United States combat troops should play no part . U.S. combat troops will not be involved in the fight, officials say .
 South Vietnamese president Diem survives another coup attempt . Two VNAF pilots try to kill him and his brother Ngo Dinh Nhu by bombing and strafing the presidential palace . February 27 South Vietnamese President Diem survived another coup .
 The attack confirms Diem’s conviction that his main adversaries are domestic . As a result he retreats deeper into himself, delegating more authority to his brother .
 Operation Sunrise is South Vietnam’s first long-range counteroffensive against the Viet Cong . Operation Sunrise launched in Binh Duong Province, 35 miles north of Saigon, as part of the Strategic Hamlet program .
 The plan calls for ARVN troops to establish 14 fortified hamlets in War Zone D, north of Saigon . The plan also calls for the creation of 14 fortified villages in the region .
 By the end of the year, only four of the planned hamlets have been constructed and occupied . Only four have been built and occupied so far this year .
 The operation, which ends in 1963, will ultimately be a failure and the Viet Cong will once again control the area . The operation is ultimately a failure, and the operation will ultimately fail .
 The 39th Signal Battalion arrives in Vietnam March 23 . The first U.S. Army regular unit, the first regular unit in the Army, arrived in Vietnam .
 The Vietnamese air force pledges support for President Ngo Dinh Diem after a political uprising and an attempt on the president’s life, March 1962 . During ceremonies in Saigon, the Vietnamese air forces pledge support for Diem .
 Two U.S. soldiers are killed in a Viet Cong ambush while on a combat operation with South Vietnamese troops . April 9 Two United States soldiers were killed in an ambush in South Vietnam .
 The first U.S. Marine Corps air unit lands in South Vietnam on April 15 . April 15 arrived aboard the aircraft carrier Princeton .
 The unit, dubbed “Task Force Shoofly,” reinforces the three U.S. Army helicopter companies already in Vietnam . The unit is dubbed ‘Task Force Shoofly’
 The unit’s mission will be to carry supplies and troops in support of the South Vietnamese army . The unit will be carrying troops and supplies .
 Intelligence reports indicate that the Viet Cong are forming battalion-sized units in several parts of Central Vietnam . The Viet Cong have been fighting in Vietnam for years .
 In Laos, Phoumi Nosavan’s forces are routed, paving the way for a settlement in the ongoing civil war . May 6-27 in Laos, Laos, where the civil war is still raging . In the U.S.
 President Kennedy sends 3,000 marines and 50 jet fighters to Thailand in response to Communist expansion in Laos . May 17, 1963, President Kennedy sent the troops to Thailand . President Kennedy was responding to the Communist expansion of Laos . Kennedy was assassinated in June 1963 .
 The marines are flown to Udorn, which is 35 miles from the Laotian capital of Vientiane, to thwart the Pathet Lao threat .
 In Saigon, President Diem passes several presidential decrees forbidding the holding of any meeting for any purpose without prior government approval . Diem, continuing his campaign against dissidents, passes several decrees .
 International Control Commission for Vietnam charges North Vietnam with subversion and aggression in South Vietnam . May 25 A report of the report says North Vietnam is accused of subversion, aggression and subversion in South .
 It also accuses South Vietnam of violating the 1954 Geneva Accords by accepting United States military aid and establishing “a factual military alliance” with the U.S. It also charges that the United States is violating the treaty with its military buildup in Vietnam .
 The Polish delegation, following the Soviet line, does not support the report’s findings . The report was published by the Soviet Union in Moscow, Russia .
 June Students for a Democratic Society issues its Port Huron Statement . Statement calls for “true democracy” in the United States and an end to the arms race .
 SDS will become increasingly radicalized and will organize teach-ins and demonstrations to protest the war after U.S. ground forces are committed .
 Three Laotian factions sign an agreement for the establishment of a neutralist regime under Souvanna Phouma . June 12 three Laotians sign a deal to establish a neutralism regime in Laotia .
 A team of 30 Australian military advisers arrives in Vietnam to join with American advisory teams training South Vietnamese military forces . The Australian team joins with American advisers training Vietnamese forces .
 The largest helicopter lift in Vietnam thus far takes South Vietnamese troops north of Saigon in 18 marine helicopters, 12 U.S. Army helicopters, and 11 helicopters belonging to the Vietnamese air force . Largest helicopter lift takes place in 18 Marine helicopters and 12 US Army helicopters .
 The declaration and protocol on the neutrality of Laos is signed at the 14-nation conference in Geneva . Laos is one of the most isolated countries in the world .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara orders plans to be made for withdrawal from Vietnam and reduction of aid to Saigon . McNamara: U.S. withdrawal would be withdrawal and the reduction of Saigon aid .
 1962 Chronology 45 early 1962: U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia . Order reflects what is perceived as “tremendous progress” during 1962 . It also reflects reservations about domestic support for long-term United States involvement .
 HMM-362 flew 50 combat assaults with South Vietnamese troops and suffered no casualties . August 1 Marine helicopter squadron was replaced by HMM -163 . The squadron was deployed to Vietnam in 1968 .
 The Viet Cong have grown in numbers, and some U.S. officials feel that the war has become stalemated . Despite hundreds of engagements during the preceding two months, South Vietnamese forces have increased in numbers .
 General Earle Wheeler replaces General George Decker as Army chief of staff . Wheeler replaces Decker as Chief of Staff . Wheeler takes over from Decker . Wheeler is the Army's second most senior commander .
 Maxwell Taylor replaces General Lyman Lemnitzer as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . General Maxwell Taylor will replace General Lemanitzer as Joint Chiefs' chairman of Staff. Taylor replaces Lemanitz .
 U.S. helicopter crewmen have begun to fire first on Viet Cong troops encountered during missions in support of South Vietnamese troops . Despite State Department denials, several sources report that United States helicopters have begun firing first on enemy troops encountered .
 Operation Morning Star, a major South Vietnamese effort to clear Tay Ninh Province, north of Saigon, ends in failure . The operation was part of a major operation to clear the province north of the city . Operation MorningStar was launched October 19 .
 Five thousand South Vietnamese troops ferried by United States helicopters kill only 40 Viet Cong in eight days and capture two others . Five thousand Vietnamese troops killed only 40 of the enemy in that eight days .
 U.S. officials call the operation a waste and disclaim any responsibility for it . United States officials say the operation is a waste .
 October 28 Khrushchev orders withdrawal of missiles from Cuba, ending the crisis . October 28, 1962, Soviet Union withdraws all its missiles from the island of Cuba . October 29, 1959, Soviet-Russian-U.S. missile embargo ended .
 Mansfield was originally a supporter of President Ngo Dinh Diem . Mansfield places blame for the deteriorating situation in Vietnam squarely on the Diem regime for its failure to share power .
 The VC are prepared for a long struggle and have expanded considerably in size and influence, he says . Acknowledges that government control of the countryside has improved slightly .
 Successful counterinsurgency in Vietnam will take several years of greater effort by U.S. and South Vietnamese government . Success hinges upon Diem gaining the support of the peasants through social and military measures .
 Saigon announces that 4,077 strategic hamlets have been completed out of a projected total of 11,182 . The hamlets now house 39 percent of the South Vietnamese population . Saigon announced that 4077 hamlets were completed .
 December 31 President Kennedy authorizes the expansion of Operation Farm Gate . December 31 he authorizes an expansion of the operation . President Kennedy also authorizes Operation Farm gate .
 Approximately 11,300 U.S. advisory and support personnel are now in Vietnam . Approximately 11-300 United States advisory personnel are currently in Vietnam.
 One hundred and nine Americans have been killed or wounded during the previous year, almost eight times as many as in 1961 . One 100 and nine U.S. citizens have been wounded or killed in previous year .
 U.S. Army and Marine Corps aviation units have flown over 50,000 sorties . About one-half of those sorties were combat support missions .
 China claims to have armed the Viet Cong with more than 90,000 rifles and machine guns this year . South Vietnam is estimated at 25,000, with active Viet Cong sympathizers numbered at 150,000 . China claims it has trained and trained guerrilla forces in South Vietnam are estimated at
 The Viet Cong are now killing and kidnapping 1,000 local officials per month . They are kidnapping and killing local officials every month . Viet Cong now kill and kidnap local officials .
 South Vietnamese government regular troops number 243,000 plus 65,000 Self Defense Corps members trained to defend their villages . Regular troops are also included in the Self Defense Force .
 Uncharacteristically, the Viet Cong stand and fight against a bungled ARVN attack during which three U.S. advisers are killed, eight are wounded, and five American helicopters shot down .
 The engagement, symbolic of the ARVN’s many problems, clearly demonstrates that government troops can neither cope with the strategy nor match the fighting spirit of the Viet Cong . The engagement is symbolic of a government failure to cope with its own problems .
 Headquarters MACV declares the battle a victory for South Vietnamese forces because the VC quit the area after the fighting . Despite candid assessments of the poor ARVN performance by Lieutenant Colonel John Paul Vann and other U.S. advisers, the battle was declared a victory .
 The poor performance of the South Viet1963 Chronology 47 namese troops is an indicator that the United States will eventually be compelled to escalate the war by committing American ground troops to fight the Communists .
 White House aide Michael V Forrestal advises President Kennedy to expect a long and costly war . Forrestal: Expect a long, costly war with the U.S. President Kennedy expected to be involved in the war .
 He warns that, in his opinion, Viet Cong recruitment in South Vietnam is effective enough to continue the war even without infiltration from the North . He says, "Viet Cong recruitment" effective enough for the war .
 Vietnamese paratroopers jump from U.S. Air Force C-1 23 transports in the initial assault wave of Operation Phi Hoa II in Tay Ninh Province, March 1 963 . The initial assault was part of the first phase of the operation in the country .
 U.S. helicopter crews escorting ARVN troops are cleared to shoot first when encountering enemy soldiers . February 26 United States helicopter crews escort ARVVN . troops . The helicopter crews have been cleared to fire first .
 100 U.S. troops of the Hawaiian-based 25th Infantry Division are sent to South Vietnam to reinforce United States Army aviation units by serving as door gunners aboard Army H-21 helicopters .
 Diem initiates Operation ‘Open Arms’ designed to subvert the Communist military effort . Operation was designed to convince their troops to desert or rally to the South Vietnamese cause . Operation "Open Arms" was launched April 17, 1968 .
 The campaign promises clemency and material benefits to guerrillas if they abandon the war against his government . The campaign also promises material benefits if they leave the government .
 Americans for Democratic Action group issues resolution demanding U.S. withdraws troops from Vietnam . Group calls for troop withdrawal from Vietnam to be withdrawn from Vietnam.
 May 8 Buddhists riot in the streets of Hue after they are denied the right to display the multicolored Buddhist flag during the celebration of Buddha’s birthday . The riot was sparked by a refusal to allow the flag to be displayed during the celebrations of Buddha's birthday .
 Nine persons are killed, including seven children and one woman, and about 20 are wounded . About 20 people were wounded in the attack .
 Diem blames the incident on the Viet Cong and refuses Buddhist demands that the officials responsible be punished . Diem refuses to apologize for the incident .
 Buddhist demonstrations continue into August as the resentment against Diem’s regime intensifies . Countrywide Buddhist demonstrations are expected to last into August .
 U.S. ambassador Nolting urges Diem to be conciliatory, but Diem refuses . Diem refused to be confronted by the United States ambassador . U.N. ambassador: "Diem refuses to negotiate"
 Diem’s sister-in-law Madame Nhu, self-styled First Lady of Vietnam, alleges that the Buddhists are being manipulated by the Americans . The Buddhists accuse the Americans of manipulating them, she says . Diem's sister in-law says the
 Diem created a committee to investigate the Hue incident, but it is only for show and has no real authority . Pressure from Deputy Ambassador William Trueheart forces Diem to create the committee .
 MACV commander General Paul Harkins is reported to have warned U.S. military personnel to avoid duty with Vietnamese military units involved in the suppression of Buddhists . U.N. forces in Vietnam are said to be involved in suppression of Buddhism .
 Buddhist monk Thich Quang Due publicly immolates himself in Saigon to protest repression by the Diem regime . June 11 Buddhist monk due publicly immolated himself in Vietnam .
 Diem remains stubborn, despite repeated U.S. appeals, and his special committee of inquiry confirms his contention that the Viet 1963 Chronology 49 Cong were responsible for the Hue incident .
 Six Buddhist monks have followed Thich Quang Due’s example . By November, six Buddhist monks had followed his example .
 Ngo Dinh Nhu’s wife, Madame Nhu, exacerbates the crisis by referring to the self-immolations as Buddhist “barbecues” and offers to supply matches . Nhu: Self-immolation is a Buddhist ‘barbec
 President Kennedy appoints Henry Cabot Lodge, his former Republican political opponent, to succeed Nolting as ambassador to Vietnam beginning August 1 . Lodge is the former Republican opponent of Nolts . Lodge will succeed him in Vietnam .
 July 4 General Tran Van Don informs Lucien Conein of the CIA that certain South Vietnamese officers are planning a coup against Diem . July 4 general Tran van Don tells CIA that the coup is planned . August 4 General Van Don says the coup will take place against
 Kennedy is initially opposed to the coup, preferring that Diem purge his entourage and institute more liberal reforms . Kennedy initially opposed Diem's overthrow . Diem was ousted by the coup .
 Ninety Viet Cong are killed in a four-hour battle in the Ca Mau Peninsula at the southernmost tip of South Vietnam .
 President Diem declares martial law at the urging of General Tran Van Don ostensibly to prosecute the war more effectively . August 20, 1968, President Hoang declared martial law .
 Don’s real purpose is to set conditions for the coup being contemplated by himself and a number of his fellow officers . Don's real purpose was to set . conditions for himself and . many of his . fellow officers, he says .
 Diem hopes to implicate the army in the campaign against the Buddhists conceived by his brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu . The campaign was conceived by the brother of Diem's brother .
 August 21 South Vietnamese special forces loyal to President Diem’s brother, Nhu, attacked Buddhist pagodas in Saigon, Hue, and several other cities, destroying property and beating 1,400 Buddhists and students . August 21 special forces attacked Buddhists, students and
 Several large-scale demonstrations break out in a number of cities . Demonstrations break out across the world in response to the protests .
 In Washington, President Kennedy and his administration see these actions as the last straw . President Kennedy's administration sees this as the "last straw" in Washington .
 Diem’s foreign minister, Vu Van Mau, and his ambassador to the United States, Tran Van Chuong, resign in protest over Diem's treatment of the Buddhists . Van Mau and Chuong resigned in protest . Diem was the prime minister of Vietnam from
 Henry Cabot Lodge arrives in Saigon to replace Frederick Nolting as U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam . Lodge replaces Frederick Noltting as United States ambassador to S. Vietnam .
 He reports back to Washington that Diem’s brother, Nhu, is behind the attacks against the Buddhists . Diem's brother is behind attacks against Buddhists, he says .
 Lodge also says that a group of South Vietnamese generals are seeking U.S. support for a coup against Diem . Lodge says that the generals want the United States support for Diem's overthrow . Lodge: The United States should support the coup .
 August 24 Ambassador Lodge receives a State Department cable stating that the U.S. can no longer tolerate Nhu’s influence in the Diem regime . The cable was sent by the State Department . Ambassador Lodge received the cable .
 Lodge directs Lodge to tell the South Vietnamese generals that Washington is prepared to discontinue economic and military aid to Diem if he does not remove Nhu and institute reforms . Lodge: Washington is also prepared to tell Diem that U.S. will discontinue aid to Vietnam if he
 Diem refuses to drop Nhu and will not discuss reforms that President Kennedy wants . Diem refused to discuss the reforms that he wants to make .
 Lodge will try to convince the Kennedy administration to support the dissident generals . Lodge will meet with President Kennedy at the White House on Monday .
 Cambodia severs diplomatic relations with South Vietnam in protest over border violations and persecution of the Buddhists . Cambodia's diplomatic relations between South Vietnam and Cambodia have been strained for years . Cambodia is protesting border violations, persecution of Buddhists in Vietnam .
 Two U.S. pilots are killed and three other Americans wounded when enemy gunfire brings down their helicopter in Tay Ninh Province, 55 miles north of Saigon . The helicopter was shot down by enemy gunfire .
 Ambassador Lodge reports to Washington that the conspiracy and coup have collapsed . Ambassador Lodge: August 31 Ambassador Lodge says to D.C. that the coup has collapsed . August 31 ambassador Lodge reports that the plot has collapsed. August 31
 He also reports hearing that Nhu was secretly dealing with the Viet Cong . Nhu is believed to have been dealing with Nhu's enemies .
 The discussion reveals the differences of opinion within the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration is divided on issues of national security .
 Paul Kattenberg, just returned from Saigon, proposes disengagement from Vietnam . He says the war effort is irretrievable, with or without Diem, even if Diem dies .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara agrees with Rusk, asserting that the U.S. is winning . Rusk: "The United States is winning" McNamara: "We are winning"
 The U.S. Army establishes the 145th Aviation Battalion in Vietnam in September . The 145th aviation battalion was the first of its kind in Vietnam .
 President Kennedy rebuffs French president Charles de Gaulle’s proposal for a neutral, united Vietnam . Kennedy rejects any policy that would lead to withdrawal of U.S. troops from Vietnam before the Viet Cong menace has been eliminated .
 The Times of Saigon charges that the CIA had planned a coup against Diem for 28 August . Diem was assassinated by the CIA in 1968 .
 Roger Hilsman advises Secretary of State Rusk that the U.S. should encourage the South Vietnamese generals who have been discussing a coup against Diem . He suggests attacking North Vietnam if Hanoi interferes with the coup if it takes place .
 General Victor Krulak and Joseph Mendenhall of the State Department report to President Kennedy on their recent fact-finding mission to Vietnam . September 10. September 10 . September 11 .
 Mendenhall concludes from talks with bureaucrats and politicians that Diem is near collapse . Krulak concludes that the war is going well, but Mendenhalls says Diem's government is in trouble .
 At least 90 soldiers and civilians are killed in fighting during a government counterattack to retake the Ca Mau Peninsula towns of Cai Nouc and Dam Doi . September 11 at least 90 troops and civilians were killed .
 Washington decides to suspend economic subsidies to South Vietnamese commercial imports and freeze loans for developmental projects . The move is part of the effort to pressure Diem into making reforms .
 They also serve as a clear sign to those planning a coup against Diem . However, they are also a clear signal that those planning to oust Diem are planning to do so .
 McNamara and General Taylor arrive in Vietnam after being dispatched by President Kennedy . President Kennedy was dissatisfied with Krulak and Mendenhall's report .
 They were charged to determine whether the country’s military situation had deteriorated as a result of the clash between the government and the Buddhists . The Buddhists clashed with the government last year .
 President Kennedy receives the report of the McNamara-Taylor mission . President Kennedy received the mission report .
 The report is generally optimistic, citing ‘real progress’ in the war but noting that the anti-Buddhist campaign has hurt the war effort . The report notes that anti-buddhist campaigns have hurt the effort .
 Vietnam War Almanac 1963: 'No solid evidence of the possibility of a successful coup' Almanac says there is ‘no solid evidence’ of a coup . They recommend sanctions against the Diem regime but recommend that the administration continue to work with Diem .
 Lodge reports to Kennedy that the coup against Diem appears to be on again . October 5 Lodge reports that Diem's coup against him appears to have been successful . Lodge: "Coup against diem appears on again"
 General Duong Van Minh asks for assurances that the U.S. will not thwart a coup, and that economic and military aid will continue . He asks that the United States .
 October 7 Madame Nhu arrives in the United States for a short visit despite being rebuffed by the Kennedy administration . The Kennedy administration refuses officially acknowledge her presence or to extend diplomatic courtesies .
 General Harkins informs President Diem that the U.S. will deny funds to the Vietnamese Special Forces if funds are used for purposes other than fighting the Viet Cong . Vietnam Special Forces played a leading role in attacks against the Buddhists .
 Washington will also not renew the annual agreement supplying the government with surplus food, which is sold to pay South Vietnamese troops . Washington also will not renew an agreement supplying surplus food to pay the government .
 These actions serve to convince the dissident generals that they have Washington’s approval for the coup . These actions . serve . to convince them that they . have Washington . approval for their coup .
 General Harkins informs General Don at a British Embassy reception that he knows of coup . General Don considers it a mistake that will detract from the war against the Communists . October 22 General Don tells General Don that he considers coup a mistake .
 The following day Don tells Lucien Conein of the CIA that he has postponed the coup set for October 26 . The coup was postponed by Don .
 White House aide McGeorge Bundy sends a cablegram to Lodge seeking assurances that the coup will succeed . October 25 is prompted by concerns over a public relations fallout if the coup fails .
 October 27 Lodge meets with Diem, but reports to Washington that the meeting was a “fruitless, frustrating” exchange . Lodge: Meeting was ‘fruitless and frustrating’
 Government troops have killed 44 guerrillas in a battle at three strategic hamlets in Quang Ngai Province . U.S. military spokesman reports that government troops killed 44 .
 Kennedy’s confidence in the coup is shaken when General Taylor cites messages from General Harkins . At a National Security Council meeting, Kennedy's confidence is shaken by General Taylor's comments .
 At 1:30m., the coup begins when the forces of Major Generals Duong Van Minh, Ton That Dinh, and Tran Van Don begin the takeover of the government . They seize the police headquarters, radio stations, the airport, and other installations and launch attacks
 Diem and his brother Nhu are trapped inside the palace and reject all calls to surrender . Diem is believed to be holding on to his brother, Nhu .
 At 4:30 a.m., Diem telephones Ambassador Lodge to ask where the United States stands . Diem calls the ambassador to ask if the U.S. stands in the region .
 Lodge offers to provide Diem and his brother sanctuary and safe conduct out of the country if he resigns . Lodge also offers to give Diem sanctuary, safe conduct and sanctuary out of country .
 In the end, Diem is unable to summon any support, so he and Nhu escape through a secret tunnel and go into hiding at St. Louis Cathedral . Diem was unable to summons any support .
 At about 6:00 p.m., Diem begins negotiating with the generals, who have assured Lodge that Diem’s life will be spared . November 2: Diem negotiates with the general, who assure Lodge that his life is safe . November 3: November 2
 Diem finally agrees to surrender, and a U.S.built Ml 13 armored personnel carrier is sent to pick up him and his brother in Cholon . Diem was captured by the U.N. State Department of State Department .
 Major Duong Huu Nghia and General Minh’s bodyguard, Captain Nguyen Van Nhung, murder Diem and Nhu on their way to Joint General Staff headquarters . Diem, Nhu and Nhung were killed at Minh's orders . Ngh
 At the White blouse, a meeting is interrupted with the news of Diem’s death . The meeting was interrupted by a meeting interrupted by the news .
 According to witnesses, President Kennedy’s face turns a ghostly white and he immediately leaves the room . Witnesses say the president's face turns ghostly white and he immediately left the room.
 Ambassador Lodge cables Kennedy predicting that the change of regime will shorten the war against the Viet Cong . Ambassador Lodge: "Change of regime" will shorten war against Viet Cong.
 The United States recognizes the new provisional government of South Vietnam . The U.S. recognizes it as a provisional government in Vietnam .
 Former vice president Nguyen Ngoc Tho, a Buddhist, becomes premier . Revolutionary Military Committee headed by General Duong Van Minh holds real power .
 1,000 of 15,000 American advisers in South Vietnam will be withdrawn beginning December 3 . November 15 Major General Charles Timmes announces in Saigon that the withdrawal will begin in December .
 In Cambodia, Prince Sihanouk, charging that the CIA is trying to oust him from power, declares an end to all U.S. military and economic aid . November 19 in Cambodia, Cambodia, declares a end to military aid .
 President Kennedy is assassinated in Dallas, Texas, November 22, 1963 . Vice President Lyndon Johnson assumes the presidency .
 President Johnson reaffirms the U.S. intention to continue military and economic support to South Vietnam . November 24 President Johnson decides that there will be no break from the Kennedy policies .
 He instructs Lodge, in Washington for consultations following Diem’s death, to communicate his intention to the South Vietnamese generals . Lodge is in Washington, D.C. for consultations after Diem's death .
 Ho Chi Minh Minh and senior staff make plans for the future . December 11, 1969, was the first time the U.S. Embassy in Vietnam was in the midst of the war .
 They are happy with Viet Cong progress during recent months, but they realize that there will be no rapid victory . The Viet Cong have been happy with recent progress in recent months but they are not optimistic about the future .
 Lyndon Johnson plans to continue the U.S. involvement in Vietnam, perhaps deploying as many as 100,000 combat troops in Vietnam . It is clear that Lyndon Johnson .
 Viet Minh veteran Bui Tin had been conducting covert inspections of the Hanoi leadership for five months . He says they are poorly organized, lacking leadership, and unprepared for a long campaign .
 The South Vietnamese junta orders a temporary halt to the strategic hamlet program . December 2 The South Vietnam junta ordered a temporary stop to the program . The junta also ordered a halt to a number of strategic hamlets .
 Senior United States representative in Long An Province Bari Young reports that three quarters of the strategic hamlets in his province have been destroyed by the Viet Cong, peasants, or a combination of both .
 2,800 government casualties and 2,900 Viet Cong losses in November, U.S. military says . U.N. military spokesman in Saigon reports attacks on hamlets, outposts, patrols in November have resulted in government casualties .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara arrives in Saigon to evaluate the new government’s war effort against the Viet Cong . McNamara visited Saigon on December 19, 1968 .
 His assessment lays the groundwork for decisions that will lead to an intensification of the covert war against North Vietnam, and increased American aid to the South . The U.S. will continue to support the South in Vietnam .
 Some 16,300 U.S. military personnel are now in Vietnam; South Vietnamese forces remain at 243,000 . Some of Vietnam's military personnel now serve in Vietnam .
 President Johnson receives a report prepared by Major General Victor H Krulak . President Johnson received a report from the Joint Chiefs of Staff . President was in office at the time of the incident .
 11 main Buddhist sects in South Vietnam announce they are forming an institute for secular affairs . The institute will coordinate Buddhist political and social activities . The 11 main sects conclude a four-day convention in Saigon .
 Buddhists oppose a government the Buddhists regard as insensitive to their goals . This is seen as a move to present a united front against a government seen as insensitive .
 U.S. military sources say bulk of arms and equipment come from Chinese and North Vietnamese ports via Cambodia and the Mekong River in South Vietnam .
 An offensive began on December 31 when 10 ARVN battalions set out to destroy a VC force of two battalions in the Ben Sue area some 40 miles west of Saigon . The offensive ends when Communist forces escape .
 U.S. military advisers with the ARVN openly describe the operation as a failure . The operation is a failure, according to the United States . United States military advisers describe it as a failed operation .
 Ground fire hits 15 U.S. planes supporting the action, and five American advisers are wounded . Five American advisers were wounded .
 Major General Duong Van Minh, chairman of the Military Revolutionary Council, issues decrees . The decrees centralize government and military power in himself and two other officers .
 The new regime will prove both unresponsive to the people of South Vietnam and politically unstable, says John Defterios . He says it will prove that it will be politically unstable and unresponsive .
 Harkins' optimistic views on the progress of the war have come under increasing criticism in Washington . Westmoreland will soon be replaced by the Secretary of War, who is generally accepted to take over .
 A joint U.S.-South Vietnamese report concludes that the government’s war against the VC in the Mekong Delta “cannot be won” unless there are major reforms in the region . The report says the government cannot win the war unless there is a need for
 The report recommends an end to both the forcible removal of peasants into strategic hamlets and the corruption and mismanagement that prevails in such villages . The report also recommends the end of both forcible . removal . of peasants and corruption in villages .
 Viet Cong guerrillas down a United States B-26 bomber, killing two American flyers . Two American flyers were killed in the crash .
 President Johnson approves Operations Plan 34A, clandestine operations to gather intelligence and conduct sabotage to destabilize the North Vietnamese regime . South Vietnamese forces supported by the U.S. were to conduct clandestine operations . Operation 34A was part of the plan to gather information and sabotage .
 Five U.S. helicopter crewmen are killed and three are wounded in a major ARVN attack on Communist bases in the Mekong Delta . Five crewmen were killed, three were wounded .
 The action is designed to show to all powers in the Far East, the U.S. commitment to Vietnam .
 Battalion-size Viet Cong force carries out first significant action on Ca Mau Peninsula in two months . Attacks on Nam Can, isolated district capital of Nam Can . First significant action in Ca Mau peninsula for two months since April .
 General Nguyen Khanh deposes General Minh in a bloodless coup and seizes control of the government in Saigon . A junta headed by General Khanh, 37, heads the 37-year-old commander of the ARVNI Corps .
 General Minh is placed under house arrest and the figurehead premier, Nguyen Ngoc Tho, is arrested and incarcerated . The premier is placed in a state of arrest and put under house-arrest .
 Ambassador Lodge had known of Khanh’s plans, but dismissed them as just another rumor . Ambassador Lodge said Khanh's plans were just a rumor . Khanh was killed in 2007 .
 General Khanh assumes the chairmanship of the Military Revolutionary Council . He moves quickly to gain U.S. support for his regime . Khanh takes control of the military Revolutionary Council.
 Many ARVN officers turn against Khanh when he attempts to try rival Generals Tran Van Don and Le Van Kim on trumped-up charges . Khanh has been accused of trying to bring down rival generals on trump-based charges .
 One U.S. soldier is killed and five are injured by a bomb blast in Saigon . Five are injured in the blast, including one who was killed .
 President Johnson says he has General Khanh’s pledge to increase the war effort against the Viet Cong . In turn, Johnson pledges full U.S. support for the new regime .
 Johnson also says he is prepared to consider any plan that truly ensures the neutralization of both North and South Vietnam . Johnson says he's prepared to take part in any plan to neutralize the two nations .
 A Viet Cong force raids the United States military compound at Kontum . One U.S. officer was killed .
 VC troops overrun an ARVN battalion headquarters at Hau My, killing 12 and wounding 20 ARVVN troops . VC forces ambush a battalion in Thua Thien Province, killing eight, wounding 20 .
 About 1,000 students demonstrate in Saigon for the return to power of General Minh . General Khanh had released from house arrest and persuaded to stay on as a figurehead . General Minnh had been released from under house arrest .
 Soviet premier Aleksey Kosygin arrives in Hanoi . He pledges support for North Vietnam in its effort toward unification of Vietnam and condemns American policy .
 A bomb explodes in a Saigon bar, killing five Vietnamese and wounding six U.S. servicemen and 20 civilians . Five Vietnamese and six Americans were killed in the blast .
 President Johnson orders the withdrawal of American dependents from South Vietnam . President Johnson ordered the withdrawal from Vietnam .
 General Khanh announces the formation of a new Vietnamese government with himself as premier . General Minh is named chief of state, a position without real authority . Khanh is the prime minister .
 A bomb explodes at the Saigon stadium, killing two Americans and injuring 20 . Two Americans were killed and 20 injured in the blast .
 United States authorities in Saigon denounce the indiscriminate bombings of the previous two days . U.S. authorities take steps to tighten security measures at all United States installations in the city .
 General Khanh visits ARVN troops in the field as part of the Vietnamese New Year observances . Khanh announces a 20 percent pay increase for all servicemen up to and including the rank of corporal .
 Walt Rostow writes a memo to Secretary of State Rusk in which he argues that the U.S. should seriously consider bombing Hanoi . Rostow: The United States should consider bombing the country .
 Rostow also recommends that President Johnson obtain a congressional resolution to give him authority to wage war . Rostow: War should be authorized to go to war with Congress .
 British prime minister Alec Douglas-Home reaffirms his nation’s support for the U.S. defense of South Vietnam . British PM attacks statements by Britons urging that the United States withdraw from Vietnam .
 The recent round of Communist terrorist operations continues with a bomb explosion in a movie theater for U.S. personnel in Saigon, killing three Americans and wounding 50 . Three Americans were killed and 50 wounded in the blast .
 United States officials announce that the VC are evidently conducting a terrorist campaign to force a face-losing evacuation of army and diplomatic dependents . U.S. officials say that VC are clearly conducting a terror campaign .
 CIA memo concludes that South Vietnam is making little progress in its war against the Communists . CIA memo: South Vietnam makes little progress against Communists . Memo was sent to secretaries of defense, state, and other top officials .
 The VC shoot down two VNAF planes and one U.S. pilot is killed . One of the planes was shot down by the VC . One U.N. pilot was killed in the attack .
 Prince Sihanouk proposes that the United States, Thailand, South Vietnam and Cambodia sign an agreement to “recognize’t Cambodia’s neutrality and territorial integrity . The agreement would be signed by the U.S., Thailand and South Vietnam .
 Viet Cong guerrillas ambush an ARVN convoy in the Saigon area, killing six soldiers and wounding nine . Six soldiers were killed and nine wounded in the ambush . The ambush was the first of its kind in the area .
 ARVN troops launch attacks on various Viet Cong positions near the border of Cambodia and South Vietnam . ARNN troops have been fighting against the Viet Cong in the past .
 TASS demands withdrawal of U.S. military aid and halt to ‘interference’ in South Vietnam’s affairs . Soviet Union will not stand idly by if the United States extends the war to North Vietnam, TASS says .
 Despite a five to one advantage in manpower an ARVN force fails to defeat a VC battalion near Long Dinh . ARVVN forces fail to defeat VC battalion despite a five-to-one superiority in manpower .
 General Khanh dismisses three of his four corps commanders and five of his nine division commanders . Khanh is so angry that he dismisses 3 of his 4 corps commanders .
 Rusk makes it clear that the U.S. rejects any political settlement that involves American withdrawal . Rusk maintains that withdrawal would leave South Vietnam exposed to a Communist takeover .
 The purpose of these missions, which are code-named DeSoto, is to gather intelligence about North Vietnamese coastal defense installations .
 Chronology 61 chronology of war against North Vietnam . Includes blockading of Haiphong harbor and blockades of North Vietnamese railways . President of Vietnam in 1964 . William Bundy .
 Bundy points out that such actions will require some form of legislative endorsement short of a declaration of war . Bundy recommends that the president obtain a congressional resolution . Bundy: Such actions would require a congressional endorsement, short of war, and he recommends that .
 General Khanh charges that the French are plotting to assassinate him and impose a neutralist settlement . Khanh says he is being held hostage by the French . He says they are planning to kill him and establish a neutralism .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff submits a memo entitled “Removal of Restrictions for Air and Ground Cross Border Operations,” requesting the authority to conduct operations in Laos to eliminate it as a Communist sanctuary . Laos is considered a communist sanctuary .
 Two Vietnamese are killed and 10 injured by a grenade tossed into a crowded marketplace in Due Ton . Two Vietnamese were killed and ten injured in the attack .
 Secretary General U Thant says he sees no effective role for the United Nations in Vietnam conflict . U.N. secretary general U. Thant: "No effective role" for the UN in the Vietnam conflict is needed .
 Americans in Vietnam report growing sentiment in the country for neutrality . The United States advises President Khanh not to sever relations with France . France reportedly behind the neutralist movement .
 In a move apparently made to encourage the French, the VC release four French citizens they have held prisoner . The VC release them in a bid to encourage them to return French citizens .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff orders a U.S. Air Force air commando training advisory team to Thailand to train Lao pilots in counterinsurgency tactics . This had been proposed in December 1963 and the plan was approved by Thailand’s government in February 1964 .
 General Khanh sets forth a comprehensive reform program to rebuild South Vietnam’s political and administrative structures and raise the standard of living . In a 15-page policy paper, he sets forth plans to rebuild the country's political, administrative structures .
 President Johnson says the U.S. will move armed forces to and from South Vietnam depending on the need . Johnson says no decision has been made on removing United States dependents from Vietnam .
 Defense Secretary McNamara and General Maxwell Taylor arrive in Vietnam on a fact-finding mission . McNamara is briefed by General Nguyen Khanh and Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge .
 General Nguyen Khanh takes McNamara and Taylor on a tour of the countryside to demonstrate U.S. commitment to his regime . General Khanhh takes them on tour of his country .
 One U.S. helicopter accompanying the group crashes, killing two United States airmen . One United States helicopter also crashes; two airmen killed in crash .
 The South Vietnamese government agrees to the four-power talks proposed by Cambodia to guarantee the latter’s neutrality . The talks will take place in the South Vietnamese capital's capital, Hoang .
 In separate actions, a United States helicopter and a spotter plane are downed and six Americans are killed . Six Americans were killed in separate actions .
 General Phoumi Nosavan, the Laotian rightist leader, and General Nguyen Khanh of South Vietnam agree to allow South Vietnamese troops to enter Laos in “hot pursuit” of Communist forces .
 McNamara sends memorandum to President Johnson outlining the findings of his recent trip to South Vietnam . McNamara sent memo to Johnson outlining findings of McNamara's recent trip .
 The second program, called “Graduated Overt Military Pressure,” is to be readied for initiation on 30 days’ notice . The long-range “program of graduated military pressure” includes air attacks against military and possibly industrial targets in North Vietnam .
 Operation Farm Gate will be reinforced by three squadrons of U.S. Air Force B-57 jet bombers flown in from Japan . The South Vietnamese air force and the ongoing Operation Farm gate .
 President Johnson presides over a crucial session of the National Security Council at which Secretary of Defense McNamara and General Maxwell Taylor present a full review of the situation in Vietnam .
 McNamara says conditions in South Vietnam have deteriorated since his last visit . McNamara: 40 percent of the countryside is now under Viet Cong control or influence .
 He reiterates the recommendations he had made in the previous day’s memorandum .
 South Vietnamese ground and air forces attack the Cambodian village of Chantrea . South Vietnamese air and ground forces attacked the village in Cambodia in April .
 U.S. observer plane is downed during World War II . United States military advisers participate in the operation .
 U.S. and South Vietnamese governments will apologize to Cambodia for the raids, but Sihanouk demands reparations . Cambodia's government will apologize for the raid, but Cambodia's president says reparations must be made .
 The talks between Cambodia and South Vietnam collapse over border violations . The South Vietnamese delegation departs . Cambodia and Vietnam have been at odds for years over border disputes .
 The ARVN claims two major victories in Kien Phong and Hau Nghia Provinces, with high casualties for the VC, but a United States pilot is killed while supporting the action . U.S. pilot was killed in the battle .
 Sihanouk continues to force his demands for reparations and apologies from the U.S. for the raid on Chantrea . He is demanding a full-scale conference in Geneva in Geneva .
 France intervenes and persuades Sihanouk to soften his demands . Cambodia continues to deny that Cambodia provides sanctuaries for the Viet Cong . France persuades Cambodia to soften its demands .
 United States Army and Vietnamese air force helicopters are called in to rescue South Vietnamese soldiers from Ap Giao Hiep, an outpost surrounded by the Viet Cong . U.S. helicopters rescue soldiers from the outpost .
 Unidentified U.S. official in Saigon announces that the ‘momentum’ of the Viet Cong has been checked . Unidentified United States official: “Momentum' of Viet Cong checked.”
 Hanoi begins sending regular army troops into South Vietnam in late 1963 . The decision was made following up on a decision made by the leadership of the Vietnamese government in late 1964 .
 A large number of engineer construction battalions are deployed to improve the Ho Chi Minh Trail network in preparation for the movement south of main force PAVN units to join the fight with the Viet Cong .
 Combat units undergo special training and political indoctrination in preparation for their departure for the south . While the road network is being improved, combat units are undergoing special training .
 Former vice president Richard Nixon visits Vietnam and issues a series of statements sharply criticizing Johnson administration policies for “compromise and improvisations” Nixon also promises to make the situation an issue in the forthcoming U.S. presidential campaign .
 In fighting at the Phuoc Tan outpost, six U.S. advisers are wounded and 12 ARVN are killed . Six United States advisers were wounded . 12 ARVs were killed .
 A draft law authorizes conscription into the Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps . The paramilitary forces bear the brunt of the fight against the Viet Cong . Both forces have suffered a lack of volunteers and a rise in desertions .
 50 ARVN soldiers and four U.S. advisers are killed in four days of major fighting in the Mekong Delta . 50 ARVs and four American advisers were killed in the fighting .
 The Ministerial Council of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization holds its 10th annual meeting in Manila . The meeting is being held in the Philippines .
 The United States Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam will be combined with the Military Assistance Command Vietnam . The move will reduce duplication of effort and make more efficient use of U.S service personnel .
 This contingency plan is drawn up in response to President Johnson’s decisions and orders at the March 17 National Security Council meeting . The contingency plan was drawn up by the president's decision to withdraw from the country .
 In Saigon, terrorists toss a bomb into a United States bus and injure two U.S. soldiers . Two Americans were injured in the bombing .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk, William Bundy, and General Earle Wheeler, army chief of staff, visit Saigon . They review the latest U.S. plans for covert actions against North Vietnam with Ambassador Eodge .
 Souvanna Phouma goes to the Plain of Jars in the north of Laos to confer with leaders of opposing factions in an effort to demilitarize Laos .
 The talks fail, however, and Phouma returns to Vientiane and announces his intention to resign . The talks failed, and he announces his resignation .
 On the 19th several generals attempt a coup, but with the support of the United States ambassador, Phouma regains control of a coalition government . The coup is the first of its kind in the country .
 Johnson administration views Phouma as the only hope for some kind of moderate and stable government . Communist Pathet Lao reject his coalition and go on the offensive .
 Viet Cong guerrillas strike in four provinces, one place within 14 miles of Saigon, but South Vietnam forces halt their advance . South Vietnamese forces halt the advance in one place near Saigon .
 United States officials praise this as one of the most successful operations of the war . Many U.S. military officials still believe that the ARVN are combat ineffective and will not be victorious in the long run .
 Republican leaders of the Senate, Everett Dirksen and Charles Halleck, hold a joint news conference in Washington . They charge that the Johnson administration is concealing the extent of U.S. involvement in the war .
 The air force officer was part of Operation Farm Gate, which had begun in February 1962 . He was one of the air force officers involved in Operation Farm gate .
 President Johnson summons congressional leaders to the White House for briefings by Defense Secretary McNamara and CIA director John McCone to convince them that progress is being made in the war against the Viet Cong .
 In a clash with the Viet Cong in Trung Tap, one American is killed and three are wounded . One American died and three were wounded in the clash .
 In France, Premier Georges Pompidou reemphasizes his country’s desire to see Vietnam neutralized . He says this will require that the United States deal with Communist China .
 The Oregon senator has been using this verbiage in public comments about the war . He has used it to refer to the Iraq War, which began in 2003 .
 Westmoreland will eventually become fixated on attrition warfare based on the assumption that the Communists can not sustain large-unit fighting because they lack sufficient logistical capabilities . The U.S. will eventually be fixated by his World War II and Korean experiences .
 Secretary of State Rusk flies to Ottawa, Canada, to make secret arrangements with J Blair Seaborn, Canada’s new representative on the International Control Commission . Rusk wants him to convey the offer of United States economic aid to Premier Pham Van Dong if the North Vietnamese
 Viet Cong guerrillas penetrate Long An, capture 74 Viet Cong defectors; other VC forces attack Tan An and kill six women and five children . VC forces kill 74 defectors in Long An and capture 74 others .
 The USNS Card, an escort carrier being used as an aircraft and helicopter ferry, sinks at its dock in Saigon . It was presumably from an explosive charge assumed to have been placed by Viet Cong terrorists . The ship was used as a ferry and aircraft carrier .
 A terrorist throws a bomb into the crowd viewing the USNS Card, sunk at its dock, and eight U.S. servicemen are wounded . Eight United States servicemen were wounded . A terrorist threw a bomb at the crowd .
 ARVN Rangers wiped out by a Viet Cong attack 25 miles northwest of Saigon . One hundred ARVn Rangers were wiped out in the attack, 25 miles from Saigon.
 General Khanh sensing a decline in his fortunes and a lack of support for his efforts, tells Ambassador Lodge that he wants to declare full-scale war on North Vietnam . Khanh: "I want to declare war against North Vietnam. I want to go to war"
 Lodge does not inform him that the U.S. had already developed its own plan to bomb the North . Lodge doesn't mention that the United States had also developed plans to bomb North Korea . Lodge: "The United States has no intention of bombing the North"
 The United States announces it is freezing all assets of North Vietnam . The U.S. is barring any further financial and commercial transactions between the two countries . North Vietnam and North Vietnam have been involved in a financial dispute .
 Ten U.S. servicemen are among 16 killed when a USAF transport plane crashes at Tan Hiep . Ten United States servicemen were killed when the plane crashed .
 General Khanh says that his country would appreciate aid from other countries in addition to the U.S. He says that he would like to see other countries aid from the United States .
 Cambodian forces destroy an ARVN armored personnel carrier that strays into Cambodia in pursuit of VC troops . The vehicle was captured by the Cambodian government in Cambodia's capital, Cambodia .
 Khanh immediately apologizes, but says the real problem is that Cambodia allowed the Viet Cong to take refuge there in the first place . Khanh: "The real problem" is that the government allowed them to be taken refuge there .
 On May 9, a clash between Cambodians and ARVN troops leaves seven Cambodians dead . Seven Cambodians were killed in the clash between the two sides of the border .
 Cambodian students in Phnom Penh demonstrate, demanding the withdrawal of all U.S. military personnel in their country . Students demonstrate, calling for withdrawal of American troops .
 It is alleged that Cambodian aircraft strafed ARVN troops searching for Viet Cong . It is then alleged that Cambodia's planes strafed the troops . It was alleged that the planes were strafed .
 The Cambodian government asks that the United Nations send a mission to Cambodia to disprove charges it shelters Viet Cong . Cambodia's government asks the U.N. send a team to prove that it shelters the Viet Cong. The mission would disprove the charges .
 A terrorist is captured trying to place an explosive charge under a Saigon bridge over which Defense Secretary McNamara’s car is to pass on May 12 . The bomb was detonated under the bridge over the bridge . McNamara's car was to pass over the Saigon Bridge over which
 Defense Secretary McNamara and General Maxwell Taylor visit Vietnam for their fifth fact-finding mission . McNamara, Taylor visited Vietnam on their fifth mission .
 60 U.S. Navy dive bombers are being sent to Vietnam . 40 refurbished, propeller-driven B-26 bombers being readied for Vietnam .
 Defense Secretary McNamara presents a plan to President Johnson calling for increased military aid to South Vietnam . McNamara's plan was rejected by the White House, but it was eventually accepted .
 A Viet Cong battalion wipes out an ARVN relief force, 20 miles north of Saigon, killing 54 ARVs . 54 ARNN were killed and 50 wounded in the attack .
 U.S. military adviser criticizes ARVN combat performance . The next day, a United States military adviser criticized the performance of the NVA .
 President Khanh signs decree that abolishes restrictions imposed by Diem regime on Buddhists . Buddhists granted same rights as Catholics . The decree was signed by the former president of Vietnam .
 Defense Secretary McNamara reports to the National Security Council on the situation in Vietnam . President Johnson informs congressional leaders attending the session that he will probably seek more aid for South Vietnam .
 Governor Rockefeller accepts President Johnson’s offer to brief all Republican candidates for the presidency . Rockefeller: Americans are not getting the full story of the situation .
 Senator Goldwater openly charges that U.S. pilots are dying because of obsolescent planes . Goldwater: The planes are obsolescent and dangerous to pilots .
 The Communist Pathet Lao launch an offensive on the Plain of Jars . The offensive threatens to collapse the pro-American government of Premier Souvanna Phouma .
 President Johnson alerts troops in Okinawa and orders the Seventh Fleet in the South China Sea to prepare for possible military action . When word of this situation reaches Washington, President Johnson alert troops .
 Officials begin drawing up a resolution to get Congress to declare that Laos' independence and integrity of Laos are vital to U.S. interests . The resolution could be presented to Congress .
 Secretary of State Rusk visits Saigon primarily to get Ambassador Lodge’s support for the ‘retaliatory’ actions being contemplated by the Johnson administration . Secretary Rusk visited Saigon to meet with Ambassador Lodge to discuss the "retaliation"
 Lodge counsels more reliance on South Vietnamese forces and increased efforts to apply the “carrot” of inducements to North Vietnam before applying the ‘stick’ of heavy bombing .
 President Johnson asks for an additional $125,000,000 for economic and military aid to Vietnam . President Johnson in a special message to Congress, asks for $125K in additional aid to the country .
 The United States initiates low-altitude reconnaissance flights over southern Laos and northern Laos by United States Navy and United States Air Force jets . These flights are code-named Yankee Team .
 The United States releases bomb fuses and more T-28s to the Laotian Air Force . At the same time, the U.S. releases bombs and more bombs . The Laotan Air Force has been deployed to the country in recent years .
 Souvanna Phouma has been consulted about the flights and has given his approval . The flights will be on the way from London to New York .
 France proposes reconvening a 14-nation conference on Laos in Geneva . The proposal is rejected by the United States and Great Britain, but accepted by the Soviet Union, Poland, Cambodia, India, and Communist China .
 UN Security Council meets to consider Cambodia's charge that the U.S. directs South Vietnam’s raids into Cambodia . Cambodia's claim that the United States directs South Vietnamese raids . Cambodia says it has been accused of directing the raids in Cambodia .
 U.S. ambassador Adlai Stevenson calls for clear marking of the border and the stationing of some force to police the border . Stevenson: The border should be marked and some force is needed to police it .
 Secretary of State Rusk explicitly accuses North Vietnam of initiating and directing the aggression in South Vietnam . Rusk: "North Vietnam initiated and directed the aggression"
 ARVN forces conclude a month-long campaign in the Do Xa region by overrunning the headquarters of General Don . General Don, a top Viet Cong leader, is a top leader in the region . ARVn forces conclude the campaign by overtaking General Don's headquarters .
 Saigon claims this operation will set back the Viet Cong’s efforts for many months . Don escapes capture but Saigon says it will be a success for the next few months .
 Thailand mobilizes its border provinces against incursions by the Pathet Lao . Thailand agrees to the use of its bases by the United States Air Force for reconnaissance, search and rescue .
 By the end of the year, some 75 U.S. aircraft will be based in Thailand to assist in operations against the Pathet Lao .
 Assistant Secretary of State William Bundy draws up a 30-day program that culminates in full-scale bombing of North Vietnam . Bundy: 30 days of bombing will take place in 30 days . Bundy says the bombing will be a deterrent to North Vietnam's enemies .
 He submits the plan as a draft presidential memorandum for consideration by an executive committee of the National Security Council . The plan is a formal draft presidential memo for consideration .
 Senator Barry Goldwater gives an interview in which he proposes the use of low-yield atomic bombs to defoliate forests . He proposes the bombing of bridges, roads, and railroad lines that bring supplies from Communist China .
 Goldwater will never be able to shake the image of an extremist, which will work heavily against him when he runs against Lyndon Johnson .
 William Bundy drafts a joint congressional resolution that would give the president authority to take whatever steps he deems necessary in Vietnam . Bundy drafts the resolution . Bundy drafted the resolution in response to the Vietnam crisis . Bundy's resolution would allow the president to take any steps he deemed necessary .
 France splits from the United States and Great Britain’s position in the UN Security Council . France urges the council to pass a resolution “deploring” the violations of the Cambodia-South Vietnam border .
 Sihanouk says he welcomes UN inquiry teams or UN troops to police the disputed border with South Vietnam . The border is disputed by both sides of the border in the region .
 President Khanh announces that South Vietnam forces will “liberate” North Vietnam after defeating the Communists in the south . North Vietnam was defeated by the South Vietnamese army in 1968 .
 Poland proposes a new Laos conference that would not include discussions of Vietnam . Poland proposes to hold the talks in Laos without discussions of the country's involvement in Vietnam .
 VC troops overrun Nho Dung and kidnap the hamlet chief; at Quang Ngai, VC snipers kill two ARVN soldiers . VC troops take over N Ho Dung, kidnap the chief of the hamlets .
 Top U.S. officials gather for two-day strategy session on Vietnam at Admiral Harry Felt’s Pacific Command Headquarters in Honolulu .
 Lodge and Westmoreland fly to Hawaii with Secretary of State Rusk . Secretary Rusk stopped off in Saigon on his way back from attending the funeral of Indian prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru .
 McNamara, William Bundy, John McCone of the CIA, and others. They are joined by McNamara and William Bundy .
 Much of the discussion focuses on the projected air campaign against North Vietnam . The development of a list of 94 targets has been developed . The list includes 94 targets .
 Lodge argues for beginning the bombing soon, reflecting his nervousness over the shakiness of the Saigon regime . Lodge argues that the bombing should begin soon . Lodge says the bombing would be the first to begin in Vietnam .
 President Lyndon Johnson reasserts U.S. commitment to defend Vietnam, but says he knows of no plans to extend the war into North Vietnam . Johnson: "No plans" to extend war into Vietnam .
 The United States and Cambodia agree on a proposal to form a threeparty commission to visit the Cambodian border within 45 days to resolve the ongoing crisis between Cambodia and South Vietnam . The U.S. and Cambodia agreed to form the proposal to visit Cambodia's border .
 Rusk, McNamara, and the other officials return to Washington and report to President Johnson on the Honolulu conference . Rusk and McNamara were in Honolulu for the conference .
 Viet Cong guerrillas enter strategic hamlet of Khanh Hoi-Dong Hung and kidnap 47 men . The men were kidnapped by the Viet Cong in the strategic village .
 He orders the army to augment stocks at Korat, Thailand, near the Laotian border, to support potential combat operations by a U.S. Army infantry brigade . He orders “first priority” at the Okinawa Forward Depot to stocking equipment that would be required for another
 The UN Security Council approves the compromise plan for a commission to investigate the situation on the Cambodian-Vietnamese border . On lune 6 will name Brazil, the Ivory Coast, and Morocco to form the commission .
 Two U.S. Navy jets flying low-altitude target reconnaissance missions over Laos are shot down by Pathet Lao ground fire . The planes were part of Operation Yankee Team in Laos .
 Washington immediately orders armed jet fighters to escort the reconnaissance flights . By June 9 escort jets are attacking Pathet Lao gun positions . Washington orders armed jets to attack PathetLao gun sites .
 The downing of the two planes is made public, but the subsequent strikes by the escort jets are not . The subsequent strikes are also not made public . The two planes were downed by the escorts .
 Some 35,000 Roman Catholic Vietnamese demonstrate in Saigon against what they allege is government favoritism toward Buddhists . They allege that the government favorsitism toward them is against them .
 Australian training teams with ARVN forces exchange fire with Viet Cong guerrillas on the same day that the Australian government sends six transport planes and more army instructors as combat advisers . The Australian government is sending more combat advisers to the country .
 The government in Canberra also calls for all SEATO members to increase their support for South Vietnam . The government calls for the increase in support for the country .
 CIA concludes that Cambodia was probably the only nation in the area that would immediately fall . The CIA says Cambodia is probably the most likely nation to fall .
 CIA analysts do not deny that the loss of South Vietnam and Laos “would be profoundly damaging to the United States position in the Far East” The memo concludes that the U.S. would have enough power to deter China and North Vietnam from further aggression .
 Souvanna Phouma threatens to resign if the flights do not stop . The Laos government is embarrassed by the disclosure of U.S. participation in air operations there .
 Thai pilots in planes with Laotian air force markings bomb the Pathet Lao headquarters at Khang Khay, destroying the Chinese mission . One civilian was killed in the attack .
 ARVN troops attack a Communist convoy from Laos and kill 27 guerrillas . ARVn troops attack the Communist convoy . The ambush was the first of its kind in Laos .
 In Paris, de Gaulle calls for an end to all foreign intervention in South Vietnam . De Gaulle: "It's time to stop foreign intervention" in Vietnam .
 West German chancellor Ludwig Erhard pledges more aid to South Vietnam . In Berlin, West German president promised more aid for South Vietnam.
 Viet Cong mines derail three trains, blow up two trucks, and kill six Vietnamese . Six Vietnamese die in the blast, including six of the mines .
 General Westmoreland travels to Malaysia to study the methods used by the British to defeat Communist guerrillas there . He studies the methods of defeating the Communist rebels in Malaysia .
 Secretary of State Rusk emphasizes the U.S. determination to support its Southeast Asian allies . Rusk spoke at Williams College, Williams College . He emphasizes the United States' determination to help Southeast Asia .
 A South Vietnamese river patrol is ambushed by Viet Cong but manages to kill 23 guerrillas in the confrontation . The patrol is killed by the Viet Cong in a confrontation with the South Vietnamese government .
 The United States military allows its own pilots operating out of Thailand to hit “targets of opportunity” in Laos . The U.S. military allows it to hit targets in Laos with its own planes .
 President Johnson postpones a decision on a resolution that William Bundy had been preparing for submission to Congress asking for authority to wage war . The resolution was to be submitted to Congress .
 Johnson and aides later deny that this decision was based on politics . Johnson and his aides later denied that this . decision was made based on political reasons .
 Ambassador Lodge may have to be replaced in Vietnam because of his possible role as a Republican presidential candidate . Attorney General Robert Kennedy might be named to succeed Lodge .
 A top U.S. military adviser departing Vietnam after three years reports that the Viet Cong have greatly improved as a military force . An unnamed top United States military adviser .
 Vietnam War Almanac 1964 also claims that over 90 percent of the VC’s weapons have been captured from South Vietnamese forces armed by U.S. forces .
 ARVN forces beat back a Viet Cong attack on Due Hoa, killing 19 but taking 51 casualties of their own . ARVn forces kill 19 but take 51 casualties from their own in the attack .
 When Seaborn returns to Saigon, he sends two long reports to the U.S. State Department . He sends them to the United States State Department, which he later dies in Vietnam .
 Secretary of State Rusk: U.S. commitment to security of Southeast Asia is “unlimited” and comparable to the American commitment to West Berlin . The United States demands full compliance with the Geneva Accords in South Vietnam and Laos .
 In South Vietnam, terrorists blow up four cars of a passenger train and kill 20 South Vietnamese . Terrorist attack kills 20 people in South Vietnam . Terrorists blow up train cars in Vietnam .
 General Paul Harkins is succeeded as head of USMACV by his deputy, Lieutenant General William C Westmoreland, who is subsequently promoted to general . Harkin is succeeded by Lieutenant General Westmoreand, who was promoted to a general .
 President Johnson announces that Henry Cabot Lodge has resigned as ambassador to South Vietnam . General Maxwell Taylor will replace Lodge as ambassador .
 Johnson makes a point of insisting that this change will in no way affect the U.S. commitment to South Vietnam . Johnson: Change will not affect the United States commitment .
 General Westmoreland is to become the “executive agent” to supervise the pacification programs in three provinces around Saigon . The first stage of a plan to coordinate the entire United States military and civilian program in South Vietnam .
 Some Republicans back Lodge's claim that Vietnam should not be an issue in the campaign . Others try to link his resignation as ambassador to a disagreement with the Johnson administration’s policies .
 Viet Cong capture civil guard platoon without firing a shot in Quang Tri Province . Civil guard platoon captured by the Viet Cong in the province of Quang tri Province .
 South Vietnamese troops attack a Viet Cong training center and kill 50 guerrilla recruits . In Quang Ngai Province, South Vietnamese forces kill 50 guerrillas . South Vietnam troops attack the training center .
 Bomb explodes in airport hangar near where General Westmoreland was addressing servicemen returning to the U.S. Two Americans are injured in the blast; two Americans were injured . General Westmanger is unharmed .
 ARVN Rangers trap a Viet Cong battalion near Long Hoi and inflict heavy casualties . ARVn Rangers trap the Viet Cong in a trap . The trap is believed to have been a success in Vietnam .
 Four Americans are killed when their helicopter crashes during a mission in the Mekong Delta . Four Americans were killed in the crash during the mission .
 New Zealand army engineers arrive in Saigon as a token of that country’s support for South Vietnam .
 A United States Army helicopter is downed and its pilot and gunner are killed . A Viet Cong sniper kills a United States helicopter pilot and injures three other Americans who have landed to pick up a wounded serviceman . A U.S. helicopter pilot is killed and his gunner is
 U.S. helicopters are now flying 1,300-1,400 hours a week, a spokesman says . United States helicopters are flying more than 1,000 hours per week, he says .
 The VC ambush a 36-truck ARVN ammo convoy in the Pleiku-Qui Nhon area, but the convoy is saved when two U.S. helicopters arrive and drive off the attackers . 29 South Vietnamese troops are killed and 24 wounded .
 In Saigon, terrorists throw a bomb at a United States officers’ billet and two Americans are killed . Two Americans were killed in Saigon in the bombing .
 General Harold K Johnson replaces General Earle Wheeler as chief of staff, U.S. Army . Johnson replaces Wheeler as Chief of Staff, United States Army . General Johnson will take over from Wheeler as Army chief of Staff .
 Wheeler becomes the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . He replaces Maxwell Taylor, who will become the U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam . Wheeler will replace Taylor as the chairman .
 Viet Cong overrun a South Vietnamese camp at Kontum and kill 44 ARVN soldiers, wounding 22, including three U.S. advisers . The Viet Cong also kill 22 soldiers, including 3 United States advisers .
 In central Vietnam, Viet Cong wipe out defenders of three strategic hamlets . Viet Cong wiped out the defenders of the defenders in central Vietnam . The Vietnamese army is fighting to regain control of the country's capital .
 VC forces attack a United States Special Forces training camp at Polei Krong, seize the camp’s arms and ammunition . 41 South Vietnamese dead and two Americans wounded . Two Americans wounded in the attack .
 Captain Roger C Donlon will later be awarded the Medal of Honor for valor during this battle . Captain Donlon was the first such award for the war in Vietnam .
 General Maxwell Taylor, the new U.S. ambassador, arrives in Saigon . He will be the first American ambassador to arrive in Vietnam . He was appointed by President Nixon in 1961 .
 As a military man with considerable experience, he is looked upon by everyone as the ideal man to coordinate and invigorate the war effort in Vietnam .
 A bomb is thrown at the U.S. embassy and two grenades explode elsewhere in Saigon . No one is injured and only slight damage is caused . Two grenades explode in the explosion .
 UN secretary-general U Thant proposes that the Geneva conference that ended in 1954 be reconvened to negotiate peace in Vietnam . UN Secretary-General U. Thant: Geneva conference should reconvene for peace talks .
 President Johnson decrees that a Vietnam service medal be awarded to Americans serving in the conflict . There has been no official declaration of war, but there has been a Vietnam war declaration .
 Communist China pledges to help defend North Vietnam if U.S. forces attack on the ground . Communist China says it will help defend the country if it is attacked by the United States .
 At least 1,000 Viet Cong troops twice attack the South Vietnamese outpost at Chong Thien and then ambush the relief force . In what is regarded as the largest battle of the war to date, the battle is believed to be the largest of all .
 The Vietnamese air force commander claims he has 30 pilots trained and ready to fly jet fighter-bombers against North Vietnam . Nguyen Cao Ky claims to have 30 Vietnamese pilots trained to fly jets against the North .
 16 ARVN soldiers and three U.S. soldiers killed in ambush 40 miles south of Saigon . Viet Cong forces ambush a convoy 40 miles from Saigon, killing 16 soldiers and 3 US soldiers .
 United States military intelligence publicly charges that North Vietnamese regular army officers command and fight in so-called Viet Cong forces in the northern provinces . U.S. military intelligence charges that the North Vietnamese army officers are involved in the Viet Congs .
 Only the day before, General Khanh had referred to the “invasion” of South Vietnam by North Vietnamese Army forces . Only the same day before the invasion of Vietnam had been declared .
 Senator Barry Goldwater is chosen as the Republican nominee for president at the Republican National Convention in San Francisco . Goldwater was chosen by the Republican Party in 1964 .
 Democrats portray him as a trigger-happy warmonger . He will go to great trouble during his subsequent campaign to explain that he never meant to advocate using atomic weapons .
 There have been 15 other clashes between South Vietnamese and Communist forces throughout South Vietnam in the past two days, indicative of the stepped-up activity by the Viet Cong .
 General Khanh started a “March North” campaign of military slogans and oratory at a ‘unification rally’ in Saigon . The campaign calls for an expansion of the war to North Vietnam .
 This breaks a promise he had made to Ambassador Lodge and Secretary Rusk in May meeting, to consult with Washington before publicly announcing any attention of declaring war on the North .
 UN team that has been inspecting the Cambodian-South Vietnamese border returns . UN team urges prompt action by the Security Council to avoid further conflict .
 Cambodia continues to accuse South Vietnam of new acts of aggression, and on the 29th, Cambodia charges that the U.S. and South Vietnam used chemical weapons, killing 76 Cambodians in six villages .
 The United States promptly denies any use of chemical weapons . South Vietnam claims that it is Viet Cong troops masquerading as ARVN forces that have been attacking Cambodian border villages .
 Viet Cong forces overrun Cai Be, the capital of Dinh Tuong Province, killing 11 South Vietnamese militiamen, 10 women, and 30 children . 11 women, 10 children, 11 men, 10 men and 30 women killed in the attack .
 Viet Cong ambush a convoy in Chuong Thien Province and kill 26 ARVN and wound about 100 . 26 ARVs were killed and about 100 wounded in the ambush . About 100 were wounded .
 Air Vice-Marshal Nguyen Cao Ky reveals that “combat teams” have been sent on sabotage missions into North Vietnam . South Vietnamese pilots are being trained for possible large-scale attacks .
 He further states that he personally flew a plane over North Vietnam on one such mission . He also says he flew over Vietnam on another mission .
 U.S. officials refuse to confirm Ky’s statements but concede that some flights had been made in previous years . United States officials refused to confirm the statements .
 President Charles de Gaulle proposes an end to the hostilities in Vietnam and Laos by agreeing to leave the Indo-Chinese peninsula . The United States, France, the Soviet Union, and Communist China would leave the region .
 Ambassador Taylor meets with General Khanh to register U.S. disapproval of recent calls by Khanh and Ky to extend the war into North Vietnam . Ambassador Taylor met with Khanh, Ky to register United States disapproval of calls to extend war into Vietnam .
 Both meetings are reported to have been ‘heated’ but it is also reported that Khanh stood firmly against Taylor’s reprimands . Khanh argued that the war had entered a new phase because of the presence of North Vietnamese forces .
 Khanh offers to resign at the second meeting, but Taylor dissuades him . Khanh offered to resign after the meeting . Taylor says Khanh's resignation is "a matter of principle"
 President Johnson insists that U.S.-South Vietnamese relations are good . In a news conference in Washington on the 24th, President Johnson says that relations between the two countries are good in Vietnam .
 Such planning, he says, will placate Khanh and his generals, while gaining time needed to stabilize the Saigon government . Such planning is needed to placate the Khanh, while stabilizing the government, he adds .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff proposes air strikes in unmarked planes flown by non-American crews . The memo suggests air strikes against targets in North Vietnam, including the coastal bases for Hanoi’s torpedo boats .
 General Khanh and the top South Vietnamese military leaders hold secret talks at Dalat . Some of those present call for expanding the war into North Vietnam and Laos .
 The United States will send an additional 5,000 U.S. troops to Vietnam to complement about 16,000 already there . It is announced that the U.N. will send about 5,500 more troops .
 Military spokesmen and Washington officials insist that this does not represent any change in policy . New troops will only intensify present United States advisory efforts, they say .
 U.S. military estimates of Communist forces in South Vietnam to 28,000-34,000 regular Viet Cong troops and another 60,000 guerrillas . About 30 percent of units formed in the past eight months are made up of troops who have infiltrated from North Vietnam .
 South Vietnamese navy conducts commando raids along North Vietnamese coast . North Vietnamese navy conducted commando missions along North Vietnam coast .
 About midnight, six special ‘Swift’ PT boats used by the South Vietnamese for their covert raids, attack two islands in the Tonkin Gulf, Hon Me and Hon Ngu .
 Although unable to land any commandos, the boats fire on island installations . The boats fire at island installations, the attack is on the island .
 The Maddox will report sighting patrol boats in the Gulf but will be told that these were the Swifts returning from their undercover raid . The Swifts will be returning from an undercover raid on the Gulf Coast .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk admits differences between U.S. and South Vietnam on the issue of extending the war into North Vietnam . Rusk insists there is agreement on the general conduct of the war .
 Saigon charges that the attack in Dinh Tuong Province on July 20 was conducted by PAVN regulars led by Chinese Communist advisers . Saigon says the attack was carried out by Chinese forces .
 A bomb explodes in a Saigon bar, wounding five U.S. servicemen and 18 South Vietnamese . The blast is believed to have taken place in Saigon's Saigon .
 Thai pilots, flying United States T-28s on covert missions from their base in Laos, bomb and strafe North Vietnamese villages along the Laotian border . Thai pilots fly U.S. T-27s from their bases .
 United States crews interpret one North Vietnamese message as indicating that they are preparing for “military operations’s” The Maddox ‘s captain John Herrick assumes means some sort of retaliatory attack . United States crew interpret one of the messages as indicating they're preparing for
 Three North Vietnamese patrol boats chase the Maddox . The Maddox was chased by three patrol boats .
 Captain Herrick orders his crew to commence fir80 Vietnam War Almanac 1964 ing as the North Vietnamese boats come within 10,000 yards and he radios the U.S. aircraft carrier Ticonderoga for air support . About 1500 hours later he orders the crew to fire a shot
 The North Vietnamese boats each fire one torpedo at the Maddox, but two miss and the third fails to explode . The Maddox was attacked by the North Vietnamese in the early 1950s .
 United States gunfire hits one of the North Vietnamese boats, then three U.S. Crusader jets strafe them . The North Vietnamese boat was shot down by the United States . The incident occurred during the Vietnam War .
 Only one bullet hits the Maddox and there are no U.S. casualties . Within 20 minutes, one of the boats is sunk and two are crippled; only one bullet .
 Because of the time difference, President Johnson is informed of the incident on the morning of the 2nd . President Johnson was informed by President Johnson because of time difference .
 With a presidential campaign underway, he wants to appear firm yet restrained . He wants to be seen as a presidential candidate, but not a candidate .
 In his first use of the ‘hot line’ to Russia, he tells Khrushchev that he has no desire to extend the conflict . He rejects any reprisals against North Vietnam and rejects any . reprisials against North . Vietnam .
 Despite Johnson’s measured response, the U.S. military command takes several critical actions . The United States military command took several critical steps to respond .
 U.S. combat troops are placed on alert and additional fighter-bombers are sent to South Vietnam and Thailand . United States combat troops were put on alert in Vietnam .
 Constellation is ordered to the South China Sea to join the Ticonderoga . The carrier Constellation will be deployed in the region of the world's largest islands .
 Admiral Sharp orders a second destroyer, the C Turner Joy, to join the Maddox to “assert the right of freedom of the seas” The ships are instructed not to approach closer than 11 nautical miles to the North Vietnamese coast .
 South Vietnamese patrol boats conduct two more clandestine attacks under Oplan 34A against North Vietnamese radar installations at Cape Vinh Son and an installation at the Cua Ron estuary . The attacks were carried out under the plan .
 At 8:00 in the evening, the destroyers Maddox and C Turner Joy intercept radio messages from the North Vietnamese that give Captain Herrick of the Maddox “the impression” that their patrol boats are planning an attack .
 Herrick calls for air support from the Ticonderoga and eight Crusader jets soon appear overhead . Herrick called for air help from the military and eight Crusaders appear to fly overhead .
 In the darkness, neither the pilots nor the ship crews see any enemy craft, but at about 10 o’clock the sonar operators report torpedoes in the water . The sonar operator reports torpedoes .
 The United States destroyers maneuver to avoid the torpedoes and begin to fire at the North Vietnamese patrol boats . The U.S. destroyers move away from the attack and begin firing at the patrol boats.
 U.S. officers report sinking two and possibly three of the PT boats . When the action ends about two hours later, United States officers say sinking two or possibly three .
 After the incident, no American is sure of ever having seen any enemy boats nor any enemy gunfire . The incident occurred in the early 1940s .
 Admiral Sharp informs Admiral Sharp that the blips on the radar scope were apparently “freak weather effects” while the torpedo sonar signatures were probably due to an “over-eager” radar operator . Shortly thereafter, Admiral Sharp informed Admiral Sharp of the blip
 Because of the time difference, it is only 0920 hours in Washington when the Pentagon receives the report of a potential attack on the U.S. 1964 Chronology 81 destroyers were the first destroyers to be attacked .
 President Johnson is immediately informed and McNamara convenes with Joint Chiefs of Staff to discuss possibilities for retaliation . President Johnson was immediately informed by McNamara .
 McNamara, Dean Rusk, and McGeorge Bundy recommend to president that reprisal air strikes be ordered . Shortly thereafter, at a National Security Council meeting in the White House, McNamara and Rusk recommended reprisal strikes .
 Johnson is cautious at first, but at a foilow-on meeting in the afternoon, he gives the order to execute the reprisal raids . Johnson was cautious, but later gave the order .
 Admiral Sharp in Honolulu is still trying to get confirmation from the Maddox and C Turner Joy that an attack has taken place . Admiral Sharp is in Honolulu trying to obtain confirmation from Maddox .
 By 1723 hours, Admiral Sharp calls the Pentagon to say that he is satisfied that the attack has occurred . Admiral Sharp then calls Admiral Sharp to report the attack had occurred .
 By 1845 hours, President Johnson has met with 16 congressional leaders to inform them of the second unprovoked attack and that he has ordered reprisal attacks . Johnson met with the president to inform him of the attack .
 He also tells them he plans to ask for a congressional resolution to support his actions . He also says he will ask for support from Congress .
 By 2330 hours, McNamara is informed by Sharp that the initial wave of strike aircraft had launched from the Ticonderoga had launched at 2243 and is on its way to the targets .
 In the early morning hours, the retaliatory raids, code-named Pierce Arrow, commence when carrier aircraft from the U.S. Seventh Fleet attack the bases used by the torpedo boats .
 F-8 Crusaders, A-l Skyraiders, and A-4 Skyhawks fly 64 sorties against North Vietnamese coastal targets . F-2 Crusaders fly from the carriers Ticonderoga and Constellation .
 They destroy or damage 25 North Vietnamese PT boats (claimed by U.S. officials to be about one-half of the North Vietnamese navy) at bases at Hon Gai, Loc Chao, Phuc Loi, and Quang Khe . Destroy seven antiaircraft installations at Vin
 Lieutenant Everett Alvarez parachutes to safety, but breaks his back in the process and is taken prisoner by the North Vietnamese . Alvarez is one of the pilots who parachuted to safety .
 McNamara announces the results of the air strikes and describes the moves that are under way to reinforce U.S. forces in the Pacific area .
 Selected army and marine forces will be readied for movement . Movements include the transfer of an attack carrier group to the western Pacific .
 Opinion polls indicate 85 percent of Americans support President Johnson’s bombing decision . Opinion polls show 85 percent support the decision .
 Numerous newspaper editorials also come out in support of the president . The president is expected to be re-elected in November .
 North Vietnam and its Communist bloc allies condemn the U.S. retaliatory strikes . The United States retaliated strikes on North Vietnam, Vietnam's communist allies . North Vietnam's government has condemned the strikes .
 China warns that it will “not sit idly by” while the U.S. commits “deliberate aggression” against North Vietnam . China says it will not “sit idly” by while the United States commits aggression .
 America’s allies generally support the U.S. actions, but some qualify that support . America's allies generally supported the United States actions .
 France renews its call for an international conference to address the situation in Southeast Asia . The international conference is scheduled to take place in Indonesia and Malaysia .
 Soviet delegation condemns U.S. for its ‘acts of aggression” against North Vietnam . U.N. delegation condemns the United States for “acts of aggressiveness” in Vietnam .
 A resolution is passed asking both North and South Vietnam to participate in the Security Council debate . A resolution was passed by the U.N. Security Council asking both South and North Vietnam to take part .
 Defense Secretary McNamara and Secretary of State Rusk testify on behalf of proposed resolution in secret sessions of the Senate and House foreign relations committees . McNamara, Rusk testified in secret .
 Only Senators Wayne Morse and Ernest Gruening oppose the measure . When debate begins on the resolution, only Senators Morse and Gruening opposed it .
 Various rallies and peace vigils are held across the U.S. protesting the bombing raids . The bombing raids were the first of the World War II bombings .
 Republican presidential candidate Barry Goldwater says he supports President Johnson’s ordering of the retaliatory raids . Goldwater plans to make the whole question of Vietnam a campaign issue in his presidential bid .
 One U.S. bomber crashes and three are damaged during the United States military buildup in Thailand and South Vietnam . Three of the planes were damaged in the crash .
 Additional air power is being deployed to South Vietnam and Thailand, he says . However, he is instructed to point out that additional air power will be deployed .
 The North Vietnamese premier is furious and indicates that his country is prepared to fight if necessary . However, he also states that he wants to keep open communication channels with the United States .
 Despite initial support for the resolution, it will become increasingly controversial as Johnson uses it to enlarge U.S. commitment to the war in Vietnam . Johnson will use the resolution to enlarge United States commitment .
 President Vladimir Putin is trying to take advantage of heightened tensions in Russia . He reimposes censorship and announces other controls . Putin has been accused of trying to use the situation to gain power .
 He justifies these acts by declaring that South Vietnam is threatened by a large-scale Communist attack . He justifies his actions by declaring South Vietnam was threatened by large scale Communist attacks .
 Hanoi charges that U.S. planes “again intrude repeatedly” into North Vietnamese airspace . The Pentagon categorically denies this, but the Pentagon says this is not true .
 Foreign Minister Gromyko of the Soviet Union again condemns the U.S. action . He pledges his nation’s full support to North Vietnam . The Soviet Union condemns the United States .
 In Calcutta, a thousand leftist students demonstrate against the U.S. in India . The students demonstrated against the United States .
 Britain announces that its Far East Fleet is ready for any emergency action to support the U.S. Not all are against the Americans, and Britain is ready to help .
 President Johnson says air strikes and congressional resolution demonstrate U.S. determination to resist and repel aggression in Southeast Asia . Johnson: Air strikes and resolution demonstrate United States’ “determination to resist’t aggression”
 A U.S. intelligence report concludes that the Communists are winning the hearts and minds of the South Vietnamese populace . The VC are increasing in strength even though they are sustaining heavy casualties on the battlefield .
 Hanoi rejects the call from the U.N. to participate in a Security Council debate on the Tonkin Gulf crisis . The country maintains that only the Geneva agreement signatories have jurisdiction in the matter .
 Ambassador Taylor in Saigon cables the president a situation report on South Vietnam . Ambassador Taylor was in the U.S. embassy in Vietnam in 1973 .
 Lieutenant Everett Alvarez, the United States Navy pilot shot down and captured during the Pierce Arrow raids, is paraded through the streets of Hon Gay, Hon Gay . Alvarez was shot down by the U.S. Navy and captured in the raids .
 The later phase will include systematic bombing raids of North Vietnam and the mining of Haiphong Harbor . The first phase of the operation will include bombing raids on North Vietnam .
 The Pentagon announces that Communist China has moved MiG fighters into bases in North Vietnam . It also insists that the USS Maddox, despite claims to the contrary, never approached closer than 12 miles to the shoreline .
 The Viet Cong distribute leaflets claiming that they will fire only on South Vietnamese units accompanied by U.S. advisers . This promise is almost immediately broken by the Viet Cong .
 90 United States and 12 South Vietnamese helicopters airlift about 1,000 ARVN troops into a Viet Cong base . 90 U.S. and 12 . Vietnamese helicopters also help airlift 1,200 ARVn troops into the base .
 Other ARVN troops converge on the area from the ground, but the 2,000-man guerrilla force slips away . The ARVVN forces slip away from the area, but it is believed to be a small group of insurgents .
 Only four Viet Cong are killed, while one U.S. helicopter is downed, killing the pilot . Only four Vietnamese are killed .
 Goldwater asserts that this includes nuclear weapons, trying to demonstrate that Johnson is saying the same thing that Goldwater did in the controversial remarks he made earlier in the campaign .
 Hanoi is reported to be holding air-raid drills for fear of more U.S. attacks . The drills are being held for fear that more attacks will be carried out .
 The government urges all civilians with nonessential posts to leave the city . Government urges all civilian posts to be removed from the city.
 Meanwhile, Viet Cong guerrillas attack three hamlets in Vinh Binh Province . Meanwhile, the guerillas attack a village in the same province . The attack is the latest in a series of attacks by the Viet Cong .
 A United States helicopter crashes 50 miles northwest of Saigon, killing three U.S. airmen . Three airmen killed in the crash .
 A summary of William Bundy’s memorandum of August 11 is cabled to Ambassador Taylor, Ambassador Unger in Laos, and Ambassador Sharp in Honolulu for comment that will “permit further review and refinement” of the document . The document is sent to the U.S
 General Nguyen Khanh is elected president by the Military Revolutionary Council . He ousts Duong Van Minh as chief of state, installs a new constitution . The constitution is claimed to be modeled on that of the United States .
 Khanh says he is not becoming a military dictator, but it is clear that he is now the chief power in the Saigon government . Khanh: "I'm not a dictator. I'm not going to be a dictator" Khanh is the prime minister of Saigon's
 Henry Cabot Lodge, former ambassador to South Vietnam, goes to Western Europe as a personal emissary of President Johnson to explain U.S. policy in Vietnam . Lodge was sent to Europe to obtain more support for South Vietnam from allies .
 Lodge returns with pledges from West Germany, Holland, Belgium, Great Britain, and Spain to provide nonmilitary technical aid to Saigon . None agree to provide military support .
 U.S. military advisers report finding only 10 VC bodies and no sign of the other 270 . United States military advisers say they have found only 10 bodies of 270 VC bodies .
 He calls for “a carefully orchestrated bombing attack on North Vietnam” to prevent ‘a complete collapse of national morale” in Saigon . The attack would prevent a ‘complete collapse’ of national . morale’
 U.S. Army Hawk antiaircraft missiles to protect airfields from retaliatory Communist air attacks . Hawk missiles would also be sent to Danang and Saigon to protect the airfields . American marines would be needed to protect Danang from possible ground attacks .
 VNAF fighter-bombers, some piloted by U.S. pilots, attack a major VC headquarters south of Saigon . Some of the planes were flown by United States .
 Viet Cong forces overrun the outpost of Phu Tuc, killing seven, wounding 15, and capturing the remaining defenders . The remaining defenders were captured .
 Four U.S. military advisers are killed in an attack on an ARVN unit in Nongong Province . When an ARNN unit responds, it is ambushed and killed . Four United States military advisers were killed .
 Buddhists charge the government with “anti-Buddhist’s policies held over from the Diem years . Buddhists say the government has ‘anti-buddhist policies’ held over by the government .
 Student demonstrations turn into street riots with students marching on Khanh’s office, storming the national radio station, and stoning U.S. Army billets .
 Khanh meets with student leaders, promising to civilianize the government . But he cannot placate the demonstrators and anti-government violence spreads to other cities . Khanh promises civilianization, but the violence continues .
 Over 1,000 ARVN casualties are reported in heavy fighting in the Viet Cong stronghold of Tay Ninh Province . ARNN suffered heavy casualties in the fighting .
 Lyndon B. Johnson nominated to run for re-election at the Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City, New Jersey .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff sends a memorandum to the secretary of defense concurring with Ambassador Taylor’s August 18 cable . The Joint chiefs of Staff also concurs with the cable . Ambassador Taylor says the U.S. has been conducting a ‘surveillance’ of
 Demonstrations and violence continue in protests against the government . Demonstrators and violence continues to be reported in the country .
 In Danang, at least nine people were killed in clashes between Buddhists and Catholics . At least nine were killed during clashes between Catholics and Buddhists .
 Revolutionary Council disbands and proposes provisional triumvirate made up of Duong Van Minh, Tran Thien Khiem, and Nguyen Khanh . Khanh to retain the title of prime minister .
 This body would rule for two months, by which time a national convention will elect a provisional leader . This is by the end of the year, when a provisional vote will be held .
 Paratroopers are required to restore order after Catholic activists attempt to storm council meeting place . This does not placate the demonstrators, and paratroopers must be called in to stop them .
 General Khanh leaves for Dalat; after his departure, it is announced that he has suffered a physical and mental “breakdown” and has gone to Dalat to recuperate . Khanh has been reported to be suffering from a mental and physical breakdown .
 Nguyen Xuen Oanh, a Harvard-educated economist and former professor of Trinity College in Connecticut, is chosen to lead the caretaker government for the next two months . He is chosen by the government to take over two months of the next year .
 The U.S. will continue to aid the South Vietnamese, but will not fight the war for them, he says . He says that the United States will not continue to fight for them . The Vietnam War is still raging in Vietnam .
 In Saigon, 50,000 Catholics participate in the funeral procession for six victims killed in the rioting . The funeral procession took place in Saigon .
 The South Vietnamese government charges that the Communists instigated the recent trouble . The South Vietnam government says the Communist Party instigated it .
 The Communist China press agency charges that the Soviet Union is supporting the U.S. in a move to intervene in Vietnam . The U.N. agency of the United Nations is responsible for the intervention .
 Ambassador Taylor confers at Dalat with Khanh and reports that he appears “rested and recovered” and ready to return to Saigon to assume premier duties . Ambassador Taylor reports that Khanh appears to be ready to take over as premier .
 Buddhist leaders announce the formation of the People’s Revolutionary Council . The council will challenge U.S. policies, although anti-Communist .
 Admiral Thomas Moorer, chief of naval operations, announces that U.S. warships will remain on alert in the South China Sea off North Vietnam in case there is any counterattack by North Vietnamese forces .
 Admiral Sharp briefs the Japanese on the situation in Vietnam . Sharp acknowledges that the Japanese have just allotted $500,000 in aid for South Vietnam .
 The JCS organizes Sigma II, a war game that is to estimate the possible results of a U.S. air offensive against North Vietnam . Sigma II is an estimate of the possible result of a United States air offensive .
 The conclusion is that the Communists are not going to stop fighting, no matter how much North Vietnam is bombed . North Vietnam will not stop fighting no matter what amount of bombing is done .
 UN secretary-general U Thant tries to set up direct talks between the U.S. and North Vietnam in Rangoon, Burma . U.N. Secretary-General U. Thant wants direct talks to be held between North Vietnam and the United States .
 Khrushchev is also secretly trying to get Hanoi to negotiate with Washington, offering the prospect of increased aid . Khruschev is trying to persuade Vietnam to negotiate .
 Khanh resumes his position as premier, dissolves the triumvirate . Khanh reappoints Duong Van Minh as chief of state, though the latter remains very much in charge .
 Phnom Penh charges that South Vietnam aircraft spread poisonous chemicals on Cambodian territory in August . Cambodia says it was attacked by aircraft carrying poisonous chemicals . Cambodia accuses South Vietnam of spreading deadly chemicals on its territory .
 Saigon charges that VC forces are operating from five bases in Cambodian sanctuaries . In response, Saigon says they are operating in five bases . Saigon also says that the VC forces operate from five Cambodian bases .
 The plan includes air strikes on Laos infiltration routes and coastal raids on North Vietnam . The plan also includes resumption of United States destroyer patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin .
 The ARVN claims it has killed 70 guerrillas in a major clash in Quang Ngai Province . A United States helicopter crewman is killed by VC gunfire, five other U.S. servicemen are injured in other operations .
 Hanoi renews appeal to Geneva Conference cochairmen to reconvene the conference . Hanoa renews appeals to Geneva conference co-chairmen . Geneva Conference will be held in November .
 Ambassador Taylor arrives in Washington to brief the administration on the situation in South Vietnam . Ambassador Taylor arrived in Washington for brief on the South Vietnam situation .
 Rusk, McNamara, the Bundy brothers, John McCone, and General Earle Wheeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs . Rusk and Johnson are joined by Rusk in Washington, D.C.
 Saigon charges that Cambodian forces have been shelling South Vietnamese territory in support of the VC . Saigon says that Cambodiaian planes have been violating South Vietnamese airspace .
 General Duong Van Minh named chairman of the military tribunal . Minh will have the duties of chief of state, but Khanh remains the real power in the government .
 United States Air Force jets come to the aid of South Vietnamese planes that report being chased by Cambodian jets . No lire is exchanged between the two countries .
 General Khanh lifts press censorship and appoints two civilians to government posts to replace military men . But he will retain his post as defense minister .
 Soviets warn Japan that it must expect some military retaliation if it allows U.S. bases there to be used for military action against North Vietnam . U.N. bases in Vietnam could be used to launch attacks on North Vietnam, Soviets warn .
 Measures include covert action, such as resumption of De Soto patrols and the South Vietnamese coastal raids . A crucial item calls for asking Premier Souvanna Phouma of Laos to permit “limited GVN air and ground operations” into southeastern Laos .
 Henry Cabot Lodge, President Johnson’s special personal emissary, reports to the president on his trip throughout Europe . Lodge is President Johnson's special personal . personal . emissaries .
 All Western European governments except France view the Vietnam struggle as a ‘free world’ issue, not just a regional problem . They issue a statement that claims that all Western European . governments except . France view Vietnam as a free world issue, they say .
 The United States ambassadors to Thailand and Laos meet with Ambassador Taylor in Saigon and decide that the South Vietnamese air force will not participate in the stepped-up air action .
 T-28s based in Laos and U.S. Navy and Air Force planes that are part of Yankee Team will continue their covert operations there .
 It is agreed that South Vietnamese troops will be able to make incursions into Laos up to 12 miles, but that Souvanna Phouma will not be informed so he can honestly deny such operations .
 Saigon sends a letter to the ICC saying that South Vietnam is prepared to disarm and end all United States support as soon as North Vietnam ceases the activities of the Viet Cong . Saigon says it will end all U.S. support if North Vietnam stops its activities of Viet Cong activities
 Vice presidential candidate Hubert Humphrey says U.S. must remain in Vietnam . He says primary responsibility for winning the war and achieving peace rests with South Vietnamese .
 The United States Navy destroyers Edwards and Morton resume the DeSoto patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin .
 Dissident army officers led by General Lam Van Phat, who was dismissed as interior minister on September 3, attempt to overthrow Khanh’s government . General Duong Van Due, commander of IV Corps, calls their movement People's Council for the Salvation of the Nation .
 Ambassador Taylor is en route back to Saigon, but his deputy, Alexis Johnson, meets with the cabinet and encourages them to remain loyal to Khanh . Johnson's deputy meets with cabinet and meets with them to encourage loyalty .
 Government troops loyal to Khanh move against coup’s main base near Tan Son Nhut . Troops loyal to the Khanh government move against the main base .
 Air Vice Marshal Nguyen Cao Ky orders VNAF 90 Vietnam War Almanac 1964 planes over insurgent generals’ headquarters . Cao Ky threatens to bomb them if they do not surrender . The final blow to the coup comes when .
 The two chief leaders of the coup attempt, Generals Phat and Due, are arrested, as are three other rebel generals . General Phat is arrested, along with Generals Due and Phat .
 The two destroyers on De Soto patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin, Edwards and Morton, are pursued at night by four unidentified vessels . The unidentified vessels are presumed to be North Vietnamese PT boats .
 The destroyers fire hundreds of shells, but never see any ships and do not detect any torpedoes . Destroyers never see ships and never detect torpedoes, they say . They fire 'hundreds of shells' but do not see ships .
 President Johnson does not authorize any retaliation and subsequently suspends the De Soto patrols . President Johnson suspends patrols .
 South Vietnam claims that two PAVN companies invaded South Vietnam, in Quang Tri Province, but that they were defeated with heavy casualties . South Vietnam says that two companies invaded Vietnam, but were defeated .
 U.S. military advisers question whether these were actually North Vietnamese troops . NVA units are beginning to infiltrate to the South, says NVA commander .
 VC artillery sink two South Vietnamese landing craft conducting operations on the Mekong River . VC artillery sinks two South Vietnam landing craft .
 General Khanh’s government makes several major changes in the military command . The changes are a response to demands of officers who emerged as loyal in the recent coup attempt . The government makes major changes to the military .
 Khanh threatens to close the Mekong River to international commercial traffic unless Cambodia stops all hostile actions . Khanh says Cambodia is threatening to close Mekong river to international traffic .
 Rhade hill tribesmen in the central plateau rebel against the South Vietnamese government and demand autonomy . They have no sympathy for Saigon or the Viet Cong, they say .
 50 ARVN troops killed at U.S. Special Forces camp at Ban Me Thuot in Darlac Province . In the process, they kill 50 ARVsN troops at the camp .
 Eventually, the uprising is put down, partly through the influence of the tribesmen’s Special Forces .
 Republican presidential candidate Goldwater charges that President Johnson lied to the American people and that he is “recklessly” committing the United States to war . Goldwater says he is "recklessly" committed to war in Vietnam .
 Rumors of another coup cause government troops to take up key positions around Saigon . Nothing materializes, but nothing materializes .
 Anti-government riots in Qui Nhon, one of the centers of Buddhist protests during August, are also put down by government forces . Government forces put down the anti-government protests in August .
 Khanh forms a 17-member “High National Council” that he charges with setting up a provisional government and drafting a new constitution . Khanh says the council will be tasked with drafting a constitution and setting up provisional government .
 Heavy fighting breaks out between South Vietnamese forces and the VC in the Mekong Delta . One U.S.-piloted aircraft is shot down and one United States soldier is killed in the fighting .
 ARVN forces claim a victory in a battle with the Viet Cong in Go Cong Province, but are defeated in a clash in Kien Giang Province . One U.S. soldier is killed in the clash, where one American is killed .
 General Westmoreland initiates Hop Tac, a pacification operation focused on six provinces around Saigon . Hop Tac is based on tactics used by the British in fighting the Communists in Malaya . The operation was based on the British tactics used to defeat the Communists .
 Ball sends copies of the memo to Rusk, McNamara, and McGeorge Bundy but no one bothers to send a copy to President Johnson until February 1965 . Ball sends a copy of the document to Rusks, McNama, and Bundy .
 U.S. Fifth Special Forces Group deploys to Vietnam from Fort Bragg, North Carolina, to oversee Special Forces operations in-country .
 Tactical units of the PAVN are beginning a steady influx into the South over the Ho Chi Minhh Trail . Tactical units are beginning to arrive in the South . They are believed to be beginning to increase their numbers in Vietnam .
 General Khanh announces that his government and U.S. authorities are revising the program that has been arming the Montagnards . Khanhh announces the program will be changed .
 In reference to the recent troubles with the tribesmen, he threatens to use force to put down further disorder . In reference 92 Vietnam War Almanac 1964 to the . recent troubles .
 ARVN troops suffer heavy casualties from a Viet Cong ambush some 15 miles north of Saigon . The ambush occurred 15 miles from Saigon, some 30 miles from the capital .
 Senator Gaylord Nelson says Congress did not intend the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution as an endorsement of any escalation of the war . Nelson: U.S. didn't intend the resolution as a declaration of war .
 Barry Goldwater announces that if he is elected he will ask ex-president Eisenhower to visit Vietnam and report on the situation there . Eisenhower’s aides quickly announce that he has not committed himself .
 General Tran Thien Khiem, a member of the government triumvirate, leaves on a “goodwill mission” to various Asian nations; in fact, he is being forced into exile . He is forced to leave the country .
 Richard Nixon claims Vietnam will be lost within a year and all of Southeast Asia within three years if the U.S. does not quickly change its policy . Former vice president Richard Nixon says Vietnam will not be lost in a year . Nixon: Vietnam will lose all of Vietnam and Southeast Asia
 VC ground fire brings down a United States helicopter, killing five U.S. servicemen . The helicopter was shot down by fire from a VC helicopter .
 Secretary of State Rusk insists that the administration’s decisions about the conflict in Vietnam have “nothing to do” with the election . Rusk says information is being withheld because of the ongoing campaign .
 Former Viet Cong member makes radio appeal to former comrades to rally to ARVN during the Chieu Hoi program . Former comrades make radio appeal for support of ARVn .
 General Khanh says South Vietnam now has the capability of bombing North Vietnam or China without U.S. aid . He says no such action is imminent . Khanh: South Vietnam has the ability to bomb North and China without United States aid .
 Saigon claims that 16,101 Communist soldiers or agents have deserted during the last 20 months under the ongoing Chieu Hoi (“Open Arms’s) program . Saigon says 16,000 Communist soldiers have deserted in the past 20 months .
 Some defectors will fight with U.S. and ARVN forces and become known as Kit Carson Scouts . Some of these defectors are known to become Kit Carson Scout Scouts .
 Nonaligned nations urge a conference in Geneva to negotiate an end to the conflict in Vietnam . Participants at a meeting of nonaligned nations in Cairo urge that a conference be called in Geneva .
 Two U.S. soldiers are killed by a landmine explosion . Elsewhere, two United States soldiers were killed by an explosion .
 The United States announces it is setting up a third helicopter company in the Mekong Delta area controlled by the Viet Cong . The U.S. will set up the company in a third location controlled by Viet Cong.
 U.S. aircraft are permitted to fly cover for Laotian planes on operations against Communist movements on the Ho Chi Minh Trail .
 The new Russian leadership will increase military aid to North Vietnam . They will not try to persuade them to attempt a negotiated end to hostilities .
 Thirteen U.S. servicemen and four civilians believed to be held as prisoners by the VC for over two years have not been allowed to contact their families . The Red Cross has been unable to make contact with them .
 MACV reports that helicopter operation, 80 miles southwest of Saigon, killed 34 Viet Cong guerrillas . The operation was 80 miles from Saigon . MACV: Helicopter operation killed 34 guerillas .
 Relations between Cambodia, South Vietnam, and the U.S. reach a new low when South Vietnamese planes strafe a Cambodian village . Cambodia, Vietnam and the United States are at odds in the war .
 When Cambodia protests, Saigon charges Cambodia once again with providing refuge for Communist forces . Saigon also charges Cambodia for providing refuge to Communist forces during the protests . Cambodia was once again accused of supporting the Communist Party .
 Cambodia is accused of placing the body of a U.S. officer advising ARVN forces in Vietnam . The body of the officer was recovered just inside South Vietnam on the 25th . Cambodia is alleged to have placed the body there to allow rescue force to be fired on .
 Cambodians shoot down a USAF C-123, loaded with ammunition; eight U.S. servicemen are lost . Then on the 24th, Cambodian shoot down an American C.123 . Eight United States servicemen lost .
 By the 28th, the United States admits that the plane did stray over Cambodian territory by mistake . The U.S. argues that such incidents arise because of the poorly defined border and the activities of the VC .
 Despite the charges and threats from Sihanouk, neither side pursues further armed confrontation . Despite the U.S. losses in personnel and planes, despite the United States losing personnel in Vietnam War Almanac 1964, neither sides pursues .
 It is reported that Hanoi’s government radio is increasing its propaganda broadcasts into South Vietnam, noting criticisms of the Johnson administration's handling of the war being made by various United States senators .
 Nguyen Khanh appoints to high posts the five generals arrested when he seized power in January . The move is part of an attempt by Khanh to placate a growing dissident element in the armed forces .
 The High National Council chooses Phan Khac Suu, a 63-year-old engineer, as chief of state . The High N Council chooses him as the country's top official . The high National Council chose him as an engineer, an engineer from Thailand .
 Nguyen Khanh resigns as premier on the 26th, and on the 29th, Tran Van Huong, former mayor of Saigon, is named premier . Khanh is replaced by Huong .
 United States T-28s, piloted by Thais, bomb and strafe North Vietnamese villages in the Mugia Pass area . The U.S. aircraft were used to strafe and bomb North Vietnam villages .
 One United States soldier is wounded when the VC down a United States Army helicopter . Another U.S. soldier is killed and two wounded in a VC ambush .
 Survey of South Vietnam reveals that it has deteriorated in both the military and political spheres . One year after the overthrow and assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem, South Vietnam has deteriorated . Survey of the country's military, political and political situation has worsened in recent years .
 Viet Cong attack Bien Hoa Air Base, 12 miles north of Saigon, kills five U.S. servicemen and two Vietnamese, wounding about 76 . Two B-57 bombers destroyed, damaged 20 United States and Vietnamese aircraft .
 President Johnson ordered the immediate replacement of destroyed and damaged planes . President Johnson, well aware that the presidential election was underway within 48 hours, essentially decides to do nothing .
 Interagency working group to draw up various political and military options for direct action against North Vietnam . However, he appoints an interagency group of military and political options .
 The United States embassy in Phnom Penh evacuates dependents from Cambodia because of the recent increase in anti-U.S. demonstrations . Demonstrations follow charges of United States involvement in border incidents .
 Wreckage of the C-123 shot down on October 4 is now displayed in Phnom Penh . The wreckage is part of the wreckage of the plane that was shot down .
 1964 Chronology 95 of the war in Vietnam . Barry Goldwater and Richard Nixon attack the president’s handling of Vietnam .
 The Republican candidate challenges Johnson to admit to the American people that the U.S. is involved in an undeclared war in Vietnam . Johnson says the United States is in Vietnam without a war declaration .
 The Soviet Union delivers a major shipment of arms to Cambodia, to replace U.S. equipment no longer available . The United States equipment was not available .
 Within two days, the Soviet Union will also be calling for a new international conference to guarantee Cambodia’s neutrality . The Soviet Union is calling for an international conference .
 Lyndon Johnson defeated Goldwater by over 16 million votes . With 6 1 percent of the popular vote, Lyndon Johnson is elected in a landslide victory .
 Goldwater defeated because many Americans believe Johnson is less likely to escalate U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia . Goldwater was defeated because of his views on the Vietnam War .
 The Democrats also achieve big majorities in both the United States House and Senate . The Democratic Party has a big majority in both chambers of Congress and the White House .
 An interagency working group appointed by the president and headed by William Bundy holds its first meeting . William Bundy heads the group . The group was appointed by President Barack Obama .
 This group is charged by Johnson to reexamine the entire American policy toward Vietnam . The group will recommend to the National Security Council a broad range of options .
 Heavily armed VC, attempting to kidnap a Vietnamese official, get within rifle-range of the U.S. embassy in Saigon . VC attempt to kidnap an official gets within rifle range of the United States embassy .
 Buddhists accuse Premier Huong of deliberately denying them any role in government . Students angry that they will lose draft exemptions . Others say he has appointed ministers who served under Ngo Dinh Diem and Emperor Bao Dai .
 Huong warns he will not hesitate to use force to suppress violent demonstrations . Huong appeals to all dissident groups to cooperate .
 U.S. military advisers openly express disgust when ARVN officers refuse to order their boats and troops along a canal they regard as militarily insecure . The canal is delaying a major operation planned to break the VC’s hold on the Mekong Delta town of Nam Can .
 South Vietnam bans the sale of the current issue of Newsweek because it carries a photograph showing a VC prisoner being tortured by ARVN personnel . The South Vietnam government bans sale of current issue .
 The latest U.S. intelligence analysis claims that the VC now number about 30,000 full-time professional soldiers . Many of the VC soldiers are North Vietnamese, many of whom are North Vietnam .
 1,200 ARVN troops push through jungles in the area, all part of the attempt to find the guerrillas that attacked the United States air base . VNAF aircraft bomb a Communist stronghold near Bien Hoa .
 Prime Minister Robert Menzies announces that his country will strengthen its defenses to meet the growing Communist threat in Southeast Asia . The move comes as the U.S. prepares to strengthen its defense against the growing threat of Communist China .
 Major floods in the region north of Saigon disrupt military operations . Viet Cong forces attack rescue operations and relief convoys . Floods disrupt operations and convoys in the area .
 Saigon police announce they have uncovered a ring involving officials from the Khanh government that sold exemptions to Vietnamese youths called up for military service . Police say the ring was part of a plan to sell exemptions to those called up to service .
 NBC-TV shows a film provided by a Japanese agency that gives the North Vietnamese version of the conflict between the U.S. and North Vietnam . The film shows the first United States POW, Lt. Lt. John McCain, who was captured by North Vietnam in March 1968 .
 Everett Alvarez was shot down and captured during the initial retaliatory strikes following the Gulf of Tonkin incident . Alvarez was captured by the U.S. Navy in Vietnam in the aftermath of the incident .
 In two separate attacks in Binh Tuy Province, VC kill 34 ARVN soldiers and wound 40 . In separate attacks, 40 people were wounded in two separate incidents .
 Prince Sihanouk says if the U.S. wants to improve its relations with Cambodia, it must order the South Vietnamese to stop their attacks on border areas . He says that if the United States wants a better relationship with South Vietnamese, it should order them to stop attacks on
 One U.S. military adviser and four ARVN soldiers are killed in a skirmish in Bien Hoa Province . Another American adviser and six ARVs soldiers are wounded .
 ARVN troops kill 17 VC and capture 21 in an airmobile operation in Quang Nam Province . ARNN: 17 VC killed and 21 captured in air mobile operation . The operation was part of an operation to capture 21 VC and kill 17 .
 Over 7,000 ARVN troops converge on enemy 1964 Chronology 97 positions in forested area near Thu Dau Mot . They find that the VC have slipped away . Elsewhere, ARVn troops converge upon enemy positions in the forest .
 A VC mine planted on the Saigon-Hue railroad derails a train, killing four railroad workers and injuring 17 . 17 South Vietnamese and one U.S. military adviser were injured .
 In Saigon, clash breaks out between thousands of Buddhist marchers and police near the palace of chief of state Phan Khac Suu . Buddhists have voluntarily observed a moratorium on violent demonstrations since November 6 .
 On the 26th, the government declares martial law, banning demonstrations and putting troops in the streets . Buddhist leaders announce that they will resort to a nonviolent campaign of noncooperation . On the 28th, Buddhist leaders say they will use nonviolent tactics .
 Ball “indicated doubt” that bombing the North would improve the situation in South Vietnam, he said . Ball argued against a judgment that a VC victory in Vietnam would have a falling-domino effect on the rest of Asia .
 The rest of the attendees favor bombing North Vietnam; only the timing is debated . However, the majority of attendees favor the bombing .
 William Sullivan arrives in Vientiane as the new U.S. ambassador . Sullivan will be the U.N. ambassador to the country .
 Ambassador Maxwell Taylor arrives in Washington to join the discussions ongoing in the select committee of the National Security Council . Taylor is the ambassador to the U.S. for the United States . He will be joined by other members of the committee .
 Victory in South Vietnam “is very much in doubt,” he calls for an escalation of U.S. bombing of North Vietnam . He says Saigon leaders demonstrate a willingness to achieve political stability, replace incompetent officials .
 The U.S. should pursue a two-phased program culminating in the bombing of infiltration facilities south of the 19th parallel in North Vietnam . Then, the United States should follow a similar program, the U.N. says .
 Members of the select committee of the National Security Council agree to recommend to the president that he adopt Taylor’s plan for a two-stage escalation of bombing of North Vietnam .
 This day in response to a reporter’s question at a news conference at his ranch in Texas, the president says he “anticipates no dramatic announcement” to come out of the select committee's sessions . President: "No dramatic announcement" will come out .
 Task Group 77 is assigned to rendezvous about 75 miles out in the Gulf of Tonkin . Task group includes attack carriers Hancock, Coral Sea, and Ranger .
 President Johnson and his top-ranking advisers agree to a two-phase bombing plan . Johnson: "Two phase bombing plan" is a two phase attack on North Korea .
 Phase I will involve air strikes by U.S. Air Force and Navy jets against infiltration routes and facilities in the Laotian panhandle . Phase II will include air strikes against infiltration sites and facilities . Phase I is expected to involve strikes on infiltration routes .
 Phase II will extend the air strikes to a wider selection of targets in North Vietnam . Phase II is expected to extend the strikes to include targets in the country's capital .
 Johnson makes it clear that Phase II is tied to a ‘serious attempt” by the Saigon leadership to achieve some political stability and get on with the war . Johnson: Phase II was tied to an attempt to achieve political stability .
 Richard Nixon calls on the United States to bomb Viet Cong supply routes . Nixon calls for the U.S. to bomb supply routes, even if it requires extending the war .
 Viet Cong overrun the district headquarters at Thien Gao, an area supposedly controlled by the South Vietnamese government . The Viet Cong kill the district chief and capture a number of weapons . The district chief is killed and captured .
 The first U.S. women to serve as military advisers will be assigned to a South Vietnamese Women’s Army Corps training camp at Saigon . It is announced that the first United States women will be deployed .
 William Bundy leaves for Australia and New Zealand to brief their government leaders on the two-phase bombing plan . Bundy will brief them on two phase of the two phase bombing plan. Bundy will also brief their Australian and New Zealander leaders .
 Most governments will not be told of plans for Phase II, the extension of the bombing into the North . Other governments supporting the U.S. efforts will also be briefed .
 General Khanh meets with other high-ranking military leaders at Dalat . They issue an appeal to all dissident groups to support the government . Khanh is still commander in chief of the military forces of South Vietnam .
 The Viet Cong move into Phuoc Tuy Province, southeast of Saigon, and commence a series of attacks that culminate in a major defeat of ARVN forces at Binh Gia, 40 miles from Saigon . From December 28,1964, to January 4,
 For several weeks about 1,000 Viet Cong had been making their way in small groups from Tay Ninh Province, northwest of Saigon . They then joined forces to conduct the surprise attacks .
 The first Congressional Medal of Honor awarded to a U.S. serviceman for action in Vietnam is presented to Captain Roger Donlon for his heroic action during a battle at Nam Dong Special Forces camp on July 6, 1964 .
 A major attack by the Viet Cong at Tan Phu in the Mekong Delta leaves seven U.S. advisers wounded . 23 ARVN soldiers killed and 50 wounded in the attack . Seven United States advisers wounded and 23 ARVs killed in attack .
 The Viet Cong attack and capture the district headquarters at An Lao and much of the surrounding valley . The attack was the first of its kind in the area .
 ARVN troops regain control only after reinforcements are airlifted into the area by United States helicopters . One United States Army officer and one United States soldier are killed in the battle .
 Prime Minister Harold Wilson briefed on the forthcoming bombing plan for Vietnam during a state visit to Washington DC .
 Ambassador Taylor holds a series of meetings with Premier Huong, General Khanh, and other South Vietnamese leaders to exact the desired assurances in exchange for the planned bombing campaign . Ambassador Taylor, having returned from Washington, meets with Huong and other leaders .
 Ambassador Sullivan in Laos gets Souvanna Phouma to allow United States planes to bomb supply routes in Laos . U.S. planes were able to bomb the Communist supply routes .
 Buddhist leaders announce a campaign to oust Premier Huong . Buddhist leaders claim he is being kept in power by the Americans . They claim the Americans are keeping him in power .
 Operation Barrel Roll is the name given to the first phase of the bombing plan approved by President Johnson on December 1 . At a meeting of the National Security Council, the final details for the bombing are reviewed .
 In such a case, the government will insist that the U.S. plane was simply on escort duty as requested by the Laotian government .
 C-123 transport aircraft crashes during take-off at Danang airport . Two U.S. servicemen were killed in the crash .
 The Defense Department does not provide any explanation for the plane's mission . The incident leads to public speculation that the Air Force is engaging in some kind of secret operations .
 A bomb planted in a Saigon bar explodes and injures two Americans, four Vietnamese . Two Americans and four Vietnamese were injured in the blast .
 United States and Cambodian representatives meet in New Delhi, India, in an effort to work out such issues as the border raids and alleged support for the Viet Cong . Talks quickly break down, but the talks quickly fail .
 One-quarter of Americans do not know there is any fighting going on in Vietnam, survey finds .
 Four U.S. Army officers are killed when the Viet Cong attack an ARVN division headquarters in Thu Dau Mot . Four United States Army officers were killed in the attack . The attack is believed to have taken place in the early hours of Sunday morning .
 Operation Barrel Roll begins with United States planes attacking “targets of opportunity” in northern Laos . U.S. planes attack ‘targues of opportunity' in Laos, Laos .
 These losses are part of the highest South Vietnamese casualty figures for a seven-day period in the war to date . South Vietnamese casualties are the highest in seven days of the war .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk addresses the Ministers’ Council of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . Rusk asks that NATO countries provide more tangible aid to the war in Vietnam .
 Some will respond with economic aid for Saigon, but none will provide troops . Some will eventually respond to economic aid, but no troops will be sent .
 ARVN forces blow up a network of Viet Cong tunnels some 15 miles northeast of Saigon, capturing 16 VC soldiers who survive the blasts . 16 of the soldiers who survived the blasts survived the blast . ARN forces blew up the network of tunnels in a bid to capture the 16
 Secretary McNamara sets the level of Barrel Roll attacks for the first 30 days of Phase I at two missions of four aircraft apiece each week .
 Viet Cong disguised as ARVN paratroopers ambush a South Vietnamese convoy returning to Saigon after escorting General Khanh to Cap St. St. Gen. Khanh .
 Khanh dissolves the High National Council, arrests individuals who oppose his rule, and conducts a purge of military leadership . Khanh is known for his crackdown on dissent .
 Telling them military plans are dependent on stability, he tries to get them to agree to restore the High National Council, but they refuse . Told them “that all the military plans which I know you would like to carry out are dependent upon government stability”
 On the 22nd, Khanh issues an order from the Armed Forces Council saying that the military will retain control of the government . Khanh issued the order on the day of the order .
 Viet Cong saboteurs, disguised as ARVN soldiers, detonate a car bomb outside the Brinks Hotel, a United States officers billet in Saigon . The attack was carried out by the Viet Cong disguised as soldiers .
 President Johnson declines to authorize reprisal air strikes against the North, despite vigorous recommendations by Taylor, Westmoreland, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other senior U.S. officials .
 Premier Huong broadcasts a Christmas message to U.S. personnel in Vietnam . Huong also broadcasts a message to United States personnel in the United States .
 General Khanh will issue his own Christmas message with thanks to the U.S. troops two days later . He will also issue a message to the United States troops .
 Pentagon releases figures showing most of the 23,000 U.S. military personnel now serving in Vietnam are not volunteers but have been assigned there . Most of the approximately 23.000 United States military personnel currently serving there are assigned there.
 The Red Cross says it has tried to send packages to the 17 or more Americans believed being held in North Vietnam . Red Cross has no assurances that the packages were delivered .
 The Armed Forces Council orders paratroopers into Saigon and extends martial law . The move is to signal Buddhists and any other potential resisters that the military government will not allow opposition to its control .
 ARVN troops capture a Viet Cong headquarters, seize a record cache of enemy arms, and claim 85 guerrillas killed in a two-day battle . ARN troops captured a record-breaking headquarters and seized a record stash of arms .
 ARVN casualties include 19 dead and 49 wounded; eight American advisers also wounded . Eight American advisers are also wounded; 19 dead, 49 wounded .
 The Viet Cong capture the village of Binh Gia, 40 miles southeast of Saigon and hold it for eight hours . The village was captured by the Viet Cong 40 miles south of the city .
 ARVN forces recapture village but only after three battalions brought in on helicopters . Three battalions are brought in by helicopters . ARVn forces retake village after three months of fighting .
 Throughout the protracted fighting, the South Vietnamese forces continually demonstrate inept leadership and poor motivation . The South Vietnamese government forces are shown to be inept and poor leadership .
 Despite the Johnson administration’s claim to the contrary, a full-scale war is now raging in South Vietnam . Despite the claims, the war is still raging in the country .
 There are about 23,300 U.S. military personnel in-country, an increase of more than 6,000 since President Johnson took office . There are more than 23,000 United States .
 Free world military forces include some 2,000 Korean military advisers, small units and advisers from Australia and New Zealand . Thailand and the Philippines preparing units for deployment to South Vietnam .
 A steady stream of North Vietnamese soldiers are moving down the Ho Chi Minh Trail to join the fight . It is estimated that the Communist forces in South Vietnam number some 34,000 main force soldiers .
 Communists control as much of South Vietnam as much as 50 percent of the country . Additionally, the Communist Party controls as many of the South Vietnamese .
 U.S. intelligence estimates that 17,000 Communists were killed during the year . 4,200 captured . United States intelligence estimates 17,500 Communists killed in the Soviet Union .
 The six-day Battle of Binh Gia comes to an end; five Americans are killed and three are wounded . The highest U.S. casualties sustained in a single battle to date .
 Thousands of anti-government demonstrators clash with government marines and police in Saigon . Thousands of protesters clash with troops and marines in Vietnam .
 There are also demonstrations in Hue, where students organize strikes against local government .
 The main resistance to the Saigon regime comes from Buddhists, who are strongly opposed to Tran Van Huong, who became premier on November 4,1964 . Buddhists opposed to the prime minister .
 The VC make another attack on ARVN positions in Binh Gia, accounting for additional casualties . South Vietnamese troops and their American advisers were killed in the attack . The VC made additional casualties in the battle .
 Associated Press survey of 83 U.S. senators shows considerable disagreement on the Johnson administration’s handling of the situation in Vietnam .
 Viet Cong forces ambush an ARVN company near Tan Bu and one U.S. adviser is killed . ARVn company was ambushed by the Viet Cong and one United States adviser was killed .
 ARVN claims to have killed 53 Viet Cong near Quang Nam and routed attackers in Hue area . ARN says it has also routed insurgents in the Hue area and routed them in the area .
 General Khanh and the Armed Forces Council agree to support the civilian government of Premier Tran Van Huong . Under pressure from U.S. officials, United States officials agree to back the government of the civilian leader .
 They pledge to confine their activities to the military realm . They also pledge to convene a national convention to “assume legislative powers” and draw up a permanent constitution . The party says it will confine its activities to only the military .
 In a cable to Saigon, Secretary of State Rusk instructs Ambassador Taylor “to avoid actions that would further commit the United States to any particular form of political solution” to the turmoil in Saigon . Ambassador Taylor: “To avoid actions ... to avoid ... committing
 The major cities, including Saigon and Hue, and much of central Vietnam are disrupted by demonstrations and strikes led by the Buddhists . The Buddhists are demanding the ouster of the Huong government .
 The demonstrators perceive that the Americans are supporting the regime in Saigon, they turn their ire on United States facilities . The demonstrators believe that the U.S. is supporting the Saigon regime .
 In Hue, a mob of 3,000 Buddhists storms the U.S. Information Service office and burns more than 5,000 books . The mob burns 5,500 books in Hue, China, in an attempt to burn them out .
 United States vice consul in Hue, Anthony Lake, is stoned by the mob when he tries to enter the building to put out the fire, but he is not hurt . U.S. Vice Consul Anthony Lake is not injured in the incident .
 Huong tries to appease the Buddhists by rearranging his government . The Buddhists are not placated and continue their demonstrations and strikes . Huong tried to appease them by arranging his government, but they are still angry .
 Prime Minister Sato says that the problem in Vietnam cannot be solved by the “rational approach” of the West . He says the problem should be left to the Asians themselves . Sato addressed the National Press Club in Washington .
 Two U.S. Air Force jet fighters shot down over Laos while escorting bombers in attacks on the Ho Chi Minh Trail . The trail passes from North Vietnam through Laos through Laos into South Vietnam .
 About 30 percent of South Vietnamese draftees desert within their first six weeks in service . It is reported that about 30 percent desert within six weeks of service .
 A revised cabinet assumes office, as Premier Tran Van Huong tries to placate the Buddhists . A revised government assumes office after the election .
 Some 1,500 ARVN troops are transported by helicopter to confront a large VC unit in the Mekong Delta province of Kien Hoa . ARN report killing 46 and capturing 61, capturing 61 .
 The Armed Forces Council, headed by Nguyen Khanh, resolves to get rid of Premier Tran Van Huong . The armed forces council is the focus of Buddhist ire in the country .
 Buddhist girl in Nha Trang immolates herself as part of the continuing Buddhist protest against the regime in Saigon .
 The Armed Forces Council ousts Premier Huong and his civilian government in a bloodless coup . General Nguyen Khanh is empowered to establish a new government .
 The council announces that it will observe the constitution of October 1964 and that the promised elections for a national congress will proceed .
 Buddhist leaders order followers to stop anti-government demonstrations and hunger strikes . They do not hide their dislike of Khanh and the United States influence .
 The aircraft carriers Hancock and Coral Sea are ordered to depart the waters off Vietnam and rejoin the Seventh Fleet . The move is part of an apparent reaction to the reduction in the number of aggressive actions .
 A Cuban publication reports that Cubans are helping to train the Viet Cong . Cubans have been helping train Viet Cong, according to the report .
 McGeorge Bundy, special assistant for national security, arrives in Saigon for talks with the U.S. ambassador . Bundy talks with General Maxwell Taylor about how to deal with the political situation in Vietnam . Bundy: "It's not easy to say what's going to happen in Sa
 There is worldwide speculation that this visit and Bundy’s visit to Saigon are linked . The U.S. and the Soviet Union have agreed to pressure their “clients” into negotiations .
 Viet Cong attack the United States Army helicopter base at Camp Holloway and blow up the nearby United States advisers’ barracks at Pleiku in the Central Highlands, killing nine and wounding 76 U.S. servicemen . United States servicemen, mostly from the 52nd Combat Aviation Battalion
 At the same time, the VC also destroy part of the fuel dump in Phu Yan Province Province .
 McGeorge Bundy joins Westmoreland and Taylor at MACV headquarters . They phone President Johnson to urge immediate retaliatory air raids against North Vietnam . Bundy and Taylor call President Johnson for immediate air raids .
 Bundy follows up with a memorandum to the president advocating “a policy of sustained reprisal” against North Vietnam . Bundy follows this with a memo to the . president advocating a policy of “sustained reprisal .” Bundy . Bundy: “A policy of
 President Johnson convenes his top advisers to discuss “appropriate and fitting” retaiiatory raids in response to the VC attacks on U.S. installations in South Vietnam . All present except Senator Mansfield and Vice President Hubert Humphrey concur .
 Humphrey kept out of Johnson’s Vietnam pianning for about a year, until he satisfies Johnson that he will support presidential policies . As a result, Humphrey is kept out .
 49 U.S. Navy jets drop bombs on barracks and staging areas at Dong Hoi, a guerrilla training camp 40 miles north of the 17th parallel in North Vietnam . Operation Flaming Dart was part of the already-planned operation . It was in retaliation for VC attacks on Ple
 A prearranged plan for evacuating U.S. dependents goes into effect and wives and children are airlifted out of Saigon . North Vietnam or another Communist power decides to retaliate for the Flaming Dart raids .
 South Vietnamese air vice-marshal Nguyen Cao Ky leads a raid, escorted by United States jets, to bomb a North Vietnamese military communications center at Vinh Linh . The raid is a follow-up to Flaming Dart, which bombed a North Vietnam communications center .
 Senators Wayne Morse and Ernest Gruening oppose the action . Senate Majority Leader Mansfield and GOP leader Dirksen support the president’s decision .
 United States Marine Corps Hawk air defense missile battalion is deployed to Danang . The Hawk missile battalion has been deployed to Vietnam since 2003 . The U.S. Marine Corps is deployed in Vietnam .
 There is considerable reaction around the world to what is perceived as a new escalation by the United States in Vietnam . The U.S. is perceived to have increased tensions with Vietnam .
 Both Communist China and the Soviet Union threaten to intervene if the U.S. continues to apply its military might on behalf of the South Vietnamese government . The United States has been in Vietnam since 1968 .
 In Moscow, some 2,000 demonstrators led by Vietnamese and Chinese students attacked the U.S. embassy . The protesters were clearly supported by the authorities, the authorities say .
 Britain and Australia support the U.S. action, but France calls for negotiations . France says it is not interested in talks with the United States, but wants negotiations .
 Three U.S. Navy planes are downed, but only one pilot is rescued . Only one pilot was rescued . Three Navy planes were downed, and only one was saved .
 Communist Chinese threaten to send ‘volunteers’ to aid the Viet Cong . Communist Chinese say they will send “volunteer’s” troops to aid Viet Cong in Vietnam .
 U Thant, secretary-general of the United Nations, calls for peace talks inside and outside of the U.N. U. Thant calls for talks in both countries . Thant: Peace talks should take place inside and out of the UN .
 President Johnson decides to undertake sustained bombing of North Vietnam that he and his advisers have discussed for a year . Johnson's decision to bomb North Vietnam was made after a year of discussion .
 The objective of the campaign is to employ air power in ever-intensifying degrees “to send a message” in an effort to persuade North Vietnam to abandon its support of the Viet Cong and enter negotiations to end the war on terms favorable to South Vietnam and the United States
 It is also meant to boost the morale of South Vietnamese and demonstrate U.S. resolve . The U.N. mission is also intended to boost South Vietnamese morale .
 Called Operation Rolling Thunder, the bombing campaign will go on for over three years, with occasional suspensions, until President Johnson calJs a haJt to it on October 31, 1968 . The bombing campaign is called Rolling Thunder .
 The Armed Forces Council, which seized power on January 27, appoints Dr. Dr. David Cameron . Dr. Cameron was appointed by the armed forces council .
 Phan Huy Quat as premier and reappoints Phan Khac Suu as chief of state . Quat replaces Suu with Quat and Quat becomes prime minister .
 Quat appoints a cabinet that includes representatives from many of Vietnam’s political, religious, and military factions . Quat, a physician with considerable experience in government, appoints cabinet members .
 Armed Forces Council announces formation of 20member national legislative council . Armed forces Council announces the formation of a 20member council .
 President Johnson meets with former president Dwight D Eisenhower to demonstrate the caliber of his supporters . President Johnson met with former President Eisenhower to show his support .
 The State Department sends secret cables to the United States ambassadors in London and eight embassies in the Far East . Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara conducts a press conference at the Pentagon, February 1965 .
 American pilots fly B-57 Canberra bombers and North American F-100 jet fighters against the VC near An Khe in support of ARVN troops . First mission in which no South Vietnamese airmen participate, indicating escalation in U.S. involvement in air war .
 The first Rolling Thunder raid originally scheduled for February 20 is postponed because of the upheaval in the South Vietnamese government . The raid was originally scheduled to take place on February 20, but was postponed .
 The State Department sends a message to the nine U.S. embassies previously contacted, rescinding until further notice the instructions to notify heads of government of the planned air war .
 Dissident ARVN officers move several battalions into Saigon with the intention of ousting General Khanh from leadership, but he escapes to Dalat . Khanh escapes from Saigon and is captured in 1968 .
 Ky meets with the dissident officers and agrees to their demand for the dismissal of Khanh Khanh . Ky agrees to the demands for Khanh's dismissal .
 Khanh submits his resignation, claiming that a ‘foreign hand’ was behind the coup . Khanh claims that a foreign hand was behind his resignation . Shortly before dawn on February 21, Khanh quits his resignation in protest at a coup .
 On February 25, as a face-saving device and to get him out of the country, General Khanh is appointed “roving ambassador” by the “Young Turks’s” who had ousted him and departs South Vietnam never to return . On February
 General Westmoreland cables Washington to request two battalions of U.S. Marines to protect the United States airbase at Danang . Westmorelands cables Washington asking for two battalion battalions to protect Danang base .
 Ambassador Taylor, aware of Westmoreland’s plan, disagrees and says he has “grave reservations” and warns that such a step could encourage South Vietnam to “shuck off greater responsibilities” Ambassador Taylor: “It will be very difficult to hold the
 United States Air Force aircraft from Bien Hoa and Danang airbases attack VC concentrations in Binh Dinh Province in support of CIDG company and their Special Forces advisers . U.S. Air Force planes attack VC concentration in Binn Dinh province .
 The first contingent of South Korean troops from “Peace Dove’s Engineer Task Force arrives at Bien Hoa . South Korea's first contingent arrives at the base of the base . The South Korean military says the mission is a success .
 Report claims nearly 20,000 Viet Cong military and technical personnel have entered South Vietnam through the “infiltration pipeline” along the Ho Chi Minh Trail from the North . Report: They remain under military command from Hanoi .
 Ambassador Taylor calls on Premier Phan Huy Quat to inform him that the U.S. is prepared to send 3,500 Marines to Vietnam . Ambassador Taylor: "As directed by President Johnson, the United States is prepared"
 The U.S. Embassy asks the South Vietnamese government to "invite" the United States to send the marines . Three days later, a formal request is submitted to the South Vietnam government . The request is then rejected .
 Premier Quat, a figurehead, has to obtain approval from the real power . General Nguyen Van Thieu, chief of the Armed Forces Council, has approval of the decision . The prime minister has been in charge of the armed forces since 2007 .
 Official: Communists must stop all infiltration, subversions, and sabotage . Official: They must offer “concrete, efficient, and appropriate means” to guarantee South Vietnam’s security . Communist Party must stop infiltration and subversion, official says .
 Operation Rolling Thunder, the sustained aerial bombardment of North Vietnam, is initiated . The sustained aerial bombardments of the North Vietnam were launched in April 1968 . The operation was the first sustained bombing campaign in North Vietnam .
 Six U.S. planes are downed, but only one pilot is not recovered . Only one United States pilot is recovered from the crash .
 Captain Hayden J Lockhart, flying an F-100, is shot down and becomes the first air force pilot to be taken prisoner by the North Vietnamese . Captain Lockhart was the first to be captured by North Vietnam .
 In Washington, President Johnson has not yet approved any extended series of bombing raids . President Johnson still has yet to approve a series of raids .
 For the next two weeks, he will consider the conflicting proposals of various military and civilian leaders . He will consider his proposals for the next week .
 The official position is that this air raid does not represent a change in U.S. policy . But it does imply the possibility of additional raids until North Vietnam ends its support of the Viet Cong .
 The U.S. State Department announces that these raids are authorized by the powers granted to President Johnson in the August 1964 Tonkin Gulf Resolution . The raids were carried out in Vietnam .
 The concern about the escalation of the conflict in Vietnam grows in the international community . The international community is growing concerned about the escalating conflict .
 Communists condemn the new bombing campaign; Cuba announces that it will aid North Vietnam . Cuba announces it will be aiding North Vietnam in the bombing campaign . Cuba says it will help North Vietnam if it is bombed .
 Prime Minister Lester Pearson expresses concern about the risk of additional escalation . Lester Pearson says he understands the U.S. position .
 In Britain, there is mounting pressure against the government’s support for U.S. policies .
 Military reports are surfacing of shortages of ammunition and equipment in Vietnam . Some items are being sold on the black market in Saigon .
 All of this lends credence to rumors that United States Marines will be sent to Vietnam . U.S. Marines are currently stationed in Vietnam .
 Two battalions of U.S. Marines will be deployed in security work at the Danang air base . South Vietnamese troops will be able to fight in combat for the first time .
 Battalion Landing Team 1/3 (1st Battalion 3rd Marines) begins landing at Danang air base . Within two hours, the Marines had landed in Danang .
 1st Marine Aircraft Wing deploys from Japan and Okinawa to Vietnam to support U.S. Marine operations in I Corps . At the same time, 1st . Marine aircraft wing deploys to support I Corps.
 President Johnson authorizes the use of napalm by U.S. planes bombing targets in North Vietnam . The napalm was used in Vietnam in the early 1950s .
 Among today’s arrivals is the first U.S. armor—an M48A3 tank of the 3rd Marine Tank Battalion . The tank is being used by the Marines in Afghanistan .
 More tanks with flame-throwing capability will be followed in a few days by more tanks, including those with flame throwing capability . The tanks are expected to be followed by tanks that have flame throwing capabilities .
 There is scattered firing from VC hidden ashore, but no marines are hit . No marines were hit by gunfire, but some were hit .
 The mission of the marines, now numbering 5,000, is restricted to the defense of the airbase . The mission is to defend the air base from the immediate perimeter and from the high ground along a ridge to the west .
 United States Navy’s Seventh Fleet begins Operation Market Time, the blockade of South Vietnam coastal waters . U.S. Seventh Fleet began operation Market Time to detect and interdict infiltration and resupply .
 The navy assigns two destroyers and six destroyer escorts to this mission . The mission is assigned to the Navy .
 This brings the total number of U.S. military personnel in South Vietnam to 27,000 . The U.N. military presence in Vietnam is the largest in the country .
 General Westmoreland begins work on a report titled “Commander’s Estimate of the Situation in South Vietnam,” which he will complete on March 26 . The report will be released March 26, 2013 .
 The report predicts that the bombing campaign against the North will not show tangible results until June at the earliest . The South Vietnamese army will need American reinforcements .
 Final report will recommend an increase of 40,000 U.S. troops . The final report will be released on Monday .
 This will bring the total U.S. troop commitment to 70,000 and provide 17 maneuver battalions . This will be the total United States troop commitment in the United States .
 The report also indicates that even more troops might be needed if the bombing fails to achieve results . The report indicates that more troops may be needed .
 24 South Vietnamese planes led by Air Vice-Marshal Ky and supported by United States jets strike barracks and depots on Con Co Island, 20 miles off the coast of North Vietnam . In some of the heaviest raids of the air war so far, 24 Vietnamese planes, supported by U
 This is the second set of raids in Operation Rolling Thunder and the first in which the U.S. planes use napalm . This is also the first time the United States has used napalm in the raids . The raids are part of the second series of operations in which napalm
 General Harold K Johnson, army chief of staff, reports to President Johnson and Secretary McNamara upon his return from a fact-finding trip to Vietnam . President Johnson, secretary McNamara and secretary of state McNamara visited Vietnam .
 General Johnson also advocates creating a four-division force of U.S. and SEATO troops to patrol the DMZ along the border separating North and South Vietnam and the Laotian border region . General Johnson says he wants to create a four division force of United States and SE
 Undersecretary of State George Ball openly criticizes France for repudiating the “common burden” of the anti-Communist world . France failed to support U.S. efforts in South Vietnam, Ball says . Ball: France repudiated the "common burden"
 Soviet foreign minister Andrei Gromyko begins conferring with British government leaders for five days . After five days, the British are unable to persuade the Russians to join in peace talks on the situation in Vietnam .
 The South Vietnamese air force bombs the village of Man Guang in the Danang area, killing some 45 civilians, including 37 children . The government claims that the VC flag had been flying over the village; the government says it was flying over .
 A rift begins to develop in South Vietnam between the U.S. military and the press corps . The press corps charge that curbs on coverage are so strict as to constitute censorship .
 U.S. military and government spokesmen claim that South Vietnam has imposed some of the restrictions . United States military says South Vietnam imposed some restrictions . South Vietnam is known to be the source of some restrictions in Vietnam .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff proposes sending two American divisions and one South Korean division to South Vietnam . About 100,000 troops would be sent for offensive operations against the Viet Cong .
 This triggers a storm of criticism around the world; the North Vietnamese and the Soviets loudly protest this introduction of ‘poison gas” into the war . The North Vietnam and the Soviet Union loudly protest the introduction of 'poison gases’ in the war.
 United States and South Vietnamese planes bomb a radar station at Ba Binh, 10 miles north of the 17th parallel, and attack a North Vietnamese convoy on Route 1 . The U.S. and South Vietnam planes bomb the radar station .
 Leonid Brezhnev hints that the Soviet Union may join the North Vietnamese in the war . He claims that many Russians have already volunteered to serve in Vietnam .
 U.S. and most Western diplomats doubt that the Soviet Union will allow Russian personnel to become involved in the war . Most Western diplomats continue to doubt that Russia will allow personnel to join forces .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara testifies before a Senate committee . McNamara says if the Communists are allowed to win in Vietnam, the U.S. will have to renew the struggle .
 John McNaughton drafts a crucial memo titled “Plan for Action for South Vietnam” to be used in the National Security Council sessions on April 1-2 . On this same day, McNamara’s most trusted associates draft a memo .
 U.S. and South Vietnamese planes attack North Vietnam radar and military radio stations . Four ships sink four ships at Quang Khe harbor .
 The official Communist newspaper says that China is ready to aid the Viet Cong with men and materiel if requested . It is clear from the statement that the Chinese are releasing it to preempt the Soviet Union in order to appear as a closer ally .
 President Lyndon Johnson makes an indirect offer of “economic and social cooperation” to North Vietnam if peace can be restored . President Johnson makes the offer in a statement about aiding Southeast Asian nations .
 Forty U.S. planes bomb four radar sites in North Vietnam as Operation Rolling Thunder continues . U.N. military action continues in Vietnam .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff propose bombing campaign to isolate North Vietnam from China . Plan would start on road and rail lines south of the 20th parallel and then “march north” week by week .
 The later phases of the campaign would target port facilities and industries outside populated areas . The campaign is expected to target ports, industries and ports .
 The president and Secretary McNamara decline to approve a multi-week program, preferring to retain continual control over timing and individual target selection .
 U.S. and South Vietnamese planes are using herbicides to defoliate jungles and destroy crops . herbicides are being used by the Vietnamese government in Vietnam and Laos .
 Lightning strikes U.S. camp defenses at Plei Do Lin and triggers land mine explosions that result in 88 casualties . Lightning strikes United States camp defenses and triggers mine explosions . 88 people died in the explosions .
 The JCS proposal to send three divisions to South Vietnam is discussed at a meeting among the Joint Chiefs, Secretary McNamara, and Ambassador Taylor . Ambassador Taylor is in Washington for the April 1-2 National Security Council meeting .
 Taylor opposes the plan because he feels that the South Vietnamese might resent the presence of so many foreign troops and that there was still no military necessity for them . Taylor: "There is still no need for them. There is still a military necessity"
 The proposal will be one of the topics of discussion at the NSC deliberations . NSC will discuss the proposal at the end of its deliberations .
 ARVN troops discover a Viet Cong camp some 60 miles northwest of Saigon, in Tay Ninh Province, and confiscate supplies, rations, and ammunition . ARN troops seize supplies and ammunition from the camp .
 42 U.S. planes drop 45 tons of bombs on the Bach Long radar station in North Vietnam . The bombs were dropped on Bach Long Radar Station .
 Some U.S. military leaders urge special retaliatory raids on North Vietnam, President Johnson refuses permission . President Johnson refused permission for the raids .
 In fact, he is contemplating giving the order to authorize U.S. troops to go from defensive to offensive tactics in Vietnam . He is also considering changing the rules to allow troops to use offensive tactics .
 Over 70 USAF planes make the largest incendiary attack to date on a Viet Cong concentration in the Boi Loi Forest, 25 miles northwest of Saigon . The attack was the largest in the history of the bombing .
 Spokesmen state that the raid has been planned for months, and that preparations included spraying to defoliate trees and using leaflets and loudspeakers to warn the civilian population to leave the area . The raid is not a retaliatory raid for the previous day’s bombing of the
 United States 1st Logistics Command was formed at Long Binh near Saigon to control logistics buildup in Vietnam . U.S. Logistics command was formed in Vietnam in 1968 to control the country's logistics buildup .
 United States Air Force begins Operation Steel Tiger to strike targets in the Laotian panhandle to interdict troops and supply movement down the Ho Chi Minh Trail . The U.S. Air Force will strike targets to stop troop movements and supply movements .
 In one of the largest battles since early February, ARVN troops clash with Viet Cong forces 25 miles south of Danang . ARVVN and Viet Cong troops clash 25 miles from Danang, 25 miles away .
 President Johnson considers deploying more ground troops to Vietnam . During two days of National Security Council meetings, President Johnson considered deploying ground troops .
 Johnson accedes to Westmoreland’s request for additional marines and will authorize the deployment of two more battalions and an increase of 18,00020,000 support troops . Ultimately, Johnson will authorize deployment of more troops .
 Ambassador Taylor insists troops continue to be restricted to defending U.S. bases and other installations along the coast . Ambassador Taylor was called to Washington for the meeting . He insists that the troops will continue to defend United States bases .
 Johnson backs his general and authorizes the U.S. forces to go on the offensive . Johnson: "I'm not going to be surprised"
 United States and South Vietnamese planes bomb a series of bridges and roads in North Vietnam, to include the major rail links to Hanoi . The operation was the first explicitly aimed at nonmilitary targets .
 Four Russian-built MiG fighters attack the United States planes in the first reported combat by the North Vietnamese air force . North Vietnam air force was the first to engage in combat with U.S. planes .
 In an air and amphibious assault at Vinh Loc on the Ca Mau Peninsula, 16 ARVN troops are killed . The assault is part of a major operation in Vietnam's capital, Hui-Hui Province .
 He sets forth several conditions before any negotiations will take place . However, in the course of his speech, he sets forth conditions .
 He calls for a vast economic plan for Southeast Asia, for which he will ask Congress to approve $ 1 billion . Additionally, he calls for an $1 billion economic plan .
 Western nations and U Thant of the United Nations support Johnson’s call for negotiations . U.N. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has called for negotiations to begin negotiations .
 Premier Pham Van Dong sets four conditions for negotiations and peace: independence for all Vietnamese, nonintervention by foreign powers, political settlement of all issues, and reunification of the country . The conditions are independence for Vietnam, non intervention by foreign forces and political settlement .
 These four points will remain fixed as the Communists’ nonnegotiable conditions . The Communist Party will remain committed to the Communist Party’s demands .
 United States jets fly 63 sorties against Viet Cong concentrations in Kontum Province . U.S. jets fly sorties over Kontom Province in Vietnam .
 Four carrier-based F-4 Phantom jets clash with Chinese MiGs off Hainan Island, the large Chinese island southeast of Haiphong . U.S. raids over North Vietnam have been carried out by U.N. forces .
 On April 12, the United States will admit that one Phantom and its two pilots were lost during the engagement . The U.S. will admit the loss of one of the two pilots .
 The 2nd Battalion, 3rd Marines and the 3rd Battalion, 4th Marines are deployed at Hue-Phu Bai and Danang . The 5,000 U.S. Marines already stationed in the area of Danang are reinforced with the arrival .
 The marines immediately push their patrol perimeters out past the immediate defenses of the U.S. installations . The marines establish active rather than passive defense measures .
 The F-4B Phantom II jets of VMFA-531 arrive at Danang, becoming the first marine fixed-wing tactical aircraft to utilize the base . Meanwhile, the first Marine fixed wing tactical aircraft have arrived at the base in Vietnam .
 Admiral Sharp reiterates earlier request for the U.S. Army’s 173rd Airborne Brigade in Okinawa . General Westmoreland cables Admiral Sharp, United States .
 ARVN troops battle Viet Cong forces north of Bong Son, along Highway 1 in the Central Highlands . ARN troops clash with the Viet Cong in the central Highlands .
 U.S. and South Vietnamese aircraft strike Thanh Yuen bridge and two radar positions previously hit in North Vietnam . United States and South Vietnam aircraft strike bridge and radar positions in Vietnam .
 He still resists the increase of U.S. combat personnel on the ground in Vietnam . He asks that deployment of the brigade be held up, but he is overruled .
 South Vietnamese forces have discovered some 4 million pounds of rice and 21 stolen trucks in a Viet Cong stronghold 30 miles north of Saigon, Vietnam says .
 Thirty United States Air Force planes bomb radar installations on Hon Mat Island . Thirty U.S. planes bomb the radar installations .
 U.S. planes conduct armed reconnaissance along Highways 7 and 8 in North Vietnam . They bomb the boat landing at Muong Sen. and bomb a boat landing . The United States bombarded the landing at the landing .
 Other U.S. planes fly the first night operation in North Vietnam . Other United States planes fly first night operations in Vietnam .
 Sites near Hanoi are being prepared for SAM II missiles to be provided by the Soviet Union . It is being reported, meanwhile, that sites near the capital are preparing for the missiles .
 South Vietnamese bombers sink four ships in another night raid . Air Vice-Marshal Ky led the attack on four ships .
 U.S. and South Vietnamese planes drop 1,000 tons of bombs on a major Viet Cong stronghold in Tay Ninh Province . The strike was the largest air strike of the war to date, with the largest in the history of the conflict .
 Ambassador Taylor cables from McGeorge Bundy protested the “hasty and ill-conceived” proposal for the deployment of more ground forces to South Vietnam . Ambassador Taylor said the proposal was ‘hasty’ and ‘ill-constructed’
 Leonid Brezhnev and Le Duan issue joint communique reiterating that the Soviet Union will send volunteers if North Vietnam requests them . Soviet Union to send volunteers to North Vietnam if requested .
 Newspaper publishers claim there is widespread support for Johnson’s policies . Newspaper publishers say there are widespread support in the polls .
 Two Queens College students report they have collected 2,000 signatures on a petition backing the president’s policies .
 Pope Paul VI calls for “constructive collaboration” to obtain peace but does not mention Vietnam by name . In his annual Easter message, he calls for peace in Vietnam .
 U.S. military and civilian leaders meet in Honolulu with General Westmoreland and Ambassador Taylor . Secretary of Defense McNamara and JCS chairman Earle Wheeler also attend the meeting .
 A possible deployment of 11 U.S. and six South Korean battalions would bring the total U.K.“third country” combat capability to 34 battalions . They discuss but do not recommend a possible later deployment .
 Secretary McNamara forwards the Honolulu recommendations to the president . McNamara also forwards a notation on possible later deployment of the army’s 1st Cavalry Division and the Third Marine Expeditionary Force .
 To protest the conduct of the war by his government, a 16-year-old novice Buddhist monk immolates himself . The monk's death is the first known act of self-immolation .
 CIA and the Defense Intelligence Agency report that a regiment of the 325th PAVN Division has been identified in South Vietnam . The CIA says the development is a “most ominous” development that proves that North Vietnamese battalions have entered the war .
 This is clear proof that the conflict is no longer solely an externally supported insurgency, it now includes effectively an invasion from North Vietnam . North Vietnam is now effectively a North Vietnam invasion from the U.S. It's clear that this is proof that it is not solely a . supported insurgency
 A patrol of the 3rd Marine Reconnaissance Battalion engages the Viet Cong for the first time at Binh Thai, nine miles southwest of Danang, with no U.S. casualties . No United States casualties reported .
 VC guerrillas infiltrate within three miles of Danang and fire on a South Vietnamese radio station . Elsewhere, VC guerillas fire on South Vietnam radio station in Danang .
 North Vietnamese supply routes and transportation are said to be seriously impaired . U.S. and South Vietnamese air forces have destroyed bridges and highways in recent weeks .
 Secretary of State Rusk attacks the “gullibility of educated men and the stubborn disregard of plain facts by men who are supposed to be helping our young to learn” Rusk was speaking at the American Society of International Law .
 President Johnson issues an executive order designating Vietnam a “combat area” and authorizes “hostile fire” pay, retroactive to January 1,1964 . President Johnson issued an executive .
 McNamara refuses to answer questions from the press as to whether the U.S. planned to send more troops . McNamara, however, refuses to say whether the United States planned to deploy more troops to Iraq .
 The war, he said, is now costing the nation about $1.1 billion per year . The war now costs the U.S. $1 billion a year .
 A Louis Harris poll indicates that some 57 percent of Americans support Johnson’s handling of the war . The poll shows that 57 percent support Johnson's handling of war .
 Some 20,000 people attacked the U.S. embassy in Phnom Penh and ripped down the United States flag in protest . The embassy was attacked by students, mostly students, who attacked the embassy .
 President Johnson renews his offer of “unconditional discussions ... with any government concerned” President Johnson defends the United States bombing raids, saying, “Our restraint was viewed as weakness”
 Former presidential candidate Barry Goldwater says Johnson’s policies are the same that he advocated in 1964 . Goldwater: Johnson's policies will be the same as he advocated for in 1964.
 CIA director John A McCone sent a personal memo to President Johnson stating his view that the U.S. is willing to intensify the bombing of North Vietnam, there is no utility in committing more United States ground troops .
 The JCS says additional forces are “to bolster GVN forces during their continued build-up, secure bases and installations, conduct counterinsurgency combat operations with the RVNAF” and prepare for the arrival of additional U.S. ground forces .
 United States Ill Marine Amphibious Force headquarters is established in Danang to control marine combat operations in I Corps . III MAF will be the senior marine headquarters in-country, replacing 9th Marine Expeditionary Brigade .
 The first patrols by U.S. Marines in tanks were met only by scattered sniper fire . First patrols by United States Marines in tank patrols met only scattered sniper gunfire .
 3,500 men of the U.S. Army’s 173rd Airborne Brigade begin landing in South Vietnam . The unit deploys from Okinawa and will conduct combat operations in the III Corps tactical zone initially .
 The brigade was the first U.S. Army 1 20 Vietnam War Almanac 1965 combat unit assigned to Vietnam . The brigade is the first United States Army 1. 20 Vietnam war Almanac .
 The 173rd Airborne Brigade includes the 3rd Battalion, 319th Artillery . It was the first U.S. artillery unit assigned to Vietnam . The brigade is based in Vietnam .
 There it meets considerable opposition, but its members will claim that such opposition represents a minority view . There is also considerable opposition to such a view, but it is said to be a minority .
 United States planes sink three boats said to be carrying Viet Cong guerrillas near Danang . U.S. planes sink boat said to have been carrying Vietnamese guerillas .
 The Armed Forces Council dissolves; its leader, General Nguyen Van Thieu, says this shows that the civilian regime of Premier Quat can govern . The military leaders have no political ambitions, Thieu says . The armed forces council dissolves .
 A 6,000-man brigade of the 4th Marines deploys to Chu Lai, on the coast some 55 miles south of Danang, to build a second jet air base . The new type of field, a Short Airfield for Tactical Support, is a 4,000
 A two-day battle in the Binh Duong area, 25 miles northwest of Saigon, begins when the VC start shelling ARVN positions near Thu Dau Mot . The two days of fighting begin when the two sides engage in heavy shelling .
 Afterward it will be revealed that ARVN troops fled from the engagement when they became frightened by their own planes flying overhead . Afterward, it will also reveal that ARVs fled when they become frightened by the own planes .
 U.S. and South Vietnamese planes strike at 12 bridges in North Vietnam and claim to have knocked out four . United States and South Vietnam planes strike 12 bridges . U.N. military aircraft strike at four bridges in the country .
 More than a thousand Viet Cong troops overrun Song Be, the capital of Phuoc Long Province, and occupy it for seven hours . ARVN forces recover it supported by heavy air attack .
 Five U.S. military advisers and 48 South Vietnamese are killed . 85 Viet Cong are reported killed . Five United States military advisers are killed, according to CNN.com .
 United States and ARVN forces will pursue the Viet Cong for several days but fail to engage them . U.S. forces failed to engage Viet Cong in several days . United States, ARVn. forces will continue to pursue them .
 The Americans later charge that the Viet Cong attacked their compound after overrunning the adjacent ARVN camp, which failed to offer any resistance . The Americans claim that the attack was the result of an overrunning of the adjacent camp . The U.S. government says that the ARV
 General Westmoreland and Deputy Premier Nguyen Van Thieu make a parachute jump together . The two politicians jump together in front of each other at the end of the jump .
 Also this day, the 1st Marine Aircraft Wing flies in to establish its advance headquarters at Danang . The 1st Marines Wing flies into Danang to establish headquarters .
 U.S. will suspend bombing of North Vietnam for several delays in hope of eliciting reciprocal "constructive" gestures from the North Vietnamese . North Vietnamese embassy in Moscow says that the United States will suspend its bombing of Vietnam .
 The North Vietnamese refuse even to receive Kohler and return the message unopened . Kohler's message was returned unopened by the North Vietnamese . The North Vietnam refuse to receive the message .
 Soldiers of the 17 3rd Airborne Brigade conduct combat operations near Bien Hoa Air Base . Soldiers encounter no enemy contact during combat operations . Soldiers of 17 Airborne brigade conduct combat . operations near the base .
 Hanoi claims the Viet Cong held their first “congress” in a “liberated area” of South Vietnam in early May . The Viet Cong are believed to be the first to hold their first "congress" in the country .
 Viet Cong guerrillas attack textile mill only five miles north of Saigon, killing eight and wounding 11 . Disguised as South Vietnamese troops, they attack the textile mill . Eight killed and 11 wounded in the attack .
 President Johnson orders a pause in Operation Rolling Thunder in the hope that it may elicit a favorable response from Hanoi . President Johnson ordered the pause in the operation in an effort to elicit a positive response .
 George Meany, president of the AFL-CIO, criticizes ‘academic’ opponents of President Johnson’s conduct of the war . Meany: “Academic” opponents of war were “academists’. Meany says .
 Organized labor largely supports the administration’s Vietnam policies . The administration has been criticized for its Vietnam policy .
 The Vietnam War Almanac 1965 features prominent academic and governmental figures who defend or attack the administration’s policies in Vietnam . It lasts 151/2 hours 1 22 hours 1. 22 hours .
 McGeorge Bundy leaves for the Dominican Republic to monitor the assignment of U.S. troops there . Bundy had agreed to participate, but he leaves for Dominican Republic . Bundy will monitor assignment of United States troops .
 President Johnson has sent the troops to put down what he regards as an attempted Communist takeover . President Johnson sends troops to stop the Communist takeover of the country .
 27 U.S. servicemen and four South Vietnamese dead at Bien Hoa air base . 95 Americans injured; over 40 United States and South Vietnamese planes, including 10 B-57s, are destroyed .
 Gallup poll shows a slight decline (from 55 percent to 52 percent) in the number of Americans who support the administration’s policies in Vietnam . Gallup poll: A slight decline in support for the administration's policies in the country .
 President Johnson releases memo from Secretary of Defense McNamara showing how the recently appropriated $700 million will be spent on the military .
 Henry Cabot Lodge says nations did not want the U.S. to negotiate an end to the war . Lodge says they were concerned about the United States' willingness to stay in Vietnam . Lodge is back from a trip through Asia where he visited .
 The United States resumes bombing raids over North Vietnam, striking at oil storage tanks . U.S. strikes at North Vietnam's oil storage tankers . The U.N. bombing campaign is the first of its kind in North Vietnam .
 There is disappointment that North Vietnam did not respond to the bombing pause . North Vietnam has not responded to the decision to stop bombing .
 Soviet Union warns Thailand against allowing the U.S. to use Thai bases to raid over North Vietnam . The Soviet Union tells Thailand not to allow the United States to use Thailand bases to attack North Vietnam.
 The government alleges that there has been a plot to assassinate Premier Quat . Most of those arrested are Roman Catholics and military personnel . The main complaint seems to be that Quat is not taking a hard enough line against pro-Communist elements .
 The Soviet Union is building antiaircraft missile sites in and around Hanoi, Vietnam . It is now officially confirmed by U.S. intelligence that the sites are being built by the Soviets .
 United States planes bomb a military complex at Quan Soui, an ammunition depot at Phu Qui, and five other targets in North Vietnam . The U.S. planes bomb the military complex, a depot and a military base .
 President Anastas Mikoyan suggested that the world was threatened by nuclear war, Eaton reports . Eaton also reports that President Mikoyans suggested that nuclear war was a threat . Eaton reports that the president also suggested that war was possible .
 Secretary of State Rusk will respond to Eaton’s observations two days later, claiming that the U.S. does not give “undue importance” to Kosygin . Rusk also warned the Soviet Union and China to avoid further military involvement .
 Over 2,200 ARVN troops launch an offensive in Kontum, a strategic area in the Central Elighlands, in an attempt to disrupt a Viet Cong buildup . The offensive is reportedly aimed at taking control there when the monsoon season begins .
 National Legislative Council will uphold all of Quat’s demands on June 4 . President Phan Khac Suu refuses to sign a decree of Premier Quat's calling for some cabinet changes .
 Eight hundred Australian troops depart for Vietnam, and New Zealand announces that it will send an artillery battalion . New Zealand will send a battalion to Vietnam .
 United States warships begin to provide naval gunfire against Viet Cong targets in the central coastal area of South Vietnam . U.S. naval gunfire was fired at targets by the Viet Cong during the war .
 At first this gunfire is limited to destroyers armed with five-inch guns . Cruisers and cruisers will soon be called in and eventually a battleship mounting 16-in-range guns will provide support .
 Only three U.S. advisers and about 60 of the South Vietnamese troops manage to escape . Only three United States advisers and 60 of South Vietnamese forces managed to escape. Only three of the Vietnamese troops were able to escape in Vietnam .
 The battle demonstrates to the U.S. military the continuing difficulties that the South Vietnamese military faces in confronting their Communist foe . This battle demonstrates the difficulties faced by the South Vietnam military in confronting Communist foes .
 United States planes bomb an ammunition depot at Hoi Jan, west of Hanoi, and try again to drop the Thanh Hoa Bridge . U.S. planes bombed Hoi-Jan, Vietnam, during the war .
 U.S. forces in Vietnam pursue the “enclave’s strategy first suggested by Ambassador Taylor .
 Under this concept, United States forces will control the densely populated coastal areas, freeing up the ARVN to recover and take control of the countryside while the government builds credibility and legitimacy . U.S. forces would control the coastal areas and take over the countryside, allowing the government to
 The marines are now at Danang, Phu Bai, and Chu Lai, while the army will defend the area around Vung Tau in the III Corps tactical zone . The army will also be in the tactical zone in the north .
 Beijing warns again that the increasing U.S. role in the war justifies China’s own increased support to North Vietnam . Beijing says the increasing United States role justifies its increased support for North Vietnam.
 United States planes continue bombing raids on military installations throughout North Vietnam . U.S. planes continue to bomb North Vietnam military installations .
 Visitors to Hanoi report that almost one-third of the city’s population has been evacuated and that the city is now ringed by antiaircraft sites . Visitors to the Vietnamese capital report that one third of the population has now been evacuated .
 Poet Robert Lowell rejects invitation to attend arts festival at the White House . Lowell says he opposes the administration's policies in Vietnam .
 U.S. Marines and ARVN troops mount joint operation against Viet Cong forces in the area of the Chu Lai air base . They are supported by naval gunfire from the USS Canberra .
 Australia deploys the 1st Battalion of the Royal Australian Regiment to Vietnam for combat operations in III Corps . The battalion was deployed to Vietnam in the early stages of the Vietnam War .
 The first contingent of Australians arrives by plane in Saigon . They will join the United States 173rd Airborne Brigade at the Bien Hoa air base .
 Britain’s foreign secretary Michael Stewart proposes a conference to end the fighting and remove all foreign troops from South Vietnam .
 The Soviet Union has rejected the British plan for reconvening the Geneva conference, Stewart says . Stewart also reveals that the Soviet Union rejected the plan for the conference .
 In two ambushes in the area of Pleiku, at Binh Chanh and Phu Bon, the Viet Cong destroy another battalion of ARVN troops . The Viet Cong also destroy a battalion in two ambushings .
 Major General Lewis Walt takes command of the III Marine Amphibious Force and the 3rd Division from Major General William Collins . Major General Walt replaces Major General Collins as commander of the Marines .
 At least six Russian Ilyushin-28 light jet bombers are now in North Vietnam . U.S. officials confirm that at least six of the Russian aircraft are in the country now .
 The State Department confirms that U.S. troops are engaging in some combat against Communist forces in Vietnam . Troops assigned to guard United States installations in Vietnam are engaged in combat with Communist forces .
 General Westmoreland sends a long message to the Pacific commander for relay to the Joint Chiefs, describing the deteriorating battlefield situation . The message was sent by the Pacific's Pacific commander .
 This request leads to the ‘44battalion’ debate within the Johnson administration . It is clear that such a commitment will drastically change the United States role in Vietnam . Such a commitment would change the U.S. role .
 When questioned as to how he will deploy so many troops, Westmoreland will reply that he must be free to move U.S. forces around Vietnam .
 This apparently innocuous statement seems to describe a mission change for U.S. troops, produces an immediate response in the press . The statement was apparently innocuous .
 Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach writes to assure president that he has the power to commit large-scale forces without going back to Congress . U.S. forces in Vietnam have been criticized for new combat role .
 Some 1,500 Viet Cong start a mortar attack on the district capital of Dong Xoai, about 60 miles northeast of Saigon . They then quickly overrun the town’s military headquarters and an adjoining militia compound .
 Other Viet Cong also raid a United States Special Forces camp about a mile away . U.S. helicopters fly in ARVN reinforcements, and at first the Viet Cong seem to be in retreat .
 On the last day, a battalion of U.S. paratroopers is flown into an airstrip near Dong Xoai, but Westmoreland never sends them into battle . The last day of the war, the U.N. troops were flown into the airstrip but
 Second Lieutenant Charles Q Williams of 5th Special Forces Group single-handedly knocks out a Viet Cong machine gun . Williams guides helicopters into the area to evacuate the wounded . Williams knocks out machine gun and guides helicopters to evacuate wounded .
 Williams will receive the Congressional Medal of Honor for his actions in the battle . Williams was wounded four times in the engagement . Williams will be awarded the Medal for his bravery .
 Ambassador Taylor, in Washington for consultations, reports to President Johnson and Congress, and speaks at several public forums . Ambassador Taylor provides a pessimistic outlook on the situation in Vietnam .
 A faction of officers, known as the “Young Turks,” led by Air Vice-Marshal Ky, and Generals Nguyen Van Thieu and Nguyen Hun Co, announce formation of a National Leadership Committee . Roman Catholic opposition to Premier Quat’s government leads him
 Fulbright will become one of the most vocal critics of the war and the Johnson administration’s handling of it . Fulbright to become a vocal critic of the Johnson Administration .
 Communist terrorists explode a bomb in the Saigon airport that wounds at least 22 persons, including 20 U.S. servicemen . The bombing is the largest bomb attack in Vietnam's history .
 U.S. planes bomb targets in North Vietnam every day, but are still prohibited from bombing Hanoi and the Soviet missile sites . United States planes still bomb targets but are not allowed to bomb the Soviet sites .
 On June 17, two United States Navy jets down two Communist MiGs, and one more three days later . Two of the MiGs were shot down by the U.S. Navy .
 U.S. planes drop almost 3 million leaflets urging the North Vietnamese to end the war . United States planes also drop almost three million leaflets to get their leaders to end war .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara announces that 21,000 more U.S. troops are to be sent to Vietnam . McNamara: "21,000 troops will be deployed to Vietnam"
 He also claims that it is now known that North Vietnamese regular troops had infiltrated South Vietnam before the U.S. bombing began .
 Ambassador Taylor sends a report to Washington confirming “the seriousness of the military situation as reported by General Westmoreland” The report also points up the very tenuous hold the new government has on the country .
 Dwight D Eisenhower urges Americans to support President Johnson’s policies . Eisenhower admits the complexities of the situation, while admitting the complexities .
 Representatives of Ceylon and three nations of the British Commonwealth say they will visit the principal nations involved and try to find a way to end the war . Ceylon, Ghana, Nigeria, and Trinidad and Tobago are among the nations involved in the conflict .
 North Vietnam, the Soviet Union, and Communist China immediately reject their plan . The proposed visits were never made .
 For the first time, 27 B-52 Stratofortress jet bombers fly from Guam to strike a Viet Cong concentration in a heavily forested area of Binh Duong Province . The first time the bombers have flown from Guam .
 Operation Arc Light was launched under the aegis of the Strategic Air Command . Such flights were known as 'Operation Arc Light' in the 1960s .
 One B-52 is lost in a collision, and the raid is revealed to have cost $20 million . The raid was revealed to be the largest ever to take place in the U.S.
 Air Vice-Marshal Nguyen Cao Ky assumes the premiership of the ninth government within the last 20 months . He is the prime minister of Vietnam's ninth government in 20 years .
 "He promises to rule with an iron hand and will start by demanding full mobilization," he says . He promises to start with full mobilization .
 General Wheeler cables Westmoreland asking if the 44 battalions will be enough to convince enemy forces that they cannot win . General Wheeler later wrote to the General asking if he could win the battle .
 He says the 44 battalions will establish a favorable balance of power by the end of the year . But to seize the initiative, further forces would be required in 1966, he says .
 U.S. planes bomb targets only 80 miles from the Chinese border, deepest raids into North Vietnam so far . United States bombs targets 80 miles away from China's border .
 Premier Ky announces austerity measures, which include extending martial law and curfew, imposing price controls, and cutting salaries of top government officials . The measures are part of a plan to impose price controls and extend martial law .
 Hanoi Radio announces that the Viet Cong have shot Sergeant Harold G Bennett . Bennett had been captured in December 1964 while serving as an adviser with the Vietnamese Rangers . Bennett was shot in retaliation for South Vietnam's execution of a convicted Viet Cong terrorist .
 President Johnson appeals to the United Nations to persuade North Vietnam to negotiate a peace . President Johnson appealed to the U.N. to persuade N. Vietnam to talk peace .
 Thirty-one people, including nine Americans, are killed in a bomb explosion in a riverboat restaurant in Saigon . Nine Americans were killed .
 Hanoi Radio reports that the Viet Cong now have “death lists,” headed by the names of Ambassador Taylor, his deputy, U Alexis Johnson, Premier Ky, and General Thieu .
 About 1,000 Viet Cong attack an ARVN position near Due Hoa, 20 miles northwest of Saigon . They are finally dispersed by aerial bombing .
 3,000 troops of the 173rd Airborne Brigade in conjunction with an Australian battalion 1 28 Vietnam War Almanac 1965 . The first major ground offensive ordered for U.S. forces in Vietnam .
 The operation is called off after three days when it fails to make any major contract with the enemy . One American is killed and nine Americans and four Australians are wounded . Nine Americans, four Australians and four Americans are wounded in the operation .
 The State Department assures the American public that the operation was in accord with Johnson administration policy on the role of U.S. troops .
 United States Army Vietnam is formed at Long Binh near Saigon to support army operations in Vietnam . U.S. Army Vietnam was formed in Vietnam to support operations in the country .
 The 2nd Brigade, 1st Infantry Division, deploys to Vietnam from Fort Riley, Kansas, for combat operations in III Corps .
 The 1st Brigade, 101st Airborne Division, deploys to Vietnam from Fort Campbell, Kentucky, for combat operations in II Corps . The 1 Brigade deploys in Vietnam from the Fort Campbell Army base .
 The number of U.S. soldiers, airmen, marines, and sailors in South Vietnam now exceeds 50,000 .
 Undersecretary of State George Ball submits memo to President Johnson advising against enlargement of U.S. commitment in Vietnam . Ball convinced that the United States is “pouring its resources down the drain in the wrong place”
 Ball concludes that “humiliation would be more likely than the achievement of our objectives” and advises that the U.S. “cut its losses” by not committing more troops, restricting the combat role of those in place, and seeking to negotiate a way out of
 The United States air base at Danang comes under attack by the Viet Cong for the first time . An 85-man enemy sapper team infiltrates the airfield, blowing up three planes and heavily damaging three others . One USAF man is killed and three United States Marines are wounded .
 The State Department reports that 20 percent fewer ships from non-Communist nations are calling at North Vietnamese ports . The U.S. State Department says that ships are less likely to call at North Vietnam ports .
 This suggests that the U.S. is beginning to isolate North Vietnam, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: This suggests it is possible by political or military pressure, but not necessarily by military pressure .
 The Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., leader of the civil rights struggle by African Americans, says he may join peace rallies and teach-ins . King says he is so convinced the war must be ended that he may help end the war .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk makes an Independence Day broadcast over the Voice of America . Rusk says the United States is still waiting to hear what North Vietnam will do in return for a cessation of U.S. bombing . North Vietnam has not responded to the request .
 ARVN troops retake outpost near Ba Gia from the Viet Cong, who will attack several times during the next few days but be repulsed by the South Vietnamese troops . The South Vietnamese forces retake the outpost from the enemy forces .
 2,500-man task force of South Vietnamese, U.S. and Australian troops moves in to search area . Task force is part of the 173rd Airborne Brigade, which is based in the Philippines .
 10 Americans and one Australian were killed in an Australian platoon ambushed . 10 Australians and 10 Americans were reportedly killed .
 Representative Gerald Ford urges President Johnson to bomb antiaircraft sites ready to receive Soviet missiles . Ford urges president to bomb sites that were ready to get Soviet missiles from the U.S. Rep. Gerald Ford calls for bombing sites .
 Maxwell Taylor resigns from his post in Vietnam . He will be replaced by former ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge . Taylor will be the first ambassador to leave Vietnam .
 Taylor returns to Washington haunted by a sense of failure . Taylor lost the debate about increasing U.S. ground commitment at the Honolulu conference in April .
 U.S. Army captain pleads not guilty to charges of feigning mental illness to get out of Vietnam . He was accused of trying to get a better life out of the Vietnam War .
 Prime Minister Harold Wilson of Great Britain sends an envoy to Hanoi to persuade the North Vietnamese to consider negotiations, but the envoy is rebuffed . Harold Wilson was the prime minister of the British government .
 President Johnson confirms that the government is considering limited mobilization, to include a call-up of reservists, larger draft quotas, and increased defense expenditures . The government is also considering increased defense spending .
 Viet Cong attack An Hoa island, and five Americans are killed in the first day’s fighting . In the ensuing days, many civilians will die in the crossfire .
 On July 13, the VC overrun the last outpost and kill all 26 ARVN defenders . The VC overruned the outpost on July 13 and killed all 26 .
 Viet Cong release 60 ARVN soldiers captured on June 8 at Dong Xoai . In a gesture evidently to gain favor with the South Vietnamese people, the Viet Cong released the soldiers . The move was apparently intended to show favor with South Vietnam people .
 U.S. Phantom jets shoot down two MiG-17s with Sidewinder air-to-air missiles . The first air force airto-Air victories of the Vietnam War were the first air to-air victories .
 The government announces that the first contingent of ‘volunteers’ has left to serve in South Vietnam . The first contingent has left the country .
 Secretary Rusk states that the “idea of sanctuary is dead,” meaning that the United States will attack any part of North Vietnam it chooses to . Rusk: The U.S. will attack North Vietnam if it chooses .
 United States planes inflict heavy damage on a river shipping area northwest of Hue . U.S. planes were involved in heavy bombing raids on the area in Vietnam .
 Vice President Hubert Humphrey defends the administration’s conduct of the war . Humphrey warns its critics not to mistake appeasement for peace .
 A marine patrol from the 3rd Reconnaissance Battalion is ambushed by the VC near Danang . The marine patrol was ambushed near the city .
 First Lieutenant Frank Reasoner of Kellogg, Idaho, kills two Viet Cong and organizes his men into a hasty defense . Then races through machine-gun fire to rescue his injured radio operator . Wounded, the platoon leader, First Lieutenant Reasoner, is killed by two Viet
 Reasoner was the first marine to earn the Medal of Honor in the Vietnam War . Reasoner succumbs to his wounds, but later is named the first Marine to win the Medal . He was killed in Vietnam .
 U.S. planes hit targets only 40 miles from the border of China, the closest raids to the border to date . The raids were the closest to the Chinese border to ever be carried out .
 Confronted with outraged protest, Ky first denies making this statement, then admits that he meant only that he admired the way Hitler rallied the German people . Ky then says he admired how Hitler rallied his people .
 With the arrival of 3,000 U.S. troops, the total United States force in Vietnam is now 71,000 . The U.N. troops in Vietnam are now in the country's most populated region .
 The Department of Defense announces curbs on reporting specifics of casualties, troop movements, and participating units . The curbs are voluntary .
 New Zealand deploys a field artillery battery to Vietnam for combat operations in support of the Australian forces in III Corps . The battery was deployed to support the Australian troops in the Vietnam War .
 McNamara is informed by secret cable from Deputy Secretary of Defense Cyrus Vance that Johnson has decided to give General Westmoreland the additional troops he had requested . McNamara was informed that he had asked for the troops .
 A large ARVN force clears and reopens Route 19, the strategic route through the Central Highlands . Route 19 is a strategic route that traverses the country's Central Highlands and borders many of its valleys .
 An armed convoy from Qui Nhon gets through to Pleiku without being attacked by the Viet Cong . For the first time in six weeks, an armed convoy passes through Pleiku . The armed convoy is the first of its kind to pass through the border .
 Six of the 10 main roads leading out of Saigon are reported to be completely controlled by the Viet Cong . However, it is reported that six of the ten main roads out of the city are completely controlled .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara visited the carrier USS Independence off Vietnam . McNamara was secretary of defense during the war .
 Commander Jeremiah Denton is shot down and captured in North Vietnam . He was captured in a raid over North Vietnam in 1968 .
 He will remain one of the most prominent U.S. POWs until the end of the war . He will later be elected to Congress .
 Souvanna Phouma holds elections, but the polls are open only to a limited elite who must vote for carefully screened candidates . The polls are only open to a small elite who can only vote for selected candidates .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara revises an earlier memorandum for the president prepared on July 1 . McNamara was on a weeklong trip to Vietnam . The memo revises the earlier memo .
 Ho Chi Minh says his people will fight for 20 more years or as long as it takes to achieve victory . The 20th anniversary of the signing of the Geneva Accords is 20 years since the signing .
 Premier Ky, also speaking on this occasion in Saigon, reaffirms his determination to fight for the ‘liberation’ of North Vietnam . Premier Ky reaffirms that he is committed to fighting for the "liberation"
 Government planes bomb trucks carrying supplies for the Viet Cong on the Ho Chi Minhh Trail . Government planes bombed trucks with supplies .
 President Johnson begins a weeklong series of conferences with his civilian and military advisers on Vietnam . President Johnson will meet with private citizens he trusts .
 He appears to be considering all options, but it's clear he has made up his mind to provide more combat troops . Westmoreland and McNamara requested more troops, and recommended by McNamara .
 Thirty Guam-based B-52s bomb the Viet Cong in War Zone D again . Fighter-bombers then move in for precision strikes on the same area .
 Some of President Johnson’s advisers tell him that he should give the American public all the facts, ask for an increase in taxes, mobilize the reserves, and declare a state of national emergency . President Johnson's advisers say he should .
 President tells staff that he wants any decisions implemented in a ‘low-key manner’ in order to avoid an abrupt challenge to the Communists . However, the president rejects this approach, telling staff he wants to avoid undue concern and excitement in Congress and public opinion .
 The Pentagon reports that since 1961, the U.S. wounded in Vietnam outnumber those killed by 5 to 1, the highest such ratio in any American conflict . The highest ratio in all American conflict was in Vietnam, the Pentagon reports .
 U.S. destroyers shell a fleet of suspected Viet Cong junks and sink 23 of them . United States destroyers shells suspected enemy junks .
 President Johnson informs a small group of Democratic and Republican congressional leaders of his decision to increase the number of ground troops in Vietnam . The decision was made by Johnson to increase ground troops .
 Secretary Rusk has talked with members of the International Red Cross about improving the treatment of POWs on both sides . The United States government confirms that Secretary of State Rusk is talking with the Red Cross .
 F-105 fighter-bombers attack missile installation that fired at U.S. planes on July 24 and another missile installation 40 miles northwest of Hanoi . U.N. planes fired at two missile installations in Vietnam in July .
 Five U.S. planes were shot down in the attack . One missile launcher was destroyed, another damaged, but five were destroyed .
 President Johnson orders an increase in U.S. military forces in Vietnam, from the present 75,000 to 125,000 . Johnson says he will order additional increases if situation calls for it .
 He says he has asked the commanding general, General Westmoreland, what more he needs to meet this mounting aggression . He says, “I have asked him what more I need to do to meet the mounting aggression.”
 To fill the increase in military manpower needs, he announces that the monthly draff calls will be doubled from 17,000 to 35,000 . The monthly calls will also be doubled .
 Most members of Congress are reported to favor Johnson’s decision . United States state governors, now convened for their annual conference, also support a resolution backing Johnson .
 Hanoi immediately attacks Johnson, condemning the U.S. troop increase . Johnson's troop increase was condemned by the Vietnamese government . Johnson was assassinated in 1968 .
 U.S. and South Vietnamese bombers hit a Buddhist monastery by mistake, killing two monks and wounding ten . Two monks were killed and ten were wounded in the attack .
 One survey shows general support for Johnson’s decision to send more troops . But another, more specialized, shows a shift from complete support to uncertainty .
 First 4,000 paratroopers of the 101st Airborne Division arrive in Vietnam, landing at Cam Ranh Bay . The 101st arrived in the country's first major combat operation in Vietnam since 1944 .
 29 nations now give some kind of aid to South Vietnam . Only Korea, Thailand, Philippines, Australia, and New Zealand send troops to the country .
 The United States formally requests that the United Nations Security Council help settle the war in Vietnam . The U.N. Security Council has been tasked with settling the war .
 President Johnson charges that Gerald Ford has misrepresented events by claiming that prominent Democrats dissuaded Johnson from calling up the reserves . President Johnson says Gerald Ford claimed prominent Democrats had dissuaded him from using the reserves to call up reserves .
 Ford denies that he ever said this, but the disagreement is only a reflection of one of the most controversial aspects of the war . Johnson’s failure to call up the reserves is only one of his most controversial decisions .
 United States aircraft bomb 11 bridges, destroying two, and hit three radar installations in North Vietnam . U.S. aircraft bomb bridges, destroy two, destroy radar installations .
 Operation Market Time is removed from the United States Seventh Fleet and assigned to a newly created coastal surveillance force . The monitoring of sea traffic along the Vietnam coast will continue to be controlled by the U.S. Navy .
 United States troops end six-day operation in Phuoc Tuy Province, during which they fail to make contact with the Viet Cong . U.S. troops end operation after failing to find any contact with Viet Cong during operation . United States forces end operation in Vietnam .
 In Flonolulu, General Wheeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, meets with Admiral Sharp, CINCPAC, to discuss plans for stepping up U.S. forces in Vietnam . In Vietnam, the United States will step up its presence in Vietnam.
 The United States has begun transferring troops from U.S. Army Europe on a “volunteer” basis . The move is being done on a volunteer basis, a U.N. Army spokesman in Washington says .
 A Viet Cong force of about 3,000 soldiers strikes at a South Vietnamese special forces camp at Due Co near the Cambodian border . The attack is the latest in a series of attacks by the South Vietnamese government forces in Vietnam .
 United States troops from the 1st Infantry Division and 173rd Airborne Brigade are inserted into the battle . Two ARVN airborne battalions are flown in as reinforcements, but the VC will not be repulsed until U.S. troops arrive .
 Peasants in Hau Nghia Province are reported to be demonstrating against both the VC and South Vietnamese government .
 CBS TV shows pictures of men from the 1st Battalion, 9th Marines, setting fire to huts in the village of Cam Ne, six miles southwest of Danang . Despite a report that the Viet Cong had already fled the area, the Vietnamese government had reportedly already fled .
 The Department of Defense announces that it is increasing the monthly draff quota from 17,000 in August to 27,400 in September . The monthly quota will be increased to 36,500 in October . The increase is expected to take place in September and October .
 It also announces that the navy will require 4,600 draftees, the first such action since 1956 . The navy will also need 4,500 drafetees . It is the first time since 1956 that such a move has been made since then .
 Viet Cong sappers penetrate U.S. defenses and blow up Esso oil storage tanks on Hai Vai Peninsula, across the bay from Danang . Esso storage tanks were blown up by the Viet Cong .
 Two million gallons of fuel are destroyed, but U.S. military officials say it does not affect combat operations . Fuel is almost 40 percent of the United States supply in Vietnam .
 A U.S. B-57 with a full load of bombs crashes into a residential section of Nha Trang . The crash was the first of its kind in Vietnam .
 U.S. aircraft bomb explosives plant at Lang Chi in North Vietnam . United States aircraft bomb the explosives plant in Vietnam . Bombing plant was the first time the bombs had been dropped in Vietnam since 1968 .
 The Chinese government warns that it may send forces to Vietnam to fight for the Communist cause if necessary . The government says it could send troops to Vietnam if necessary to defend the country .
 Reverend Martin Luther King criticizes President Johnson for his failure to enter negotiations with the Viet Cong to end the war . King threatens to appeal personally to the Communists, even if it means violating federal law .
 A-4 Skyhawk becomes the second U.S. aircraft shot down by a surface-to-air missile over North Vietnam . The U.N. aircraft is the second aircraft to be shot down in Vietnam .
 Five U.S. Navy warplanes were downed over Hanoi by antiaircraft fire . Five United States Navy . warplanes are downed over the city . Five US Navy . Warplanes were shot down by anti-plane fire .
 Advance units of the 7th Marines land at Chu Lai, bringing U.S. Marine strength in South Vietnam to four regiments and four air groups .
 The marines are given responsibility for the conduct of combat operations in southern I Corps and northern II Corps . The marines will be responsible for combat operations for southern and northern I Corps .
 U.S. and VNAF aircraft continue the intensified air campaign in South Vietnam . United States and V.N.F aircraft continued to fly over Vietnam .
 The National Assembly approves sending troops to fight in South Vietnam . In exchange for sending one combat division to Vietnam, the United States agrees to equip five South Korean divisions . The U.S. agrees to arm South Korea in exchange for the agreement .
 Two car bombs explode at the National Police Headquarters in Saigon, killing eight policemen and wounding 17 . Eight policemen were killed and 17 wounded in the blast .
 The Viet Cong claim credit for the attack, but there is some speculation that it is the work of a dissident group of South Vietnamese who have attempted a coup . Some speculation that a coup attempt is also possible .
 VC guerrillas attack a U.S. Marine tank unit near Danang but suffer six killed in the process . Six Americans died in the attack .
 U.S. Marines conduct Operation Starlite on the Van Tuong Peninsula 16 miles south of Chu Lai, Quang Ngai Province, I Corps. The operation is part of the U.N. Korea mission to conduct operations in the region .
 5,500 marines from the 3rd, 4th, and 7th Marines destroy a Viet Cong stronghold, scoring a resounding victory . The first major operation of the Vietnam War conducted only by United States troops .
 U.S. pilots have received approval to destroy any Sovietmade missiles they see while raiding North Vietnam . The move is a major change from previous orders that restricted them to bombing only previously approved targets .
 United States Task Force Collins from the 101st Airborne Division conducts Operation Highland . Operation Highland is a clearing operation to secure An Khe base for the incoming U.S. Marines .
 USAF B-52 bombers strike suspected Viet Cong concentrations in War Zone D . Fighter-bombers attack radar site in North Vietnam .
 ARVN forces clear Route 21 between Ninh Hoa and Ban Me Thuot in the Central Highlands, II Corps, to permit supply convoys to pass . Route 21 is located in the central Highlands of Vietnam, and is closed to traffic .
 After an all-night battle in the Can Tho area of the Mekong Delta, a Viet Cong battalion is forced to withdraw, leaving behind over 50 dead . Over 50 people are killed in the battle .
 Premier Nguyen Cao Ky announces that South Vietnam will not negotiate with the Communists without guarantees that North Vietnamese troops will be withdrawn from the South . South Vietnam is demanding guarantees that the Communists will withdraw their troops from South Vietnam .
 He promises to institute major reforms to correct economic and social injustices . He also promises that his government will institute reforms .
 In the United States, President Johnson signs into law a bill making it illegal to destroy or mutilate a United States draff card, with penalties of up to five years and a $10,000 fine . The bill was signed into law in the U.S. with penalties
 Foreign troops, including U.S. forces, will be paid in scrip in order to curb black marketeering in South Vietnam . The decision was made to stop black marketeers in Vietnam .
 U.S. aircraft continue to bomb targets in North Vietnam . B-52s strike Viet Cong troop concentrations in War Zone D and in Quang Tin Province .
 The United States I Field Force Vietnam headquarters is formed at Nha Trang to coordinate army combat operations in the Central Highlands . The headquarters is located in the central Vietnamese capital .
 The 1st Cavalry Division deploys to Vietnam from Fort Benning, Georgia, for combat operations in II Corps .
 Operation Starlite with Operation Piranha on Batangan Peninsula, 23 miles south of their base at Chu Lai, Quang Ngai Province, I Corps . United States Marines and South Vietnamese forces follow up Operation Starlight with Operation .
 Purpose of operation is to find and destroy remnants of the 1st Viet Cong Regiment . Purpose of the operation was to find remnants of 1st . Viet Cong regiment .
 U.S. warplanes hit a bridge just 17 miles from the North Vietnamese border with China . The bridge is located 17 miles away from the border with North Vietnam . It was the first bridge to be bombed by the United States .
 United States aircraft drop 10,000 tons of toys and supplies over five towns in South Vietnam . U.S. aircraft dropped 10,500 tons of supplies and supplies in five towns .
 Advance elements of the 1st Cavalry Division begin to arrive in South Vietnam at Qui Nhon . Advance elements arrive in Qui-Nhon .
 The arrival of the entire division will bring U.S. troop strength in South Vietnam to 125,000 . The arrival will bring the United States troop strength there in the South Vietnam .
 The division will initially be based at the newly established Camp Radcliff in An Khe . It will be based in the country's capital An Khe Province .
 Representative Gerald R Ford charges that the Johnson administration is deceiving Americans about the actual cost of the war . Ford: The Johnson administration has been lying to the public about the cost of war .
 ARVN paratroopers and their U.S. advisers jump into the Ben Cat area, 20 miles north of Saigon . The area is 20 miles from Saigon and is located 20 miles south of the city .
 This is the first major parachute assault of the war by the South Vietnamese . The first major parachuting assault was carried out by South Vietnamese forces .
 Although they fail to make contact with the enemy, they achieve their goal of clearing Route 13, at least for the time being .
 U.S. deputy ambassador Alexis Johnson warns Japan and other noncommunist nations that they cannot continue to remain apart from the struggle in Vietnam . Johnson: "fundamental issues are at stake"
 In their first strike over the Mekong Delta, B-52 bombers hit targets in Vinh Binh Province . First strike over Vietnam's Mekong River .
 ARVN troops claim that the Viet Cong used gas grenades when attacking an outpost near Quang Ngai, but the claim will never be substantiated . The claim will be never substantiated by the Vietnamese government .
 In three incidents, U.S. planes strike so close to the DMZ that at least 60 South Vietnamese civilians are reported killed or wounded . In three such incidents, United States planes strike close to DMZ, killing or wounding civilians .
 General Westmoreland orders that special precautions be taken to avoid causing harm to civilians, but simultaneously calls for redrawing the borders of the free strike zone . Westmorelands orders special precautions .
 U.S. troops from the 1st Brigade, 101st Airborne Division, conduct Operation Gibraltar, a search and destroy sweep northeast of An Khe in Binh Dinh Province . Operation Gibraltar was part of Operation Gibraltar to secure the base camp .
 During this operation, the American troops defeat a Viet Cong regiment, the first defeat of an enemy main force unit by the U.S. Army . The operation was the first to defeat a main force force by the United States Army .
 Seven United States aircraft were lost in raids over North and South Vietnam . Seven U.S. aircraft were killed .
 Chinese claim to have shot down a U.S. F-104 jet over Hainan island and captured its pilot . United States claims that the plane developed a mechanical problem over the Gulf of Tonkin .
 During an engagement near Ben Cat, United States troops kill 12 VC and report finding a large arms cache . U.S. troops killed 12 VC, report finding an arms cache in Ben Cat area .
 The South Vietnamese government executes three accused VC agents held at Danang . The South Vietnam government executed three VC agents in Danang, Vietnam . The executions were the first of its kind .
 Two U.S. soldiers held captive since 1963 are executed in retaliation for the execution of their agents by the South Vietnamese . Three days later, a clandestine VC radio station announces the execution . The execution of the two soldiers is announced as “war criminals” in retaliation .
 Two U.S. Air Force jets are shot down, one by a surface-to-air missile, while bombing the Minh Binh bridge in North Vietnam . One of the jets was shot down by a missile during the bombing of the bridge .
 The 1st Infantry Division deploys to Vietnam from Fort Riley, Kansas . It will initially be stationed in Bien Hoa Province, III Corps . The division will be in Vietnam for three years .
 U.S. Special Forces launches clandestine operation called Shining Brass . Teams are inserted into Laos to watch and disrupt traffic along the Ho Chi Minh Trail .
 South Korea deploys its Capital Division and a marine brigade to South Vietnam . The Korean troops will conduct combat operations in II Corps .
 The administration in Washington authorizes use of tear gas by U.S. troops in Vietnam . After a long debate, the administration in D.C. authorizes tear gas .
 Beijing claims that Chinese gunners downed a U.S. plane intruding into China’s Kwang Si Province . The United States Department of Defense will not confirm the incident, but acknowledges that one plane did not return from a bombing mission .
 United States B-52s hit suspected VC bases in Tay Ninh Province near the Cambodian border . U.S. B-QCs hit suspected sites in the province near the border with Cambodia . BQCs were used to carry out strikes on suspected targets .
 1st Air Cavalry Division joins with South Vietnamese marines to conduct Operation Happy Valley . Operation is the first large-scale operation since arriving in the previous month .
 North Vietnamese 325th Infantry Division fails to trap North Vietnam 325th Division . North Vietnamese Army reopens Pleiku-An Khe highway and destroys enemy hospital with U.S. medical supplies .
 Company from 173rd Airborne Brigade ambushed in the “Iron Triangle” area in III Corps . Eight Americans are killed and 25 wounded in the attack .
 Senator John Stennis states that it may be necessary to keep U.S. forces in Vietnam for another 15 years . Senator Stennis says it may not be necessary for the United States forces to stay in Vietnam .
 The Defense Department orders a draff call for 45,224 men for December . It is the largest quota of men drafted since the Korean War in 1950 .
 The student-run National Coordinating Committee to end the War in Vietnam sponsors nationwide demonstrations . Demonstrations in some 40 U.S. cities are planned .
 David Miller, a relief program volunteer, becomes the first U.S. war protester to burn his draff card . Miller is the first person to burn the card during a war protest .
 He was arrested by agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation . He is later arrested by federal agents .
 Protests against U.S. policy in Vietnam are held in London, Rome, Brussels, Copenhagen, Copenhagen and Stockholm . Protests coincide with demonstrations being conducted in the United States .
 Premier Sato of Japan announces that Japan will send no troops to Vietnam, even if it is requested by the U.S. Sato says Japan will not send any troops . Sato: "Japan will not be sending any troops"
 North Vietnamese troops launch a major assault on a U.S. Special Forces camp at Plei Me in the Central Highlands, 25 miles northwest of Pleiku . North Vietnam troops attack a United States Special Forces base in the area .
 The United States 1st Cavalry Division conducts Operation Good Friend in Binh Dinh Province, II Corps, to provide security for the arrival and establishment of the Republic of Korea’s Capital Division Cavalry Regiment at Binh Khe .
 A terrorist mine explodes in the marketplace at Tra On, a town in the Mekong Delta 75 miles southeast of Saigon, killing 11 persons and wounding 54 . 11 persons were killed and 54 wounded in the attack .
 The United Auto Workers’ executive board issues a statement declaring its support of administration policy in Vietnam . The U.A.W. executive board declares its support for administration policy .
 Admiral United States Grant Sharp, Pacific area commander, claims that Allied forces have “stopped losing” the war . In a Honolulu interview, Sharp says Allied forces in the war have stopped losing . Sharp: "Allies forces have 'stopped winning'
 He further states that he does not believe China will enter the conflict . He also says he doesn't believe he believes China will join the conflict in Syria .
 The Americans for Democratic Freedom denounces a probe into suspected communist influence on the war protest and anti-draft movement . The group calls the probe an attempt to “stifle criticism” of government policy .
 Operation All the Way was a follow-on operation to the clash at the Plei Me Special Forces camp . The operation took place in Pleiku Province, II Corps, in Pleiiku Province .
 The purpose of the operation is to seek out and destroy Communist forces operating in the area . The operation is being carried out to find and destroy communist forces .
 Soldiers from C Battery, 2nd Battalion, 19th Artillery, prepare to support 1 st Cavalry operations southwest of Pleiku Special Forces Camp, November 1965 .
 The Korean Capital Division arrives in South Vietnam and assumes the mission of providing security in the Qui Nhon area . The Korean capital division is based in Vietnam .
 VC forces damage and destroy a number of Allied aircraft in two separate raids on marine air bases . VC forces damaged and destroy aircraft in the two separate attacks .
 The first raid occurs at the Marble Mountain base, in which VC commandos, under cover of mortar fire, force their way onto the runway and toss grenades into open helicopter cockpits . The second raid occurs under the cover of fire, when commandos storm the base .
 25,000 people march in support of America’s action in Vietnam . Led by five recipients of the Congressional Medal of Honor . The march is led by five Congressional Medal Of Honor recipients .
 Ten miles from Danang, United States Marines repel a VC human wave attack, killing 56 guerrillas . U.S. Marines killed 56 guerillas in the attack on Danang .
 Search of the dead uncovers sketch of marine positions on the body of a 13-year-old boy . The boy had been selling drinks to the marines the previous day .
 Two U.S. planes accidentally bomb a friendly Vietnamese village, killing 48 civilians and wounding 55 others . 48 civilians were killed and 55 others were wounded in the attack .
 An American civic action team is dispatched to the scene, and a later investigation discloses that a map-reading error by South Vietnamese officers is responsible for the incident .
 United States planes destroy three antiaircraft missile sites and a highway bridge during a raid 35 miles northeast of Hanoi . U.S. planes destroyed three sites and highway bridge .
 The U.S. Air Force deploys its 3rd Tactical Fighter Wing to Bien Hoa for combat operations in III Corps . The 12th Tactical Fighter Fighter Wing is deployed to Cam Ranh Bay for combat in II Corps .
 Norman Morrison, a 32-year-old Quaker from Baltimore, immolates himself in front of the Pentagon . Morrison is a Quaker and a pacifist from Baltimore .
 Two U.S. helicopters crash in mid-air near An Khe, killing all nine crew members and passengers on both aircraft . All nine crew and passengers were killed in the crash .
 U.S. fighter-bombers from the aircraft carrier Oriskany damage or destroy nine antiaircraft sites, five missile launchers, and several support buildings . Two planes are shot down .
 State Department urges administration to reject McNamara's proposal for bombing pause . State Department memo prepared by Ambassador Alexis Johnson .
 Before dying the next day, LaPorte declared that “I’m against wars, all wars. I'm against all wars,” he said . Before dying, he declared that he was against war .
 Operation Silver Bayonet is a follow-on operation to the clash at the Plei Me Special Forces camp . U.S. 1st Cavalry Division and ARVN troops launch operation in Pleiku Province, II Corps . The operation was a follow on to the clashes at the
 The purpose of the operation is to seek out and destroy Communist forces operating in the la Drang Valley . The operation is being carried out to find and destroy communist forces .
 The 1st Cavalry Division has blunted a Communist offensive designed to cut South Vietnam in two . McNamara describes how the U.S. Army has blundered in the the la Drang Valley .
 1st Battalion, 7th Cavalry, from the United States 1st Cavalry Division, battles the entire 66th NVA Regiment at Landing Zone X-Ray near the base of the Chu Pong Massif in the la Drang Valley . Operation Silver Bayonet was one of
 Only artillery fire, tactical air support, and the tenacity of the 1st Cavalry troopers prevent the NVA from overrunning the American positions . The NVA was defeated by artillery fire and air support .
 Enemy troops overrun Hiep Due, a district headquarters 25 miles west of Tam Ky . The area is located 25 miles from Tam Ky.
 General Thi, commander of South Vietnamese forces in I Corps, is forced to abandon I Corps . He has too few regulars to leave any men there . Two ARVN battalions will later retake the town, but he has to abandon it .
 The 48th general assembly of Reform Judaism’s Union of Hebrew Congregations adopts a resolution urging President Johnson to order an immediate cease-fire in Vietnam, so that peace talks can be arranged . The resolution was adopted by the Reform Jewish congregation of Reform Jews .
 Three battalions from the 1st VC Regiment overrun the Regional Forces garrison at Hiep Due . West of Tam Ky, three battalions . from the . 1st . VC Regiment . overrun the regional forces garrison .
 Using string bows, VC guerrillas fire arrows dipped in rancid animal fat at U.S. troops guarding the air base at Qui Nhon . The arrows were fired at the United States .
 Operation New Life-65 is a counterinsurgency operation meant to break the hold of the Viet Cong on Binh Tuy Province, III Corps . Elements of the U.S. 1st Infantry Division and 173rd Airborne Brigade join with a battalion from the Royal Australian Regiment
 The 18th NVA Regiment encounters stiff resistance from a South Vietnamese Ranger battalion supported by naval gunfire from two U.S. destroyers and marine tactical aircraft . In an assault on the town of Thach Tru, the NVA faces stiff resistance .
 The United States 7th Marines arrive by helicopter the next day, driving enemy forces from the area . The U.S. 7th Marine Corps arrives by helicopter to drive enemy forces out .
 United States casualty statistics reflect intensified fighting in the la Drang Valley and other parts of the Central Highlands . U.S. casualties statistics reflect the intensified fighting .
 Two nuclear-powered ships join Seventh Fleet and take position off South Vietnam . Aircraft carrier USS Enterprise and guided missile frigate USS Bainbridge take position .
 President Johnson recommends that U.S. troop strength in South Vietnam increase from 120,000 to 400,000 . General Westmoreland can conduct major sweep operations he deems necessary to destroy enemy forces .
 Nearly 35,000 war protesters circle the White House for two hours before moving on to the Washington Monument . Dr. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. addresses the crowd at the Monument .
 The VC release two U.S. Special Forces soldiers captured two years earlier during a battle at Hiep Hoa, 40 miles southwest of Saigon . Two years later, the VC also release two United States soldiers captured in the battle .
 Sergeant George Smith and Specialist Fifth Class Claude McClure declare that they oppose U.S. actions in Vietnam . They will campaign for the withdrawal of United States troops from Vietnam .
 President-elect Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines states that he will send troops to South Vietnam . Marcos says he plans to send troops there . Marcos was elected president of Philippines in 1972 .
 Defense Secretary McNamara reports that the Ky government “is surviving, but not acquiring wide support,” while the Viet Cong appear to be getting stronger .
 His overall evaluation is “that the best chance of achieving our stated objectives lies in the deployments” previously discussed . Nevertheless, he says “the best chance” of achieving objectives lies with deployments .
 British foreign secretary visits Moscow in an effort to enlist Soviet assistance in restarting the Geneva conference on Indochina . Michael Stewart visits Moscow to seek Soviet assistance .
 Andrei Gromyko, the Soviet foreign minister, rebuffs him, saying peace talks cannot begin until America withdraws all troops and ceases its bombing of North Vietnam . Andrei says that peace talks must begin until U.S. withdraws troops and stops bombing of Vietnam .
 U.S. secretary of state Dean Rusk announces that the United States will attend an international conference on Southeast Asia . Rusk: The United States is willing to attend the conference .
 UN head U Thant announces that he favors the American proposal, but he is rebuffed by Hanoi . U.N. head U. Thant says he favors American proposal but he's rebuffed .
 This pause would give the North Vietnamese an opportunity to respond favorably . If they do not, the tempo of the air war can be readily increased . The North Vietnamese should respond favorably and, if they don't, it can be increased .
 The memorandum outlines the conditions the U.S. should insist upon before a permanent bombing halt . The memorandum also outlines conditions the United States should insist on before the permanent halt .
 In the United States, the general board of the National Council of Churches issues a statement approving the administration’s commitment to unconditional negotiations and urging new peace initiatives . In the U.S.
 In a memorandum to President McNamara, Defense Secretary McNamara states that U.S. troop strength must be substantially augmented . “If we Marines from the 7th Regiment move along a rice paddy in pursuit of the Viet Cong, December 1965,” McNamara wrote .
 Operation Harvest Moon/Lien Ket-18 is an operation intended to clear Viet Cong forces from the Que Son Valley in Quang Nam and Quang Tin Provinces, I Corps. USMC and South Vietnamese forces join to conduct the operation . USMC forces join forces to clear
 Despite the report, the bombing campaign continues for three more years . The bombing campaign is expected to continue for more than three years .
 Senator Ernest Gruening states that the conflict in Vietnam is a civil war that poses no threat to U.S. security interests . Senator Gruening says the conflict is no longer a threat to the United States .
 He declares that despite the president’s repeated assertion that he is continuing a commitment made by previous administrations, the U.S. has made no “solemn pledge” to support South Vietnam .
 To prepare for an anticipated expansion of its role in Vietnam, the United States begins emergency construction of additional military installations in Thailand . The U.S. is building additional military facilities in Thailand to prepare for the anticipated expansion .
 Seventeen Democratic members of the House of Representatives sign a statement supporting President Johnson’s refusal to bomb Hanoi and Haiphong . The statement was signed by 17 Democrats .
 Article in Pravda accuses Chinese leaders of refusing to cooperate with efforts by other Communist nations to defeat the U.S. in Vietnam . Article also accuses China of not cooperating with efforts to defeat United States .
 Only 20 percent of Americans believe the U.S. should have withdrawn from Vietnam before its troops became involved in combat . The Opinion Research Corporation releases a poll showing that only 20 percent believe the United States should have withdrew from Vietnam .
 U.S. Air Force planes destroy thermal power plant at Uong Bi, 14 miles north of Haiphong . First raid on a major North Vietnamese industrial target, the plant was destroyed in the first raid .
 The plant supplies about 15 percent of North Vietnam’s total electric power . The plant reportedly supplies 15% of the country's electric power supply .
 General Westmoreland submits a new troop request to Defense Secretary McNamara, stating that he needs a total of 443,000 men by the end of 1966 . The request was rejected by McNamara .
 U.S. Navy forms the River Patrol Force which will launch Operation Game Warden to interdict North Vietnamese and Viet Cong bases and lines of communication in inland waterways in April 1966 .
 Montagnard tribesmen stage a series of uprisings in the Central Highlands . They are seeking autonomy from the South Vietnamese government, seeking autonomy .
 A recent increase in Viet Cong bombings prompts United States authorities to impose a daily curfew on U.S. forces stationed in Saigon . The curfew was imposed after a series of bombings by the Viet Cong .
 Representative Emmanuel Cellar charges the Selective Service director, Lieutenant General Lewis Hershey, with “demeaning the draft act” by reclassifying students who participate in antiwar protests . Rep. Cellar says Hershey reclassifies students who protest against the war .
 President Johnson suspends Operation Rolling Thunder, the bombing of North Vietnam, to encourage the leaders in Hanoi to agree to conduct negotiations . The bombing pause will last 37 days, until January 31, 1966, until the end of the war .
 Heavy VC attacks force Allied military authorities to abandon efforts to extend Christmas truce . Allied forces abandon attempts to extend the Christmas truce after heavy fighting .
 UN ambassador Goldberg, Ambassador-at-Large Harriman, Vice-President Humphrey, and presidential assistant McGeorge Bundy depart for various world capitals .
 Their purpose is to explore the possibilities of attaining a negotiated settlement . They include the possibility of a settlement with the government .
 The administration’s current diplomatic campaign makes some headway when Poland, Yugoslavia, and Italy agree to aid U.S. peace efforts . The administration's current diplomacy campaign makes headway .
 Total U.S. strength in South Vietnam is 184,300; 1,369 American military personnel have been killed in action to date . More than 7,000 wounded in Vietnam .
 South Vietnamese military strength remains at 514,000, with a reported 11,000 killed, 22,600 wounded, and 7,400 missing during previous year’s fighting .
 An estimated 34,500 North Vietnamese and Viet Cong were killed during 1965 . The majority of those killed were killed by the North Vietnamese .
 South Vietnam’s government appears as unstable as ever, and in the United States, protests and demonstrations against the war are increasing . In the U.S., protests against the Vietnam War are increasing.
 Advance elements of the 1st Regiment, 1st Marine Division, arrive in Vietnam from Camp Pendleton, California, to conduct combat operations in I Corps . The rest of the division will follow by the end of March .
 Operation Marauder was a search and destroy operation in Hau Nghia Province, III Corps . Paratroopers from the 173rd Airborne Brigade and Australian troops were involved in the operation . The operation was part of a search operation in the region .
 Elements of the 1st Cavalry Division conduct Operation Matador in Kontum and Pleiku Provinces, II Corps . They provide security for the incoming 3rd Brigade of the 25th Infantry Division . The operation is part of the II Corps' Second World War II II Corps
 Cambodian government warns that if Allied forces violate its territory or airspace, it will seek aid from other nations and conduct armed attacks into South Vietnam . In a letter to the UN’s secretary-general U Thant, the government says it would seek help from other countries .
 The letter also requests that the International Control Commission expand its border patrols to investigate reports of arms shipments from Cambodia into South Vietnam . It also asks that the ICC investigate reports that U.S. and ARVN units are attacking Khmer villages .
 Hanoi asserts that the United States is preparing to double its strength in South Vietnam . The U.S. is intensifying air attacks over Laos and sending American troops into central Laos and Cambodia .
 Senator George McGovern says U.S. peace proposals have little chance of success in Vietnam . McGovern: Administration refuses to recognize that conflict is primarily a civil war between Saigon regime and National Liberation Front .
 McGovern asserts that any talks that exclude either of these parties are doomed to failure . McGovern: Talks that exclude the two parties would be doomed to fail .
 U.S. ambassador to UN Arthur Goldberg circulates a letter asking that UN members help “advance the cause of a peaceful settlement” in Vietnam .
 Senate Majority Leader Everett Dirksen of Illinois expresses opposition to President Johnson’s offer of ‘negotiations without prior conditions’ in a statement asserting that total military victory must precede any peace talks . The statement was issued in response to the President Johnson's offer of
 Operation Crimp/Buckskin is a massive search and destroy operation in III Corps . U.S. forces converge on the ‘Iron Triangle’ a stronghold area northwest of Saigon . The operation is being supported by troops from Australia and New Zealand .
 Allied forces uncover and destroy a huge tunnel network before pulling out of the area . Allied forces uncovered and destroy huge tunnel networks in the Battle of the Second World War .
 Moscow issues a communique pledging increased military aid to North Vietnam . Moscow pledges increased military assistance to the communist state .
 Douglas Ramsey is a U.S. aid mission representative in Hau Nghia Province . After ambushing his car, VC guerrillas kidnap Douglas Ramsey, a United States aid mission rep . Ramsey was kidnapped by the VC in the country's capital, Dangangang, in
 Operation Van Buren is a combined security effort to protect the rice crop in Phu Yen Province, II Corps . Troops from 1st Brigade, 101st Airborne Division, Republic of Korea’s 2nd Marine Brigade, and ARVN forces conduct the operation . Operation
 President Johnson urges Hanoi to respond positively to the bombing pause and peace campaign by agreeing to begin peace talks . President Johnson: Hanoa is holding up peace because North Vietnamese leaders hope the U.S. will quit .
 Viet Cong forces violate a cease-fire called in observance of the Vietnamese Tet holiday . Viet Cong troops violate cease-fires called in . Vietnam's Tet holiday is celebrated in Vietnam and Vietnam .
 Operation Blue Light is the airlift of the 3rd Brigade, 25th Infantry Division, from Hawaii to Pleiku, South Vietnam, to offset the buildup of Communist forces there . The newly renamed Military Airlift Command completes the operation . The operation is part of the newly-named Military
 Ho Chi Minh attacks American peace overtures in a statement demanding that Washington recognize the National Liberation Front as the sole representative of the people of South Vietnam . Hanoi’s four-point peace formula as a basis for ending the war .
 McNamara recommends raising the number of U.S. troops in Vietnam to more than 400,000 by year’s end . McNamara warns that planned deployments and increased bombing will not ensure military success .
 President Johnson strongly suggests that he has decided to resume bombing at a joint White House meeting of the National Security Council with a bi-partisan group of congressional leaders .
 North Vietnam is using bombing pause to increase shipments of war supplies along the Ho Chi Minh Trail, and repair bridges and other transport facilities damaged by U.S. bombings . The administration also releases intelligence reports showing that North Vietnam uses the bombing pause .
 Operation Masher/White Wing/Thang Phong II is the largest search-and-destroy operation to date . The operation was conducted in Binh Dinh Province in the central lowlands of II Corps .
 Operation includes a bloody battle in a small village eight miles north of Bong Son against two battalions of the 22nd NVA Regiment . The operation includes a 12-day battle in the Kim Son Valley and a bloody threeday battle north of the village .
 Secretary of State Rusk declares that despite the bombing suspension, VC terrorists are still conducting bombings and assassinations in South Vietnam .
 Associated Press poll of 50 senators shows that 25 favor a resumption of the bombing . Poll shows 25 favor resumption, poll shows . Poll also shows that 50 senators support resumption .
 Defense Secretary McNamara receives a message from General Westmoreland stating that, in addition to the 443,000 troops already requested, he needs another 16,000 men by year’s end . McNamara received the message .
 A U.S. Marine force of more than 5,000 conducts Operation Double Eagle . The operation is a companion operation to the 1st Cavalry’s Masher/White Wing . The U.N. Marine Corps is based in Okinawa .
 The operation is designed to trap the enemy between the two attacking U.S. forces in Quang Ngai and Binh Dinh Provinces . The operation was launched in April 2014 .
 In honor of Tet, the Vietnamese lunar new year, the Saigon government releases 21 North Vietnamese Army POWs . Saigon released 21 POWs in honor of the Tet holiday .
 President Johnson announces a resumption of Operation Rolling Thunder after a 37-day pause . President Johnson made the announcement in a televised address to the nation . The operation is scheduled to resume after 37 days of a pause .
 The president also discloses that he has instructed Ambassador Arthur Goldberg to ask the UN Security Council to arrange an international conference to end the conflict .
 The 460th Tactical Reconnaissance Wing deploys to South Vietnam for combat operations . The U.S. Air Force’s 460th tactical reconnaissance wing deployed to Vietnam .
 Giap: U.S. commitments elsewhere limit the number of men that can be sent to Vietnam . Giap adds that the United States commitments elsewhere also limit the amount of men sent .
 Defense Secretary McNamara reveals that retired lieutenant general James Gavin’s proposal that U.S. troops limit their activities to coastal enclaves was considered by senior Pentagon officials, but all had rejected it . Gavin's proposal was rejected by senior officials, he says .
 Such a withdrawal would allow enemy forces to consolidate their hold on large areas of South Vietnam . It would leave ARVN units open to decimation, leaving them open for decimation .
 Tho charges that some comrades “have made an incorrect assessment of the balance of power between the enemy and us and of the enemy ruses’s ruses. Tho says some comrades have made an . incorrect assessment .
 President Johnson meets with Nguyen Cao Ky and Nguyen Van Thieu in Honolulu . Johnson announces renewed emphasis on “The Other War’s” attempt to provide the South Vietnamese rural population with local security and economic programs .
 Current Saigon pacification efforts reach only about 1,900 of the country’s 15,000 hamlets . Rural Pacification Minister Nguyen Due Thang reveals that it would require five to six years to place a typical province under government control .
 Gavin also cautions that any further large increases in U.S. troop strength could prompt Chinese intervention and even reopen the Korean front . Gavin: Any further large . increases in United States troop strength . could prompt . Chinese intervention .
 Kennan tells the Senate Foreign Relations Committee that Vietnam has caused the U.S. to neglect more important problems elsewhere . Kennan says Vietnam has been a priority for the United States since Vietnam began .
 Kennan is concerned about the impact of the war's impact on U.S.-Soviet relations . Kennan: "I am concerned that the war’s impact on our relations will be very difficult"
 China accuses the USSR of conspiring with the United States to force North Vietnam to the negotiating table . China says the USSR conspired with the U.S. to force the Vietnamese government to negotiate .
 The United States 1st Infantry Division and a battalion from the Royal Australian Regiment conduct Operation Rolling Stone to provide security for road 1 56 Vietnam War Almanac 1966 .
 President Johnson discloses that additional U.S. forces will be sent to Vietnam to augment the 205,000 troops already serving there . President Johnson indicates that the buildup will be gradual . The buildup is expected to be gradual, but a gradual increase .
 Central Committee of the World Council of Churches adopts a resolution proposing an immediate cease-fire in Vietnam . The resolution was adopted by the World Committee of Churches .
 Operation Double Eagle II is a follow-on operation to Double Eagle I in Quang Tin and Quang Nam Provinces, I Corps. A United States Marine task force conducts the operation . The U.S. Marines are involved in the operation in Vietnam's South Vietnam region .
 The United States 1st Infantry Division conducts Operation Mastiff, a search and destroy mission in Tay Ninh Province, III Corps . The operation is part of the U.S. Army's 3rd and 4th Division in the region .
 Three VC camps and an arms factory are destroyed in the Boi Loi Woods . During the course of the operation, three VC camps are destroyed . Three of the camps were destroyed during the operation .
 Best estimates indicate fewer than 20,000 VC defected during the previous year . By contrast, best estimates indicate that fewer than20,000 defected in 2013 .
 Elements of the United States 1st Infantry Division uncover and destroy three VC camps and an arms factory during an operation in the Boi Loi Woods . The operation was part of the U.S. Army's first major offensive in the Vietnam War .
 Buddhist-led anti-government demonstrations begin in Hue, Danang, and Saigon and will last until June . Buddhists are protesting against the government .
 The United States Air Force’s 366th Tactical Fighter Wing and 315th Air Commando Wings are deployed to Vietnam for combat operations . The U.S. Air Force is deploying to Vietnam to conduct combat operations.
 United States II Field Force Vietnam is established to coordinate U.S. Army combat operations in III Corps and IV Corps . The force is based in the United States.
 U.S. forces in South Vietnam now total 215,000, with another 20,000 en route . Secretary of Defense McNamara announces that American forces in S.Vietnam are now at an all-time total of 215,00 .
 USAF jets pound various Red River Valley transport facilities 40 miles from the Chinese border . North Vietnamese are concentrating supplies, says USAF .
 The United States 1st Infantry Division conducts Operation Cocoa Beach in Binh Duong Province, BinhDuong Province . The U.S. 1st . Infantry Division conducted the operation in Vietnam in the early stages .
 Operation Utah/Lien Ket-26 is conducted by more than 7,000 U.S. troops in vicinity of Quang Ngai City in I Corps . Operation is launched in response to an ARVN force’s call for help . The operation is conducted in response
 Elements of the United States 1st Infantry Division, 173rd Airborne Brigade, and the 10th ARVN Division conduct Operation Silver City in War Zone D, Binh Duong Province, III Corps .
 The State Department issues a 52-page document contending that U.S. intervention in Vietnam is legally justified under international law, the UN Charter, and the United States Constitution . The document says the U.N. Charter, UN law and the Constitution provide legal basis for intervention .
 South Vietnamese pilots flying U.S. aircraft have destroyed 20,000 acres of crops . Announcement made as part of an effort to deny food to guerrillas .
 VC troops overrun a U.S. Special Forces camp at A Shau near the Laotian border after two days of savage fighting . The camp was set up near the border with Laotians .
 Air Vice-Marshal Nguyen Cao Ky, acting as premier, removes the powerful and semiautonomous commander of I Corps . General Nguyen Chanh Thi, a leading Buddhist and potential rival to Ky, is removed .
 Buddhist monks and students join demonstrations supporting General Thi and attacking the Ky regime . Buddhist monks, students and students quickly join demonstrations .
 Representative Clement Zablocki claims that for every VC guerrilla killed in recent search and destroy missions, six civilians have died . For every soldier killed in such operations, six people have died, he says .
 The South Korean assembly votes to send 20,000 additional troops to Vietnam . 21,000 ROK troops are currently serving in the war zone .
 U.S. Marines and ARVN troops conduct Operation Oregon in Thua Thien Province, I Corps. Operation Oregon was launched in 2007 . Operation Oregon is the first of its kind in the region since Operation Oregon .
 U.S. Marines and ARVN troops conduct Operation Texas/Lien Ket26 to retake An Hoa outpost in Quang Ngai Province, I Corps. U.N. troops retake the outpost . U.K. troops were deployed to take over the outpost from An
 He recommends that the bombings be restricted to a narrow “interdiction and verification zone” in Laos . He also recommends that steps be taken to construct a physical anti-infiltration barrier .
 Operation Lincoln took place in Darlac, Kontum, and Pleiku Provinces, II Corps . Operation Lincoln was part of the U.S. 1st Cavalry and brigade of the 25th Infantry Division .
 The remainder of the United States 25th Infantry Division deploys from Hawaii to Vietnam to join the division’s 2nd Brigade . The division will be headquartered at Cu Chi, Hau Nghia Province, Vietnam .
 The 1st Signal Brigade deploys to Vietnam from Fort Gordon, Georgia, to provide signal support for U.S. forces in Vietnam . The brigade is based in Georgia, Georgia .
 The 44th Medical Brigade deploys to Vietnam from Fort Sam Houston, Texas, to provide medical support for U.S. forces in Vietnam . The brigade is based in Vietnam and provides medical support to United States forces .
 The 5th Marine Regiment, 1st Marine Division, deploys to Vietnam from Camp Pendleton, California, for combat operations in I Corps .
 The USAF 35th Tactical Fighter Wing deploys to Vietnam for service in II Corps . The wing is deployed to Vietnam in support of the II Corps.
 Headquarters United States Naval Forces Vietnam is formed to coordinate naval activities in Vietnam . Headquarters of the U.S. Navy Vietnam was formed in 1973 . Headquarters is located in Vietnam, Vietnam .
 Operation Game Warden is interdiction of enemy traffic in South Vietnamese inland waterways . United States Navy TF116 begins operation Game Warden, interdicting enemy traffic on inland waterways.
 Walt Rostow replaces McGeorge Bundy as national security advisor to the president . Rostow will replace Bundy as the president's national security adviser to the U.S. Rostow is a former CIA director of the CIA .
 Seventh Air Force Headquarters at Tan Son Nhut air base in Saigon is activated as a subcommand of Pacific Air Forces to coordinate USAF activities in Vietnam . The base is located in the city of Saigon .
 United States F-4C Phantom fighter-bombers pound the main supply link between North Vietnam and Nanning, China, striking the Phu Lang Thuong railroad bridge, 25 miles northeast of Hanoi . In a related raid, U.S. planes destroy the Ph
 Concern over the confrontation between the regime in Saigon and the Buddhists prompts the administration to conduct a reassessment of Vietnam policy . Concerns over the clash between the government and Buddhists prompt the reassessment .
 Other advisers, including CIA analyst George Carver, Assistant Secretary of State William Bundy, and Defense Secretary McNamara, recommend continuation of current policies .
 There is little optimism, even among those who endorse present administration efforts . However, there are little optimism even among people who endorse the administration .
 The administration concedes that political turmoil in South Vietnam has begun to disrupt military operations by restricting the activities of ARVN forces . The U.S. acknowledges that the political turmoil is disrupting military operations .
 Viet Cong guerrillas launch a mortar attack against Tan Son Nhut air base . The attack is the latest in a series of mortar attacks by the Viet Cong rebels .
 United States B-52s from Anderson Air Base in Guam bomb North Vietnam for the first time . Raid on the Mu Gia Pass, about 85 miles north of the border, was the main route used to send supplies and infiltrators into South Vietnam .
 Beijing claims to have downed a U.S. attack plane over Liu Chow Peninsula, north of Hainan island . Beijing claims it downed a United States attack plane . Beijing says it downed the plane over the Liu Chow peninsula .
 Premier Ky and Chief of State Thieu pledge to dissolve the current ruling junta . They pledge to hold elections for a constituent assembly with legislative powers . The current junta has been in power since 2007 .
 The statement mollifies Buddhist leaders, and its issuance signals an uneasy truce between Saigon and anti-government Buddhists . The statement signals a truce between the two sides, which have been at odds for years .
 Assistant Secretary of State William Bundy presents a draft paper entitled “Basic Choices in Vietnam” Bundy supports the option of continuing along current policy lines in South Vietnam . Bundy presents the draft paper at a National Security Council meeting .
 Thousands of Vietnamese Catholics protest against Buddhist rioters in Bien Hoa protest march . Thousands of Catholics demand that the government discipline rioters . Buddhist rioting is banned in Vietnam since 1968 .
 U.S. planes destroy two missile sites and damage main railroad bridge between Hanoi and Haiphong . Raids destroy missile sites, damage main railway bridge between the two cities . Raid is the closest to Hanoa and Haphong since the bombing began .
 Majority leader Mike Mansfield (DMont) calls for direct talks with North Vietnam, Communist China . Mansfield: U.S. should engage in direct talks in Vietnam with North and South .
 The South Vietnamese government expels a group of six American pacifists for seeking to stage anti-war demonstrations in Saigon . The group was expels by the government for trying to stage demonstrations in the city .
 USAF F-4C pilot shoots down MiG-21, the most advanced Soviet-made fighter plane in the North Vietnamese air force, with an AIM-9 Sidewinder missile . F-105 Thunderchiefs were attacked 20 miles from the Chinese border when the MiG
 American pilots fired 11 missiles without scoring a hit during the recent clash with two MiG-21s . The U.S. air force is sending a team to Vietnam to investigate the efficiency and tactical usefulness of United States missiles .
 United States 1st Infantry Division troops uncover and destroy a huge cache of enemy war materiel during an operation in Tay Ninh Province, III Corps . U.S. 1st Division troops uncovered and destroyed huge cache during operation .
 An article in the Soviet newspaper Pravda asserts that the television program Batman is brainwashing American children into becoming “murderers” in Vietnam . The article also asserts that Batman has brainwashed American children to become murderers .
 The United States 1st Aviation Brigade is organized in Vietnam to provide army aviation support for U.S. forces throughout Vietnam . The brigade is based in Vietnam .
 Defense Secretary McNamara says North Vietnamese infiltration into the South is up to 4,500 men a month . McNamara: North Vietnam infiltration is three times the 1965 level . The North Vietnamese are now infiltrating the South, McNamara said .
 The Reverend Hoang Quynh, leader of South Vietnam’s Roman Catholics, warns against early elections . He says the Ky government is estimated to control only 10 percent of the country's territory . The Ky government controls only 10% of Vietnam's territory, he says .
 A 32-member committee, with representatives from all of South Vietnam’s major religions, begins drafting a new election law . The committee is expected to draft a new law .
 Vietnamese oil storage facilities could seriously cripple the enemy war effort . The facilities are located in the country's capital, Hainan Province .
 Thich Thien Manh, co-chairman of the leadership committee of the Unified Buddhist Church’s Institute of Religious Affairs, issues a statement warning that Vietnamese Buddhists will launch another protest movement if the government does not hold elections as promised .
 U.S. air strikes have cut four major railroad links serving Hanoi, including a vital route to Nanning, China . reconnaissance photos also show that the raids have severed two main highways that share bridges with two rail lines .
 Operation Paul Revere/Thang Phong 14 is a border-screening and area-control mission in Pleiku Province, II Corps . The U.S. 25th Infantry Division and ARVN troops conduct the mission . The operation is part of the U.N.
 A-4 Skyhawk fighter-bombers destroy a surface-to-air missile site 10 miles northeast of Haiphong, as U.S. air raids move increasingly closer to major North Vietnamese population centers .
 Premier Ky dispatches 1,500 troops to Danang, which has been in a state of virtual rebellion since General This dismissal on March 10 . General This was dismissed by the country's prime minister . Danang is in state of a virtual rebellion .
 The arrival of the troops touches off another wave of violent protest by Buddhist dissidents . Buddhist dissidents protest the troops' presence in Thailand .
 The ruling National Leadership Committee of 10 generals is expanded to include 10 civilians . Besides deploying troops to troubled locales, the government also enters into negotiations with Buddhist leaders .
 Premier Ky signs a decree setting September 10 as the date for the election of a constituent assembly . The assembly will have powers to appoint a civilian government . Two weeks later, the election will be held .
 Representative Melvin Laird states that a “credibility gap” is developing because the Johnson administration is not providing the American public with precise and candid information on planned troop deployments to Vietnam . Rep. Laird says a ‘credible gap’ is developing .
 For only the third time since January 1961, more American than South Vietnamese soldiers were killed during the past week . The week’s 6.2 to 1 kill ratio is the most favorable rating in nine months .
 Air Force Secretary Harold Brown reveals that President Johnson opposes widening the air war against North Vietnam . Such a move would not completely cut off North-South movement and might prompt Chinese intervention, he says .
 UN Secretary-General U Thant states that the U.N. does not possess sufficient influence to compel the warring states in Vietnam to begin negotiations . U. Thant: "The United Nations has no power to compel [Vietnam's] warring nations to begin talks
 Thant urges that the NLF be allowed to participate in any peace talks which might be arranged . Thant also urges that any peace negotiations should be held between the two parties .
 Beijing charges that U.S. planes killed three persons during an attack on Chinese fishing boats north of the Gulf of Tonkin in international waters . Beijing says three persons were killed during the attack .
 In the largest raids since air attacks on North Vietnam began in February 1965, U.S. planes destroy five bridges, 17 railroad cars, and 20 buildings in the Vinh-Thanh Hoa area . The raids were the largest since the attacks began in 1965 .
 Other planes hit Highway 12 in four places north of Mu Gia Pass . Yen Bay arsenal and munition storage area, 75 miles northeast of Hanoi, was hit .
 The United States 3rd Naval Mobile Construction Brigade was formed at Danang to support navy and marine operations in I Corps . The brigade is part of the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps in the I Corps.
 The 1st Brigade of the United States 101st Airborne Division joins with ARVN units to conduct Operation Hawthorne/Dan Thang-61 in Kontum Province, II Corps . The 1 Brigade joins ARVNs in the operation .
 Operation El Paso II was launched against the VC 9th Division in Binh Long Province, III Corps . The U.S. 1st Infantry Division and ARVN 5th Division were involved in the operation . The operation was part of the 3rd Corps III Corps.
 Captain William Carpenter of the 101st Airborne Division calls for air strikes on his own position to prevent North Vietnamese attackers from wiping out his company . Carpenter is recommended for the Congressional Medal of Honor .
 An additional 500,000 men are needed to seal off South Vietnamese borders to enemy infiltration, says Major General Ben Sternberg . Sternberg: An additional 50,000 troops needed to secure the borders to stop enemy infiltration .
 Defense Secretary McNamara discloses that another 18,000 troops will be sent to Vietnam . The U.S. commitment to Vietnam is now 285,000 men .
 Intelligence sources report that two fresh NVA regiments have moved into the Central Highlands from Laos to serve as the vanguard of a coming enemy offensive . Two fresh regiments are believed to have moved to the region from Laos .
 The South Vietnamese government devaluates its currency, lifts some controls on business transactions, and raises the salaries of military and civil servants . In an effort to stabilize the economy and boost official morale, the government has devalued its currency .
 JCS receives a new request from General Westmoreland for an additional 111,588 men, saying he will need a total of 542,588 troops for 1967 . The JCS received a request of 111,500 men for a further 111,600 men .
 U.S. 1st Cavalry Division and 1st Brigade, 101st Airborne, conduct Operation Nathan Hale, a search and destroy mission to clear and secure the Tuy Hoa Valley in Phu Yen Province, Vietnam . The operation was conducted by elements of the U.
 Hanoi reiterates its demand that an unconditional bombing halt precede peace talks . The Vietnamese government has rejected a new American proposal for the opening of peace talks. The U.S. has proposed a cease-fire in Vietnam .
 U.S. planes strike North Vietnamese petroleum storage facilities in a series of devastating raids . United States planes struck North Vietnamese oil storage facilities during the attacks . U.N. forces bombed North Vietnam's petroleum facilities .
 Government troops seize Buddhist headquarters at Saigon, bringing to an end a wave of protest . The protests had begun in March with agitation against military rule .
 The American Baptist Association unanimously endorses a resolution denouncing “the rash of protests and demonstrations” against U.S. policy in Vietnam . The resolution was approved by the Baptist Association .
 Presidential adviser Robert Komer declares pacification efforts should be given top priority . Komer is on a trip to Saigon to help develop civic action programs .
 Komer’s mission reflects renewed concern among U.S. policymakers about the stability of the South Vietnamese government . Komer: "Komer's mission reflects concern about stability"
 United States bombers attack fuel storage installations near Hanoi and Haiphong, destroying an estimated 50 percent of North Vietnam’s fuel supply . U.S. bombers destroyed an estimated half of North Vietnamese's fuel supply in the bombing .
 These are the first raids in the immediate vicinity of the two cities . The raids constitute a major escalation of the air war over North Vietnam .
 The Hanoi-Haiphong air strikes are both applauded and denounced in Congress . Congress is divided on the issue of the war in Vietnam .
 Senator Richard Russell states that the raids will reduce American casualties . Senator Russell says they will reduce U.S. casualties . Russell: Raids will reduce casualties .
 Democratic representatives say expanded air strikes commit the U.S. to “a profoundly dangerous policy of brinkmanship” that challenges China . Sixteen Democratic representatives issue a joint statement declaring that the expanded strikes are dangerous .
 Beijing calls the Hanoi-Haiphong raids a serious escalation of the war, warning that it is prepared for any eventuality . Beijing says the raids are an escalation of war .
 The World Council of Churches in Geneva sends a cable to President Johnson . The latest bombing of North Vietnam is causing a “widespread reaction” of “resentment and alarm” among many Christians .
 Mobs protest the air raids on the Hanoi-Haiphong area with violent anti-American demonstrations in several cities . In India, mobs protest air raids with violent protests .
 The Greek Orthodox Church of North America expresses ‘wholehearted’ support for the U.S. stand against all aggressors, particularly in Vietnam . The church expresses “wholeheartedly’s support”
 United States Air Force and Navy jets carry out another series of raids on fuel installations in the Hanoi-Haiphong area . U.S. Air Force, Navy jets carried out a number of raids in the area .
 The national convention of the Congress of Racial Equality votes to adopt two resolutions on the Vietnam War . The resolution was adopted by the NAACP's national convention in New York .
 Operation Macon is a security operation to protect the An Hoa industrial complex in Quang Nam Province, I Corps. U.S. Marines and ARVN troops conduct the operation . The operation is part of an ongoing effort to protect an industrial complex .
 President Johnson expresses his disappointment at the reaction of a “few” United States allies . President Johnson: "A few” U.S. allies are disappointed with the response of the reaction .
 The resolution passes with a vote of 49-1, with Governor Mark Hatfield the only dissenter . Governor Hatfield is the only dissenter .
 The seven active members of the Communist bloc’s Warsaw Pact Treaty military alliance announce their readiness to send ‘volunteers’ to aid North Vietnam in its fight against American “aggression . But only if Hanoi requests them, the alliance says .
 U.S. jets fly 80 missions against petroleum facilities in the Hanoi-Haiphong area . United States jets fly . 80 missions in the area .
 Pentagon officials report that 80 percent to 90 percent of North Vietnam’s fuel facilities have come under air attack . Pentagon officials say 55 percent of the fuel facilities in North Vietnam have been destroyed .
 On July 7 and July 9, statements are broadcast in which captured pilots allegedly confess their ‘crimes” against North Vietnam . The statements were broadcast in Vietnam on July 7, July 9 .
 Conservative motion would have committed Britain to support U.S. policy on Vietnam without reservation . Motion defeated by the House of Commons in defeat of motion .
 Premier Ky calls for sterner military measures, including a land invasion of North Vietnam . Premier Ky: 'Stier military measures' include land invasion, including land invasion .
 The Soviet Union sends a note to the U.S. embassy in Moscow charging that the air strikes on the port of Haiphong endangered four Soviet ships . Four Soviet ships were in the harbor when the strikes occurred .
 A second Soviet note, charging that a Russian ship had been hit by bullets during the raid on August 2, is also rejected by the United States embassy, on August 5 . The U.S. embassy in Moscow rejected the note on August 4 .
 A Harris survey taken shortly after the Hanoi-Haiphong raids shows that 62 percent of those interviewed favor the raids . 11 percent are opposed, and 27 percent are undecided, according to the survey .
 Of those polled, 86 percent feel the raids will hasten the end of the war . 86 percent of those polled said they would end the war if the raids began .
 Officials in Saigon report increased air attacks in Laos to interdict North Vietnamese infiltration . Officials say increased air strikes in Laos will interdict infiltration of North Vietnamese .
 UN secretary-general urges North Vietnam to exercise restraint in the treatment of American prisoners . Next day the UN Secretary-General urges restraint in North Vietnam's treatment of U.S. prisoners .
 North Vietnamese ambassadors in Beijing and Prague assert Americans will go on trial . Ho gives assurances of a humanitarian policy toward prisoners in response to SANE and Norman Thomas' appeal .
 Operation Deckhouse II, amphibious and helicopter assaults to block North Vietnamese routes of entry into Quang Tri Province, I Corps. A U.S. Marine Battalion Landing Team conducted the operation . The operation was part of the U.N. effort to block the North Vietnam routes of
 Troops from the United States 4th Infantry Division, the 1st Brigade of the 101st Airborne Division, and the 47th ARVN Regiment secure the Vung Ro Pass in Phu Yen Province, II Corps . Operation John Paul Jones was part of a mission to secure
 The government lodges a formal protest with the ICC accusing North Vietnam of using the DMZ to infiltrate troops into Quang Tri Province . North Vietnam has been accused of using DMZ as a cover for its troops .
 The 15 B-52 jet bombers fly from Guam and strike a Communist camp and supply area a mile north of the Ben Hai River . They return five days later to strike it again, returning five days after .
 Cambodia accuses U.S. of bombing border villages and killing several people . Cambodia accuses the United States of bombing its border villages . Cambodia says it has been bombed and killed by the Americans in the past .
 A United States spokesman first denies that the villages were in Cambodia, then admits that they were . A U.S. spokesman first denied the villages, then admitted they were in the United States .
 The second raid takes place as representatives of the ICC are en route to the area to inspect damage inflicted on Thlok and another village . ICC representatives are also on their way to inspect the damage inflicted by the raid .
 Prince Sihanouk cancels September meeting with Ambassador-at-Large W Averell Harriman to discuss U.S.-Cambodian diplomatic relations .
 The United States 4th Infantry Division deploys to Vietnam from Fort Carson, Colorado, to conduct combat operations in II Corps; 196th Light Infantry Brigade deploys from Fort Devens, Massachusetts . The 196th light Infantry Brigade from Massachusetts also deploys in Vietnam . The 4th
 Manila deploys a 2,000-man Philippine Civic Action Group to Vietnam for noncombatant operations in III Corps . The group is deployed to the country's third-largest military base in Vietnam .
 Operation Paul Revere II is a border screening/surveillance operation in Darlac and Pleiku Provinces, II Corps. The United States 1st Cavalry Division, South Korean, and ARVN forces conduct Operation . South Korean and U.S. forces conduct
 United States planes bomb a military headquarters 25 miles northeast of Haiphong . U.S. planes bombed a military HQ 25 miles north of the city .
 An additional 1,500 marines land from Seventh Fleet ships off Quang Tri Province on September 15 to assist in the operations . The operation is expected to take place in the fall .
 India proposes an expansion of the ICC in the DMZ to prevent the spread of the fighting there . India proposes expanding the ICC to prevent spread of fighting .
 The United States and Canada accept the proposal, but South Vietnam says its acceptance is contingent on Hanoi’s agreement . The U.S., Canada and South Vietnam say its acceptance of the proposal is dependent on the South Vietnamese government .
 The 21 th anniversary of the bombing of Hiroshima is marked by anti-war demonstrations across the U.S. The 21th anniversary of Hiroshima will be marked by demonstrations .
 Thich Thien Hoa, acting chairman of the Secular Affairs Institute of the United Buddhist Church, appeals for international aid to halt what he calls religious persecution of the South Vietnamese people by the Ky regime .
 Operation Colorado/Lien Ket-52 to drive the North Vietnamese from the Que Son Valley in Quang Nam and Quang Tin Provinces, I Corps. U.S. Marines and ARVN forces drive North Vietnamese forces from the Quang Son Valley .
 Three USAF F-105 Thunderchief fighter-bombers were shot down by North Vietnamese ground fire . North Vietnam ground fire killed three F-100 Thunderchiefs .
 Major James H Kasler, regarded by many as one of the leading pilots of the war, bails out and is captured . Kasler was captured by German forces in 1944 .
 U.S. warplanes attack two South Vietnamese villages, Truong Trung and Truong Tay, by mistake, killing 63 and wounding 100 . 63 people were killed and 100 wounded in the attack .
 Troops of the 1st Battalion, 5th Marines, fight a bitter battle against NVA forces in Quang Tin Province, 60 miles west of Tam Ky . Troops are seen fighting in the province's Quang Tien Province .
 This ceremony marks the first public acknowledgment of U.S.-Thai cooperation in the war . This ceremony is the first of its kind in recognition of cooperation between the two countries .
 Prince Sihanouk criticizes the United States over the attack on Thlock, a Cambodian village close to the South Vietnamese border . The village was attacked by the U.S. and is located near the border with Vietnam .
 General William Westmoreland meets with President Johnson at his ranch in Texas to discuss Allied progress in the war . President Johnson meets with general to discuss general’s personal assessment of Allied progress .
 The House Un-American Activities Committee investigates Americans who have given aid to the Viet Cong with a view toward introducing legislation to make such activities illegal . The committee has a goal of introducing legislation that would ban such activities .
 Before the hearings are over, more than 50 people will be arrested for disorderly conduct . The hearings are scheduled to take place in New York City .
 Key leadership of groups supporting the Viet Cong are comprised of revolutionary, hard-core Communists . Pool announces that the hearings have revealed that key leadership of key groups supporting Viet Cong is Communist Communists .
 In III Corps area, a company from the 6th Battalion of the Royal Australian Regiment is on patrol near the village of Long Tan when it encounters a much larger Viet Cong force moving to attack the Australian base at Nui Dat .
 For almost three hours, the company fights off repeated attacks until a relief force gets through . The company fights back repeatedly until the relief force is able to get through .
 CIA analyst Sam Adams will conclude that irregular enemy forces are at least double the U.S. military estimates . CIA analyst, Sam Adams, has studied classified documents . Adams concludes that irregular forces (those besides the VC mainforce and North Vietnamese army units) are double the United States military
 The American cargo ship Baton Rouge Victory strikes a mine laid by the Viet Cong in the Long Tao River, 22 miles south of Saigon . The mine mine was laid in the long Tao River in Vietnam in 1968 .
 The half-submerged ship blocks the route from the South Vietnamese capital to the sea . The ship is believed to be the largest in the world .
 Secretary of State Rusk sends a letter to French foreign minister Maurice de Murville, outlining U.S. proposals for ending the war . President Charles de Gaulle will use the proposals in his discussions with North Vietnamese during his upcoming trip to Asia .
 The United States 1st Cavalry Division conducts Operation Byrd, a pacification operation in Binh Thuan Province, II Corps . The operation is part of the U.S. military's Second World War II campaign in Vietnam .
 Nguyen Huu Tho, the president of the National Liberation Front, invites other political groups to join the NLF in a broad and democratic coalition government for South Vietnam . He enumerates three points as the basis for a political solution in Vietnam, including three points to a broad, democratic
 North Vietnamese pilots are undergoing training at a secret Soviet airbase to fly supersonic interceptors against U.S. aircraft .
 Beijing charges that U.S. warplanes sank a Chinese merchant ship and damaged another in raids on the Gulf of Tonkin . Beijing says United States sunk a Chinese ship, damaged another . China says the ships were sunk in the Gulf .
 The Chinese claim that nine crewmen were killed and seven others wounded . The Chinese say nine of the crewmen died and seven were wounded .
 Deputy Premier Le Thanh Nghi has signed an agreement with Beijing whereby China will provide additional economic and technical aid to North Vietnam . Hanoi Radio announces that Deputy Premier has signed a agreement .
 The United States 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment deploys to Vietnam from Fort Meade, Maryland, to conduct combat operations in III Corps .
 The 18th Military Police Brigade deploys to Vietnam from Fort Meade, Maryland, to provide military police support for U.S. forces in Vietnam . The brigade is based in Vietnam and provides support for United States forces there .
 The ROK 9th Infantry Division is deployed to Vietnam for combat operations in II Corps . The division is part of the II Corps, which is based in Vietnam .
 President de Gaulle of France denounces U.S. policy in Vietnam . He urges the United States government to pull its troops out of Southeast Asia .
 Talks could begin as soon as U.S. commits to withdrawing its troops by a certain date, he says . He says negotiations toward a settlement of the war could begin soon if the United States commits to withdrawal .
 He and Prince Norodom Sihanouk sign a declaration calling for noninterference in the Indochinese peninsula by foreign nations . The declaration was signed by the Prince of Cambodia in 1964 .
 The United States now has 25,000 military personnel in Thailand, principally to support United States Air Force operations . The U.S. has also deployed to support U.K. military operations there .
 Thien Hoa of the United Buddhist Church issues an appeal to his followers to start a three-day hunger strike on September 8 . Hoa is protesting the elections to be held in South Vietnam on September 11 .
 Three U.S. soldiers who have refused to serve in Vietnam are court-martialed at Fort Dix, New Jersey . Three soldiers have been accused of refusing to participate in the war .
 The court rejects their defense attorney’s argument that the war is illegal and immoral . The court also rejects the defense attorney's argument that it is immoral .
 The U.S. intends to step up its destruction of crops in VC-occupied areas by threefold . It is revealed in Saigon that the United States intends to . step up their destruction of . crops in . VC-controlled areas .
 The Viet Cong try to disrupt the election by terrorist attacks against civilians and government installations . Viet Cong attempt to disrupt election by attacking civilians and military installations .
 Journalists report that the village of Lien Hoa has been razed to the ground by U.S. troops from the 1st Cavalry Division . The village has been destroyed by the U.N. troops .
 Inhabitants had been warned to leave the village before it was burned and there were no civilian casualties . No civilian casualties were reported .
 More than 20,000 U.S. and ARVN troops conduct the largest operation to date . Operation Attleboro took place in War Zone C, 50 miles north of Saigon in Tay Ninh Province, III Corps . The United States 196th Light Infantry Brigade was the
 The purpose of the operation is to locate and eliminate all enemy troops west of the Michelin rubber plantation . The operation is aimed at locating and eliminating all enemy forces .
 Communist troops are identified as major elements of the 9th VC Division, the guerrillas’ best trained and best equipped unit, and the 101st NVA Regiment . Communist troops identify as major element of 9th . VC Division .
 Beijing accuses U.S. aircraft of violations of airspace and attacks against villages and border crossings near the Munan Kwan Pass and in the KwangsiChung region . Beijing accuses United States aircraft of violating the airspace .
 U.S. planes encountered MiG fighters on September 9 about 30 miles south of the Chinese border . Secretary of State Dean Rusk announces on the 16th that United States planes encountered the fighters .
 A State Department official admits on September 19 the possibility that there had been some violations of Chinese territory . A State Dept. official admits that there may have been some Chinese territory violations .
 22 U.S. scientists urge President Johnson to halt use of anti-personnel and anti-crop chemical weapons . Seven Nobel laureates urge him to halt the use of such weapons .
 Pope Paul VI, in the encyclical Christi Matri, appeals to world leaders to end the Vietnam War . Pope Paul V. Paul VI appealed to end Vietnam War in the 1970s .
 United States B-52s conduct extensive bombing raids against a mixture of targets in the DMZ and the area north of it . These include infiltration trails, troop concentrations, supply areas and base camps .
 U.S. Army’s 145th Combat Aviation Battalion picks up soldiers of the 25th ARVN Division, 1966 . United States Army's 145th combat Aviation Battalion .
 Secretary-general U. Thant proposes again his three-point plan for peace in Vietnam . U.S. bombing of North, de-escalation of ground war in South Vietnam, and inclusion of NLF in peace talks .
 U.S. prepared to halt bombing of North when ‘assurances” are given of a cutback . U.N. ambassador Arthur Goldberg responds to the General Assembly address . Goldberg says the United States is prepared to stop bombing of the North .
 U.S. planes defoliating jungle south of DMZ to prevent North Vietnamese from using it as cover . North Vietnamese planes deflate jungle to prevent it being used as cover by North Vietnamese .
 Village of Horn Be, five miles from Quang Ngai, is attacked in error by two Marine jets, and at least 35 civilians are killed . Villagers were killed in the attack, which was an error on two of their jets .
 The United States halts air strikes against the southeastern corner of the DMZ . U.S. will allow the ICC to resume patrols in the area .
 The United States Air Force 834th Air Division and 483rd Tactical Airlift Wing deploy to Vietnam . The 834rd Air Division deploys to Vietnam for the first time .
 United States Navy begins Operation Sea Dragon to interdict enemy supply vessels in coastal waters off North Vietnam . U.S. Navy begins operation Sea Dragon, interdicting enemy supply ships off coastal waters of Vietnam . Operation begins with the help of the U.N. Navy .
 U.S. bombing of Phu Ly, 35 miles south of Flanoi, kills approximately 40 civilians . The bombing results in the destruction of all homes and buildings, killing approximately 40 people .
 He will report on December 25 about the damage he observed while in North Vietnam .
 Operation Irving is conducted by the U.S. 1st Cavalry Division, ARVN, and ROK units against the North Vietnamese 610th Division in Binh Dinh Province, II Corps . Operation Irving was launched in April 2003 .
 Operation Thayer I and its goal is to clear enemy troops from the Phu Cat area, 28 miles northwest of Qui Nhon . The operation is a follow-up to Operation Thayers I and it is the first of two to clear the area from enemy troops .
 The Soviet Defense Ministry reports that Russian experts have come to terms with North Vietnam . North Vietnamese are trained to use Soviet-made ant-missile missiles .
 This is the first public acknowledgment that the Soviets have trained North Vietnamese missile crews and observed them in action . It's the first acknowledgement that the Soviet Union has trained and observed the missile crews .
 Soviet deputy premier Vladimir N. Novikov announces he has negotiated an economic and military aid agreement with North Vietnam . The Soviet Union will provide an undisclosed amount of military and economic assistance .
 U.S. B-52 bombers attack supply and staging areas in the DMZ, destroying 25 structures . United States destroyed 25 structures in DMZ .
 Calls for an end to the war in Vietnam through negotiations through negotiations . Calls for end to Vietnam war in negotiations .
 Brown renews the suggestion that the Soviet Union, as co-chairman of the 1954 Geneva Conference, join Britain in reconvening the conference to seek an end to the war . The Soviet Union co-chaired the Geneva Conference .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara goes on his eighth fact-finding visit to South Vietnam to assess General Westmoreland’s latest troop request . McNamara is on his 8th visit to Vietnam .
 He confers with Westmoreland, Lodge, Lodge and various military leaders, and South Vietnam’s Premier Ky and Chief of State Thieu . South Vietnam's premier Ky and chief of state Thieu.
 McNamara says he finds military operations have "progressed very satisfactorily" since 1965 . But he concedes that “progress is very slow indeed” in the pacification program .
 President Johnson rules out any cessation of bombing in North Vietnam in connection with a conference planned in Manila . President Johnson ruled out cessation of the bombing in response to a Manila conference .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara recommends against filling additional troop requests from General Westmoreland . McNamara's assessment of the situation in two long memorandums to President Johnson was published .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff responds to McNamara’s pessimistic assessment with memo . Joint chiefs of Staff takes issue with McNamara's pessimistic assessment and recommendation that no increase in bombing effort .
 Units of the 196th Infantry Brigade arrive in Vietnam to join the ongoing Operation Attleboro in III Corps . The 196th Brigade is part of the ongoing operation in Vietnam .
 The United States resumes air strikes in the southeastern DMZ, which had been halted on September 27 . The U.S. had been conducting air strikes on the southeast DMZ .
 U.S. official attributes resumption of bombing to Hanoi regime rebuffing efforts by ICC observers . ICC observers have been unable to enter and patrol that sector of the zone, official says .
 Johnson leaves Washington for a 17-day trip to visit seven Asian and Pacific nations . Johnson will attend a conference scheduled in Manila, Philippines .
 President Lyndon B Johnson promised to withdraw troops from Vietnam within six months if North Vietnam withdraws its forces to the north and ceases infiltration of South Vietnam .
 The president flies to South Vietnam on October 26 for a surprise 2y2-hour visit with U.S. troops at Cam Ranh Bay . The president is scheduled to meet with troops at the bay .
 Operation Paul Revere IV is a continuation of ongoing screening and surveillance operations along the Cambodian border in Pleiku Province . The newly arrived U.S. 4th Infantry Division and elements of the 25th and 1st Cavalry Division conduct the operation . The operation is part of ongoing
 VC operatives explode a mine in the marketplace of Tra On, a town in the Mekong Delta 75 miles southeast of Saigon, killing 11 persons and wounding 54 . 11 persons were killed and 54 were wounded in the blast .
 A bus detonates a VC mine on a road 18 miles north of Hue, killing 15 Vietnamese civilians and injuring 19 . 15 people were killed and 19 were injured in the blast .
 United States Navy Sea Dragon anti-shipping operations off the North Vietnamese coast intensify in the Dong Hoi area . U.S. Navy Sea Dragons are conducting anti-ship operations .
 The United States 1st Cavalry Division conducts Operation Thayer II in Binh Dinh Province, II Corps, in the rich northern coastal plain and the valleys to the west . The U.S. military says the operation is a success .
 Fire breaks out on board the 42,000-ton United States aircraft carrier Oriskany . locker filled with night illumination magnesium flares bursts into flames .
 43 crew members killed and a further 16 injured in the fire . The fire spreads quickly through most of the ship, resulting in 43 crew deaths .
 Three hundred bombs are thrown overboard and four bombers and two helicopters are lost . After three hours, the fire is brought under control after three hours .
 In London an estimated 50,000 demonstrators take part in a protest against the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was a major anti-war protest in the 1960s .
 Ambassador-at-Large Averell Harriman visits 10 nations to explain the results of the Manila conference . He also provides the current U.S. assessment of the situation in Southeast Asia . The United States will visit 10 nations this week .
 Harriman, acting as Johnson’s personal emissary, visits leaders in Ceylon, Indonesia, India, Pakistan, Iran, Italy, France, West Germany, Britain, Morocco and Morocco .
 A South Vietnamese government announcement says the national police have smashed a guerrilla plot to blow up U.S. and Vietnamese buildings in Saigon during National Day celebrations on November 1 .
 United States Navy patrol boats and helicopters prevent a VC flotilla from crossing the Mekong River near My Tho, sinking 51 junks and sampans . U.S. patrol boats, helicopters and helicopters prevented the flotillas crossing the river .
 199th Light Infantry Brigade deploys to Vietnam from Fort Benning, Georgia, for combat operations in III Corps . The 199th light Infantry Brigade will be deployed to Vietnam .
 Viet Cong stage two separate guerrilla attacks in Saigon to coincide with celebrations for South Vietnam’s National Day . South Vietnam's National Day is celebrated in Vietnam's capital city .
 In the first incident, a 75 mm recoilless rifle is fired at a crowd of civilians waiting for the start of a parade celebrating the South Vietnamese holiday . The first incident is the first of a series of incidents filmed in Vietnam .
 In the second incident, a VC grenade is thrown at a crowded bus terminal in the city’s central market . In the first incident, the VC grenade was thrown in a crowded area of the city's central market.
 Defense Department drafts plans for intensified bombing of North Vietnam . Aim is to force Hanoi to negotiate and hindering their efforts to transport materiel to units in South Vietnam .
 Pentagon leaders admit attacks on oil facilities have done little to slow down the passage of arms and supplies into the South . Pentagon leaders say attacks on facilities have little to do with stopping the flow of weapons and supplies .
 Elements of 1st and 25th Infantry Divisions, the 196th Light Infantry Brigade, and the 173rd Airborne Brigade, joined by two ARVN battalions, fight one of the war’s largest battles .
 Operation Attleboro takes place in Tay Ninh Province against the 9th VC Division and the 101st North Vietnamese Regiment . The battle, a part of Operation Attelboro, takes place on the ground in the province .
 Nixon criticizes the pledge to withdraw military forces from Vietnam if North Vietnam withdraws its forces . Former vice president Richard Nixon says the pledge is not enough . Nixon: "It's not enough. It's a mistake"
 Johnson cautions Hanoi against interpreting the results of the congressional elections as a test of administration policy on Vietnam . Johnson also cautions that the results should not be interpreted as a political test of the administration policy .
 Fire breaks out aboard the carrier Franklin D Roosevelt, five decks below the flight deck, killing eight sailors . Eight sailors were killed when the fire broke out .
 America will increase its troop presence in 1967, but at a rate “substantially less” than the 200,000 men added in 1966 .
 Supporters of the Students for a Democratic Society shout McNamara down . McNamara tries to speak, but supporters of the students shout him down . Students for the Democratic Society shouts him down in front of the crowd .
 25 demonstrators throw themselves under McNamara's car . McNamara then tries to leave, but 25 demonstrators threw themselves under his car . The incident occurred during a protest at the White House .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara tells the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the new U.S. troop strength goal in Vietnam will be 469,000 men in the field by June 30,1968 .
 The British Council for Peace in Vietnam opens in London on October 19 . Lord Brockway is a member of the council for peace in Vietnam .
 Secretary-general of the United Nations U.N. U. Thant calls for a final and unconditional halt in U.S. air attacks on the North . U Thant disagrees with the conditional proposal advanced by Ambassador Goldberg .
 Captain Archie C Kuntze found guilty by a general court-martial in California on a charge of “conduct unbecoming of an officer and gentleman” while stationed in Saigon .
 60 students walk out to protest his defense of the U.S. involvement in Vietnam . Some 60 students walked out in protest .
 Some of those who remain shout and heckle Wheeler, and others storm the stage . Some of the hecklers are still shouting and heckling Wheeler .
 A secret report to the president from Secretary of Defense McNamara challenges General Westmoreland’s strategy of attrition . The report was a secret report from the President McNamara .
 McNamara says that the increased number of U.S. troops has not brought about a significant rise in enemy casualties . McNamara advises against a further large-scale reinforcement to Vietnam .
 McNamara's pessimism is not shared by most of the president’s closest advisers, and his recommendations are rejected by the president . McNamara: “The president is not willing to listen to McNamara. He is willing to make his recommendations,” he writes .
 Two U.S. destroyers shell a North Vietnamese radar site two miles north of the DMZ in the Dong Hoi area . North Vietnam radar site is located two miles from the border .
 U.S. destroyers sink or damage 47 out of 60 Communist supply barges off the southern coast of North Vietnam, sinking or damaging 47 of 60 . Two destroyers destroyers bombard a flotilla of Communist supply .
 Beijing claims that U.S. bombers attacked a fleet of Chinese fishing boats in international waters off the Gulf of Tonkin, killing 14 sailors and sinking five boats . Beijing claims the U.K. attacked the fleet of fishing boats off international waters .
 Operation Fairfax/Rang Dong is initiated by three battalions from the United States 1st, 4th, and 25th Infantry Divisions . The operation is to clear and pacify the area surrounding Saigon .
 Upon withdrawal of the 199th, responsibility for the area of operation will be turned over to the ARVN 5th Ranger Group .
 The South Vietnamese Constituent Assembly draws up draft articles for a new constitution . The South Vietnam Constituency Assembly is currently in charge of drafting articles for the new constitution.
 On December 15, the assembly approves the proposal for the future civil regime to be headed by a popularly elected president . The assembly also approves a proposal empowering the president, rather than the legislature, to appoint a premier .
 On December 21, the assembly approves the establishment of a bicameral legislature . It will be made up of a senate and a house of representatives . The assembly also approves a constitution that will include a senate .
 The 9th Infantry Division deploys to Vietnam from Fort Lewis, Washington, to conduct combat operations in III Corps . The division will establish its initial headquarters at Bearcat, near Bien Hoa, Vietnam .
 The 31st Tactical Fighter Wing deploys to Vietnam to support combat operations in II Corps . The Wing is part of the Army's 2nd Air Force in Vietnam .
 An American force of several battalions and a battalion of South Vietnamese Rangers begins guarding Saigon . In the wake of VC terrorist attacks on the outskirts of Saigon, an American force begins guarding the city .
 Elements of the U.S. 25th Infantry Division are employed to prevent the VC from entering rice growing areas near the Ho Bo and Boi Loi Woods in III Corps .
 A truck-park five miles south of Hanoi is hit by navy jets in the closest raid to the city since June 29 . Truck-park is the closest to the capital since a raid on June 29 on June 30 .
 The Ha Gia fuel storage depot, 14Vi miles north of Hanoi, is bombed by 50 to 60 United States F-4C Phantom jets . U.S. forces bombarded the depot with up to 60 F-2C Phantom bombs .
 Escort jets destroy four radar missile sites and an antiaircraft emplacement . Escort fighter jets destroy radar sites and ant-aircraft emplacements . Escorts destroy missiles and destroy ant-missile sites in Afghanistan .
 About 40 miles northeast of Hanoi, other navy pilots hit a second fuel dump . Other navy pilots also hit the dump .
 During the day, eight United States planes are downed, a record for a single day . Eight U.S. planes were downed during the day . The U.N. aircrafts are downed during that day .
 Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge asks Janusz Lewandowski, Polish representative on the International Control Commission, to inform Hanoi of the United States’ willingness to meet with North Vietnamese officials . Lodge asks Lewandowski to inform the Polish representative that the U.S. is willing to
 Polish foreign minister Adam Rapacki discloses that Hanoi has accepted the proposal to take part in talks at the ambassadorial level . Poland's foreign minister says Hanoa has accepted a proposal for talks .
 Hanoi does not repeat its usual demand for a cessation of U.S. raids on the North as a condition for entering the talks . The talks are expected to last for a year .
 Under cover of a 4Vi-hour mortar attack, a VC unit penetrates the 13-mile defense perimeter around Saigon’s Tan Son Nhut Air Base . The attack was part of a four-hour attack on the air base .
 Security guards kill 11 more Viet Cong and repel the others . The guerrillas return the same night and resume the attack, until security guards kill them . Security guards killed 11 more than a dozen other Viet Cong during the attack .
 U.S. fighter-bombers strike the Yen Vien railroad yard six miles northeast of Hanoi and the Ha Gia fuel storage depot .
 The United States destroyer Ingersoll exchanges fire with a North Vietnamese coastal battery 11 miles northeast of Dong Hoi and is slightly damaged . The U.S. warship was slightly damaged by the fire .
 The Johnson administration discloses that it will need an additional S9 to 10 billion in supplemental funding to pay for the war in Vietnam during the current fiscal year . The U.S. will need S9-10 billion in additional funding for the Vietnam War .
 Tran Van Van was a prominent member of the South Vietnamese Constituent Assembly . He was shot to death by two Viet Cong terrorists while driving to an assembly meeting in Saigon .
 Air Force Secretary Harold Brown releases a detailed assessment of the American air war over North Vietnam . Brown says the strikes have caused “serious manpower, supply and morale problems” for North Vietnam but are still not severe enough to persuade Hanoi to enter peace talks .
 International Red Cross says North Vietnam has rejected a proposal by President Johnson for joint discussion of fair treatment and possible exchange of war captives held by both sides . President Johnson proposed to discuss fair treatment of captives held in Vietnam .
 Johnson first broached the plan on July 20 at a news conference, and the IRC submitted the proposal to Hanoi in July . Johnson: "It's a good step for the U.S. to go to Vietnam, but it's a step further down"
 The IRC acted as Washington’s intermediary, the U.S. State Department confirms the next day that the IRC had acted as an intermediary .
 White House press secretary Bill Moyers says the U.S. is willing to discuss the proposal if the Communists show interest . Moyers: "The United States is ready to discuss" the proposal . The White House says that the United States would discuss it with Communists .
 The General Assembly of the National Council of Churches, meeting in Miami Beach, approves a statement . The statement urges the administration to consider a halt in air strikes on North Vietnam .
 California governor-elect Ronald Reagan declares he favors “an all-out total effort” in Vietnam . Reagan: “I want to go to Vietnam. I want to get involved in it. It’s a war. I’m not going to be a
 Walt Rostow, special assistant for national security, says he has found the Allied military position “greatly improved” in 1966 . Rostow envisions a dominant—even potentially victorious—position by the end of 1967 .
 U.S. planes bomb Yen Vien railroad yard, six miles northeast of Hanoi, and attack a truck depot two miles south of the city . United States planes bomb railroad yard and truck depot .
 International reaction to the raids, especially from Communist countries, is immediate . The raids are the first of its kind in the world .
 For the first time U.S. planes are bombing residential areas in the city of Hanoi and causing civilian casualties . Soviet Union and East German news agencies report that for first time United States planes are flying into the city . The United States bombed residential areas and caused civilian casualties in
 TASS says U.S. planes have bombed workers’ districts along the Red River embankment . TASS, the Soviet news agency, says that United States planes are bombing workers' districts .
 Robert J McCloskey of the United States State Department denies that U.S. planes have bombed Hanoi . State Department official denies that United States planes have been bombed . U.N. State Dept. denies that planes were bombed by the U.K.
 David E Lilienthal will head the American section of a joint Unites States-South Vietnam effort to map long-range plans for South Vietnam’s economy . The White House announces the appointment of David E. Lilienth .
 United States intelligence sources confirm reports that North Korean pilots are in North Vietnam, presumably to train North Vietnamese pilots . U.S. intelligence sources say North Korea is sending pilots to Vietnam .
 In an address at a mass in Saigon, Spellman says that the Vietnamese conflict is “a war for civilization” Spellman: “certainly it is not a war of our seeking.” In the speech, he said that the conflict was “not
 Vatican sources express displeasure with Spellman’s statements in Vietnam . Next day, Vatican sources expressed displeasure with Vatican sources expressing displeasure . Spellman says Vatican sources are unhappy with Vatican's decision to send him to Vietnam .
 Salisbury visits the sites of several U.S. air strikes that were conducted on October 1 . Salisbury had gone to North Vietnam with the authorization of both Hanoi and Washington .
 All the homes and buildings in Phu Ly (population 20,000) were destroyed, says Hoan . He reports on the destruction in the towns of Phu L and Nam Dinh .
 The 1st Cavalry Division defends LZ Bird in the Kim Son Valley, sustaining 58 killed in bitter fighting . The operation Thayer II began October 25 and began October 26 .
 The forest is bombed and napalmed in preparation for the assault, in which an estimated 1,200 South Vietnamese paratroopers are dropped from Allied air force planes .
 Some 6,000 combined South Vietnamese troops attack a Viet Cong force in the forest . South Vietnamese forces attacked the Viet Cong in a forest in the early 1970s .
 On December 29, the United States destroyer Herbert J Thomas shells suspected Viet Cong positions in the area for seven hours . The U.S. destroyer shells suspected enemy positions in an area for more than a dozen hours .
 North Vietnamese city of Nam Dinh has been hit by U.S. planes 64 times since mid-1965 . Air strikes were directed only against military targets: railroad yards, warehouse, petroleum storage depots, and power plant .
 British foreign secretary George Brown proposes an international peace conference to end the war in Vietnam . Brown proposes a peace conference in order to end Vietnam's war with the US .
 Hanoi charges that U.S. planes have bombed North Vietnamese residential and industrial targets in Vietnam . The Vietnamese government says the United States has shelled residential areas in Quang Binh Province .
 Both North and South Vietnam will charge each other with many violations during the truce . Both countries will be charged with violations of the ceasefire .
 UN Secretary-general U. Thant renews his plea to the United States for an unconditional cessation of the bombing of North Vietnam . Ambassador Goldberg’s request that Thant use his position to obtain a cease-fire was rejected .
 5,008 U.S. servicemen were killed and 30,093 wounded in the fighting in 1966, for a total of 6,664 Americans killed and 37,738 wounded since January 1,1961 .
 In Operation Rolling Thunder, the total number of individual flights in 1966 was 148,000; the total bomb tonnage was 128,000 . The number of aircraft lost was 318; and direct operational costs are $1,200,000,000. In Operation Thunder, Operation Rolling
 The CIA estimates that North Vietnamese casualties from the bombing raids to be 24,000—of which 80 percent are civilian . The CIA will produce a study in January 1967 that estimates that .
 It is estimated that the bombing is costing the U.S. nearly $10 for every dollar’s worth of damage done to North Vietnam . The bombing is estimated to cost the United States $10 per dollar of damage .
 Two brigades from the United States 9th Infantry Division, a total of 5,000 soldiers, arrive at Vung Tau . The U.S. 9th Division is part of the U.N. mission in Vietnam .
 Communists propose that the Tet truce be extended until February 15 . The Communists propose to extend the truce until the end of the month .
 Operation Sam Houston is a continuation of border surveillance and interdiction operations in Pleiku and Kontum Provinces in the Central Highlands . It aims to prevent the movement of North Vietnamese troops and equipment into South Vietnam from Communist sanctuaries in Cambodia and Laos .
 The New Year’s truce, which began at 0700 on December 31,1966, ends today . The truce began on New Year's Eve, 1966, and ends on January 31, 1966 .
 U.S. headquarters in Saigon announces resumption of normal operations . The United States headquarters in Vietnam announces resuming normal operations.
 U.S. Air Force F-4 Phantom jets down seven communist MiG-2 Is over North Vietnam . In the biggest air battle of the war to date, United States Air Force jets down 7 communist MiGs .
 Phantoms were flying cover for F-105 Thunderchiefs attacking surface-to-air missile sites in the Red River Valley . The Phantoms flew cover for attacks on missile sites .
 Colonel Robin Olds is the only U.S. Air Force ace with victories in both World War II and Vietnam . He was the first to shoot down one of the MiGs in both WWII and Vietnam.
 This raises international speculation that Hanoi is modifying its conditions for ending the war . The conditions for an end to the conflict in Vietnam have not yet been established .
 The same day, Hanoi rejects a British proposal for an international peace conference to end the war, attacking the plan because it fails to include the NLF in proposed negotiations . The British proposal was rejected because it does not include the Nieti Front .
 Operation Deckhouse V includes amphibious operations in Kien Hoa Province in the Mekong Delta, located 62 miles south of Saigon . U.S. 1st Battalion, 9th Marines, and South Vietnamese Marine Brigade Task Force Bravo launch operation . Operation is part of Operation Deck
 The Thanh Phu Secret Zone is reported by U.S. intelligence sources to contain ammunition dumps, ordnance and engineering workshops, hospitals, and indoctrination centers . The target area is reported to contain weapons and ammunition dumps . It is also said to contain hospitals, hospitals and indoctr
 Ten children are killed and 25 other civilians wounded when two VC companies in Kien Hoa Province try to shield their advance behind civilian hostages during an exchange of gunfire with an ARVN Ranger company . The children are among the 25 people wounded .
 Operation Cedar Falls is the first corpssized operation in the war . About 16,000 U.S. soldiers join 14,000 South Vietnamese troops in the operation . Operation Cedar falls was the first of its kind in the history of the Vietnam War .
 The purpose of the operation is to find and eliminate the VC Military Region 4 headquarters and clear enemy troops from the Thanh Dien Forest Preserve and the Iron Triangle . The Iron Triangle is a 60-square-mile area of jungle believed to contain Communist base camps .
 United States infantrymen discover a vast tunnel complex, apparently a headquarters for guerrilla raids and terrorist attacks on Saigon . U.S. troops found the complex in a vast network of tunnels .
 Ben Sue is leveled after its 3,800 inhabitants are removed from the area for resettlement in a camp 20 miles to the south . Ben Sue, a village reported as hostile, is leveled . The village is reported to have been reported to be hostile to the people .
 The National Liberation Front later claims that over 2,500 U.S. soldiers were killed in the 18-day operation . Over 1,229 bombing sorties are flown by United States planes in support of the assault .
 The U.S. Agency for International Development attempts to respond to reports of widespread corruption and thievery of commodities sent to South Vietnam by the United States . The agency is responding to reports in the American media that the U.N. sent commodities to the country .
 Congress will delay for almost a year, but eventually pass the surcharge . Congress will eventually pass a surcharge on the tax hike . The surcharge is expected to rise to $1,500 a year .
 The United States expenditure in Vietnam for fiscal year 1967 will be $21 billion . The U.S. will spend more than $20 billion in Vietnam .
 UN Secretary-general U Thant urges an unconditional halt to United States bombing of North Vietnam . U. Thant: U.S. should not bomb North Vietnam in Vietnam . Thant calls for an unconditional end to the bombing .
 U.S. planes resume air strikes against the Hanoi area for the first time since December 1966 . 37-plane mission to destroy railroads, highways, bridges, and surface-to-air missile sites 15 miles from the city .
 South Vietnamese premier Ky thanks leaders of Australia and New Zealand for their aid in the war . Ky thanks the leaders of both countries for their help in the battle .
 Beijing joins North Vietnam in issuing a second warning to Thailand against any military intervention in the Vietnam War . Threatening stern measures against Thailand if it permits the U.S. to base B-52s on its territory .
 Harry Ashmore, former editor of the Arkansas Gazette, says the damage inflicted by U.S. bombing in Vietnam is offset by the U.N. bombing . He says the North Vietnamese people and their morale have been affected by the bombing .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff issues order barring U.S. bombing within a five-mile radius of center of Hanoi . Order appears to be reaction to controversy over civilian bombing casualties .
 Planes will only be allowed to penetrate the zone only to chase attacking aircraft . Planes will be permitted to fly in the zone to chase aircraft .
 McNamara: 275,000 Communist troops, including 45,000 North Vietnamese regulars, in South Vietnam . Secretary of Defense McNamara testifies before a Senate committee .
 United States Marines and ARVN troops conduct Operation De Soto to relieve an ARVVN outpost and clear an area 25 miles south of Quang Ngai City, I Corps. United States. Marines, ARV. troops conduct . Operation De . Soto is part of
 U.S. helicopters accidentally kill 31 Vietnamese civilians and wound 38 in operation against the VC in the Mekong Delta . The incident occurred during a mission against the Vietnamese government forces in Vietnam .
 Hanoi demands an end to Operation Rolling Thunder before it will agree to negotiations . Hanois demands end to operation Rolling Thunder in order to reach peace talks .
 The United States 9th Infantry Division conducts Operation Palm Beach in Dinh Tuong Province, IV Corps . The operation is part of the U.S. Army's 9th Division in Vietnam . The division is based in the region .
 Purpose of the operation is to provide security for the construction of the . division base camp at Dong Tam . Purpose of . the operation was to provide . security for . the construction . of the base camp . The operation is scheduled to take place in the area .
 2,000 members of the National Committee of Clergy and Laymen Concerned About Vietnam demonstrate in front of the White House . They demand a halt to the bombing of North Vietnam .
 Operation Prairie II, a continuation of operations in the DMZ area, continues in Quang Tri Province, I Corps. The U.S. 3rd Marine Division conducts Operation Prairie I . The operation is part of a continuing operation in the area .
 U.S. artillery and planes accidentally hit a South Vietnamese hamlet 12 miles southwest of Danang, killing eight civilians and wounding 18 . Eight civilians were killed and 18 wounded in the incident .
 Operation Big Spring is a drive against the 273rd VC Regiment in War Zone D, a Communist stronghold near the Cambodian border . Nearly 10,000 U.S. troops from the 9th Infantry Division and 173rd Airborne Brigade launch Operation Big spring .
 6,000—8,000 troops of the United States 4th and 25th Infantry Divisions carry out Operation Gadsden in Tay Ninh Province, III Corps . The operation aims to disguise preparations for an upcoming operation .
 South Vietnamese and Allied forces begin defoliation of jungle growth in southern part of the DMZ . North Vietnamese troops accused of alleged “flagrant violations” of the buffer area by North Vietnam troops .
 Leaders of 15 politically diverse student organizations sign a resolution calling for the end to the draft . The resolution calls for the establishment of a voluntary military service .
 Senator Robert Kennedy returns to the U.S. after holding informal discussions in Vietnam with Western leaders . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in March 1968 . Kennedy was killed by a bomb blast in Vietnam .
 Kennedy: U.S. participation in Vietnam War has undermined U.K. prestige abroad . Kennedy: Vietnam War undermines U.N. prestige at home and abroad . Vietnam War was first war of its kind, he says .
 Kennedy denies a Newsweek magazine story reporting that he has received North Vietnamese peace proposals for ending the war . Kennedy denies the Newsweek magazine article .
 President Johnson sends a proposal to Prime Minister Harold Wilson calling for an “assured stoppage” of North Vietnamese infiltration in return for a bombing halt and no further augmentation of U.S. forces in South Vietnam .
 Prime Minister Wilson meets with Soviet premier Aleksey Kosygin in an effort to negotiate an end to the bombing of North Vietnam and begin peace talks . In London, Wilson, acting on behalf of President Johnson, meets with Kosygen in an attempt to end the bombing .
 The National Committee of Clergy and Laymen Concerned About Vietnam sponsors a three-day “Fast for Peace” by Christians and Jews across the U.S. The event is sponsored by Christians, Jews and Christians .
 The United States halts the bombing of North Vietnam during the Tet holiday . The U.S. stopped the bombing during the holiday .
 Washington insists that the formula for talks presented by Prime Minister Wilson to Premier Kosygin requires that North Vietnamese infiltration stop before a bombing halt, not afterward, as Wilson has suggested orally .
 MACV reports a massive supply buildup in North Vietnam during the first three days of the Lunar New Year truce . U.S. bombing raids have been suspended in Vietnam since the truce began .
 As the Tet holiday cease-fire ends, Allied forces launch 16 operations . Allied forces launched 16 operations in Vietnam in 1968 .
 Operation Stone is part of Operation Stone, conducted by the United States 1st Marines in Quang Nam Province . The U.S. Marines are conducting Operation Stone .
 Operation Lam Son-67 is carried out by the United States 1st Infantry Division to clear guerrillas from villages in an area 13 miles south of Saigon . Farther to the south, the U.S. 1st Division clears villages in a village 13 miles from Sa
 Operation Pershing in Quang Ngai and Binh Dinh Provinces, I and II Corps . The U.S. 1st Cavalry Division, assisted by elements of the 25th Infantry Division, the 22nd ARVN Division, and the ROK Capital Division
 The year-long operation will include a number of bitterly fought battles at LZ Pat, An Quang-Dam Tra O Lake, LZ Geronimo, Tam Quan, Bong Son, and Nui Mieu cave complex .
 President ignores appeals for an extension of the Tet truce from Pope Paul VI, Secretary-general U Thant, and other world leaders . He says he has based his decision to resume bombing on what he terms the unparalleled magnitude of the North Vietnamese supply effort .
 A U.S. artillery shell accidentally hits a 1 st Cavalry Division position, killing seven soldiers and wounding four . Seven soldiers were killed and four wounded .
 Operation Enterprise took place in Long An Province, Vietnam . Operation Enterprise was part of the U.S. 9th Infantry Division and South Vietnamese forces . The operation took place during the summer of 1968 .
 The year-long operation is aimed at defeating organized enemy forces, eliminating enemy infrastructure, and conducting pacification operations . The operation is also aimed at eliminating enemy forces .
 Operation Tucson in Binh Duong Province masks the movement of the U.S. 1st Infantry Division in preparation for Operation Junction City . Operation Tucson is part of Operation Tucson .
 Air raids on military targets in the North are accomplishing their objectives and are also raising morale in South Vietnam . Secretary of Defense McNamara says that air raids on North Vietnam targets are accompliting their objectives .
 The Communist buildup in the South has ‘levelled off’ as a result of these raids, says McNamara . North Vietnam has been forced to divert 300,000 persons to repair supply lines .
 Communist ground fire downs 13 U.S. helicopters, a record number for a single day . Nine are downed during one operation in the Mekong Delta .
 Four Americans are killed and eight wounded in the loss of 13 helicopters . Four Americans were killed, eight were wounded . 13 helicopters were also lost .
 Bernard B Fall is killed by a VC mine on Highway 1 about 14 miles northeast of Hue . Fall was gathering material for his eighth book on Vietnam; a U.S. Marine photographer is also killed in the blast .
 U.S. troops found drugs and equipment found in underground Viet Cong hospital in War Zone C during Operation Junction City, 1967 . The hospital was located in an underground hospital .
 Poll: 55 percent of those polled favor continued military pressure on North Vietnam . 67 percent support continued bombing . 55 percent favor continued pressure from North Vietnam, poll says .
 President Johnson’s approval rating is 43 percent, with 57 percent of respondents disapproving of the way he is handling the Vietnam War . Johnson's approval rating was 43 percent .
 The purpose of the operation is to clear enemy base areas in War Zone C (in Tay Ninh Province near the South Vietnam-Cambodia border, III Corps) The operation is intended to locate and destroy the Central Office for South Vietnam, the headquarters used by the North Vietnamese
 Privately, McNamara is increasingly questioning the efficacy of the bombing campaign . McNamara: "I'm not optimistic about the effectiveness of the campaign"
 Mobile Riverine Force was established to support U.S. 9th Infantry Division in the conduct of operations in the Mekong Delta area . The force was established by Commander, Naval Forces, Vietnam .
 The United States 173rd Airborne Brigade is ambushed near the Cambodian border, with additional heavy casualties . Additional heavy casualties are also reported .
 Senator Robert Kennedy proposes a three-point plan to help end the war in Vietnam . Senator Kennedy proposes three points of a plan to end the Vietnam War .
 It includes suspension of United States bombing of North Vietnam, withdrawal of U.S. troops from South Vietnam, with replacement by an international force .
 The village of Lang Vei, 15 miles south of the DMZ, is accidentally hit by bombs dropped by two U.S. F-4C Phantom jets . At least 83 civilians were killed and 176 wounded in the incident .
 South Korean forces launch Operation Oh Jac Kyo I, their largest operation to date . It involves a linkup between forces along the central coastal area of II Corps .
 Both houses of Congress pass the Mansfield Resolution backing President Johnson’s efforts to prevent expansion of the war and his attempts to gain a negotiated peace .
 Thailand acknowledges use of Thai bases by U.S. planes for air raids on North Vietnam . For the first time, Thailand acknowledges the use of its bases by United States planes .
 The Republic of Vietnam’s Council of Ministers approves a new constitution for South Vietnam . The new constitution was approved by the Vietnamese government in 2007 .
 U.S. planes bomb the Thai Nguyen iron and steel complex, 38 miles north of Hanoi, in the first bombing raid on major industrial installations in North Vietnam .
 U.S. sources in Saigon concede that this constitutes an escalation of the war . United States sources in Vietnam say this is a 'escalation' of the conflict .
 President Johnson addresses the Tennessee General Assembly in Nashville . He defends his policy of continuing the bombing of North Vietnam . President Johnson says the bombing was justified by the bombing .
 Ellsworth Bunker will replace Henry Cabot Lodge as ambassador to South Vietnam . Robert W Komer will head the pacification and economic assistance programs in Vietnam .
 The Defense Department announces an increase in purchases of herbicides and defoliants in fiscal year 1967 . The increase is intended to triple destruction of crops and defoliation of jungles in Viet Cong areas .
 The South Vietnamese Constituent Assembly adopts the draft of a new constitution . It provides for a democratically elected civilian government, including a president, a vice president, and a bicameral legislature .
 The constitution calls for local village elections during four subsequent Sundays . Provisions of the constitution call for the elections during the next four Sundays .
 Operation Prairie III is a continuation of the Prairie series of search and destroy operations in Quang Tri Province, I Corps. The U.S. Marines are conducting a series of operations in the area . Operation Prairie is the name of Operation Prairie .
 173rd VC Regiment attacked a troop from the 3rd Battalion of the 5th Cavalry near Ap Bau Bang and Soui Tre, 35 miles north of Saigon . During Operation Junction City, the 173rd and 5th VC Regiment were attacked by a troop .
 Also this day, a force of more than 2,500 VC attacks elements of the 4th Infantry Division at FSB Gold . Also on that day, more than two-500 VC forces attacked elements of 4th .
 President Johnson and major administration officials, including Dean Rusk and Robert McNamara, meet with Nguyen Cao Ky and Nguyen Van Thieu in Guam to discuss military and political aspects of the war .
 Thailand has agreed to the stationing of B-52s on its territory for bombing raids against targets in North and South Vietnam . Washington officials announce that Thailand will be stationing the planes in Vietnam .
 The Senate Preparedness Subcommittee recommends that the U.S. escalate the air war against North Vietnam by lifting restrictions on bombing targets . The subcommittee also recommends lifting the restrictions on North Vietnam targets .
 The North Vietnamese press agency reports that an exchange of notes took place in February between President Johnson and Ho Chi Minh . The exchange took place between the two leaders .
 The U.S. State Department confirms the exchange of letters and expresses regret that Hanoi has divulged this information . The secret letters were intended as a serious diplomatic attempt to end the conflict, the State Department says .
 The Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., leads a march of 5,000 antiwar demonstrators in Chicago . The Rev. King led the march in Chicago, Illinois .
 The Phoenix, a private United States yacht with eight American pacifists aboard, arrives in Haiphong, North Vietnam, with $10,000 worth of medical supplies for the North Vietnamese . The Phoenix is a private U.S. yacht with 8 Americans aboard, including eight pacifists
 The trip is made in defiance of a United States ban on American travel to North Vietnam . The trip, financed by a Quaker group in Philadelphia, is made by Quaker groups .
 President Nguyen Van Thieu dismisses six more province chiefs as part of his campaign to eliminate corruption and inefficiency . The move is part of a government effort to eliminate inefficiency and corruption inefficiency in Vietnam .
 The House Committee on Un-American Activities charges that two antiwar demonstrations scheduled for April 15, 1967, have been proposed by Communists . Many of the organizations involved are infiltrated or dominated by Communists, the committee says .
 U.S. troops from the 1st Battalion, 26th Infantry, 1st Infantry Division, fight 2,500 soldiers from the 271st VC Regiment near Ap Gu, 28 miles northwest of Tay Ninh City . In one of the bloodiest battles of Operation Junction City, U
 Heavy artillery and tactical air support help turn the tide of battle in favor of the Americans . The battle was fought in the Battle of Gettysburg in 1944 .
 26th Regiment of the United States 5th Marine Division is attached to the 1st Marine Division for combat operations in I Corps . The 26th Marines are part of the U.S. 5th Marines Division .
 Australia deploys its 7th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, to Vietnam to join the 1st Australian Tactical Force for combat operation in III Corps . The 7th battalion is deployed to Vietnam for combat operations .
 As provided for in the new constitution, effective April 1, local village elections are held . The new constitution provides for village elections .
 The North Vietnamese may be brainwashing U.S. prisoners of war to get anti-American propaganda statements from them, U.N. officials fear . The United States is concerned that the North Vietnamese are brainwashing American prisoners . The North Vietnam may be trying to get the anti-
 The Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., head of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, indicates that a link is forming between the civil rights and peace movements . Dr. King: "A link is being formed between the two movements"
 King proposes that the U.S. stop all bombing of North and South Vietnam; declare a unilateral truce in the hope that it will lead to peace talks . King proposes to withdraw all troops from Vietnam; set a date for withdrawal of all troops .
 Operation Francis Marion is a follow-on operation to Sam Houston in the western highlands of Pleiku Province . Two brigades of the U.S. 4th Infantry Division conduct the operation . The operation took place in western parts of the country .
 The purpose of the operation is to preclude North Vietnamese infiltration through the la Drang Valley, II Corps . II Corps. The operation is intended to prevent North Vietnamese infiltrations .
 Quang Tri raid blamed on disloyal South Vietnamese soldiers . South Vietnam says Communist attackers infiltrated from the DMZ .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara announces plans to build a fortified barrier just south of the eastern end of the DMZ . The barrier would curb the flow of arms and troops from North Vietnam into South Vietnam .
 Communist China and the Soviet Union have reached an agreement on speeding the shipment of Soviet military supplies to North Vietnam across Chinese territory . U.S. officials report that the deal will be sped up the shipment .
 Task Force Oregon is formed in response to MACV’s need for reinforcements in I Corps . Task force Oregon was formed after the U.S. midterm elections in November .
 It will be made up of a brigade each from the United States 25th Infantry and 101st Airborne Divisions, the 196th Light Infantry Brigade, and a squadron from the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment .
 South Vietnamese premier Nguyen Cao Ky announces the start of construction on a fortified barrier south of the DMZ to halt infiltration from North Vietnam . South Vietnam premier says the barrier will be built to halt North Vietnamese infiltration from the country .
 The San Francisco march is led by black nationalists, but most of the marchers are white . The police estimate at 20,000 by the police that the march was led by the black nationalists .
 Two F-100 Super Sabre jets drop bombs off-target, hitting ARVN battalion position 23 miles northeast of Qui Nhon, killing 41 South Vietnamese troops and wounding 50 . The U.S. Air Force says the incident was a "human error"
 An agreement is signed in Saigon for an additional $150 million worth of U.S. economic aid to South Vietnam . The total amount of assistance in 1967 to a record $700 million .
 General Westmoreland notifies the Joint Chiefs of additionai troop needs . Westmoreand notifies Joint Chiefs that he has added troops to his forces .
 Concerned about enemy buildup in sanctuaries in Laos, Cambodia, and parts of South Vietnam . Westmoreland says he needs four and two-thirds divisions—201,250 more troops .
 Major Leo K Thorsness, 357th Tactical Fighter Squadron, destroys two enemy SAM sites, then shoots down a MiG-17 . He escorts search and rescue helicopters to a downed aircrew . He then escorts helicopters to the downed air crew .
 Major Thorsness attacks four MiG-17s in an effort to draw the enemy aircraft away from the area . Although his F-105 is very low on fuel, he attacks four enemy aircraft in an attempt to draw them away .
 The United States proposes that the six-mile-wide DMZ be extended 10 miles on each side . The U.S. proposes that troops on both sides be withdrawn behind the wider buffer .
 North Vietnam rejects the proposal on the grounds that it does not include Hanoi’s principal condition for peace talks . North Vietnam is demanding an end to air attacks against North Vietnam, which they say is unacceptable .
 Newly formed Task Force Oregon conducts Operation Baker to deny the North Vietnamese the use of the lowlands near Due Pho in Quang Ngai Province, I Corps. Operation Baker is part of a larger effort to deny North Vietnamese access to the area . Operation Baker was part of Operation Baker
 Joint Chiefs transmits General Westmoreland’s request for 200,000 additional troops to Secretary of Defense McNamara, “strongly” recommending approval . Joint Chiefs transmit the request to Secretary McNamara .
 This confronts the administration with a difficult decision on whether to escalate or level off the U.S. effort . The administration faces a decision whether to level off its efforts in Syria .
 For the first time, United States planes bomb Haiphong, attacking two power plants inside the city . U.S. planes bomb two power stations in the city of Hengengong .
 Raids carried out by 86 planes from aircraft carriers Kitty Hawk and Ticonderoga . Raids were carried out from the aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk . 86 planes were involved in the raids .
 Operation Prairie IV is a continuation of the Prairie series of operations in Quang Tri Province, I Corps. U.S. Marines and ARVN troops conduct Operation Prairie III . Operation Prairie is part of a series of military operations in Vietnam .
 The purpose of this operation is to ease the pressure on the Khe Sanh Combat Base . The operation is being carried out in order to ease up the pressure of the base's operations .
 The operation includes a bloody two-day battle in which the marines capture Hill 174, a heavily fortified North Vietnamese position . Hill 174 is located five miles southwest of Con Thien .
 The 1st U.S. Marine Division conducts Operation Union to eliminate Communist strongholds between Chu Lai and Danang Quang Quan Nam, and Quang Tin Provinces, I Corps. Operation Union . Operation Union was launched in April 1944 .
 Senator Charles Percy denounces the Johnson administration as unrealistic in its Vietnam policy . Percy calls for Viet Cong participation in peace talks . Percy also calls for peace talks with the South Korean government .
 Operation Manhattan was a search and destroy mission in the Iron Triangle of Binh Duong Province, III Corps . U.S. troops from the 1st Infantry Division were reinforced by a brigade from the 25th Infantry Division, 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment, and a South Vietnamese Ranger
 This study indicates that resistance to military proposals for escalation is growing among civilian officials in the State Department . The State Department is considering military escalation plans for the Syrian conflict .
 United States planes bomb two MiG bases north of Hanoi in what appears to be a further relaxing of restrictions on air raids . U.S. planes appear to have relaxed restrictions around the area .
 United States Marines defeat North Vietnamese troops from the 325C Division on three hills near the airstrip at Khe Sanh in Quang Tri Province . Less than 10 miles from the Laotian border, U.S. Marines defeat N.V. troops in fierce fighting near the La
 Senator George McGovern makes a major speech in the Senate attacking administration policies in Vietnam . McGovern attacks the Vietnam policy in Vietnam in a speech on Vietnam .
 Democratic senators Robert Kennedy, Frank Church and Ernest Gruening join in the attack . Robert Kennedy and Frank Church were assassinated in the wake of the assassination .
 United States Navy jets from the carriers Kitty Hawk and Bonhomme Richard attack a cement plant a mile from the center of Haiphong, an oil depot, and an ammunition dump .
 North Vietnamese officials report that the British freighter Hartford is hit by bullets during the raid . Six seamen were wounded in the raid, including six British seamen . North Vietnam officials say six seamen are wounded .
 Beijing Radio reports that two U.S. F-4 Phantom jets were shot down April 24 after intruding into Chinese air space . Beijing Radio says the incident occurred April 24 .
 An electrical transformer station seven miles north of Hanoi is also attacked . The attack was also on a transformer station near the capital . The country's capital is located in the southern city of Hangi .
 General Westmoreland returns to the U.S. to make a speech and put his case for additional troops to the president . The president is expected to make the case for more troops to be sent to Afghanistan .
 Wheeler wants the president to call up the reserves to meet Westmoreland’s requested troop increase . Wheeler wants to meet the president's request to increase troop numbers . Wheeler says the president should call up reserves .
 Waves of U.S. planes drop hundreds of bombs near the Dan Phuong highway, 12 miles west of Hanoi, and on the Gia Lam railroad repair yards . One of the heaviest attacks of the war .
 U.S. Special Forces begin Operation Daniel Boone, covert intelligence missions into Cambodia to recon the Ho Chi Minh Trail and enemy staging areas . Special Forces were sent into Cambodia in the early 1950s to recon and gather intelligence on the Ho-Chang Minh trail . Operation Daniel
 The operations are part of MACV’s Special Operations Group Program Shining Brass/Prairie Fire . MACV: Shining Brass is part of the program Shining Brass and Prairie Fire program .
 A debate develops between the CIA and U.S. military leaders on the issue of how to measure the strength of Communist forces in Vietnam . The CIA and United States military leaders debate the issue .
 Brigadier General Joseph A McChristian, Westmoreland’s chief of intelligence, shows his superior a CIA report that estimates available Communist forces at 400,000 .
 Westmoreland feels this gives a distorted impression by lumping regular troops with guerrillas . He says this includes paramilitary forces engaged primarily in political work .
 U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk says North Vietnam has rejected 28 peace proposals . Rusk: North Vietnamese have rejected at least 28 peace offers .
 The publication of a Republican white paper on Vietnam reveals a wide division in the party . The white paper was published by the Republican National Committee .
 Communist MiG bases at Kep, 37 miles northeast of Hanoi, and Hoa Lac, 19 miles west of the capital, are bombed for the third time . The bases are located near Kep 37 miles .
 An ‘International Tribunal on War Crimes’ opens in Stockholm on May 2 . The tribunal was created by opponents of U.S. policy in Vietnam .
 Chinese officials claim that four U.S. aircraft bombed the southern Chinese town of Nin Mong, 20 miles north of the North Vietnamese border, on May 2 . Chinese officials say four United States aircraft bombed Nin Mong . The incident occurred 20 miles from the North Vietnam border .
 Senator J William Fulbright (DArk.) said he “no longer believes’s statements on Vietnam by President Johnson, Secretary Rusk, or Secretary McNamara . Fulbright said he no longer believes statements by Johnson, Rusk or McNamara on Vietnam .
 Leading congressional supporters of the war are influenced by their interest in defense industries in their home states, he says . He also charges that some leading congressional supporters are influenced .
 Assistant Secretary McNaughton sends Secretary of Defense McNamara a recommendation for cutting back the air war to the 20th parallel . The recommendation would reduce U.S. pilot and aircraft losses over heavily defended Hanoi and Haiphong .
 This is the first recommendation within the administration of a reduction in the bombing campaign . The first recommendation is to reduce the number of bombing raids in Afghanistan .
 On May 6, McNaughton expresses concern to McNamara about this memorandum, because it had also recommended giving General Westmoreland 80,000 more men . On May 4, the White House had recommended 80,00 more men for the war .
 State Department report says damage was probably caused by antiaircraft missile debris . Report: Damage was likely caused by missile debris, not U.S. planes . State Department says it was probably a result of antiacraft missile debris from the aircraft .
 Dartford crewmen insist their ship was strafed by U.S. aircraft . This version is supported by a British seaman aboard a nearby ship, but it is not supported by any British official .
 Three U.S. pilots shot down during a raid over Hanoi paraded through the streets of the capital city .
 Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker, in a report to President Johnson, describes an encouraging turnout in recent village council elections . Bunker: "An encouraging turnout was encouraging"
 He estimates that 77 percent of eligible voters in participating villages cast votes . The vote is expected to take place in villages across the country .
 Walt Rostow, generally described as a “strong bombing advocate,” sends a memo to President Johnson recommending a bombing cutback . Rostow's memo is one of the most important memos in the history of the war .
 Rostow rejects proposals for mining North Vietnam harbors and bombing port facilities . He recommends that bombing be concentrated on supply routes in southern North Vietnam . Rostow: Bombing should be concentrated in southern Vietnam .
 Protesters demonstrate against the Vietnam War in Wichita, Kansas, 1967 . The Vietnam War was the focus of the protest .
 Senator Edward Kennedy says that the civilian casualty rate in Vietnam is over 100,000 a year . Kennedy: Civilian casualties in Vietnam are estimated to be 100,00 a year, based on a Senate subcommittee .
 The marine base at Con Thien just south of the DMZ comes under a three-hour attack . The base was attacked by the South Korean government forces .
 North Vietnam mortar crews also carry out additional attacks on nearby marine camps at Dong Ha, Gio Linh, and Camp Carroll . North Vietnam has also carried out attacks on other marine camps .
 A North Vietnamese force attacks a 3rd Marine Regiment unit nine miles northwest of Khe Sanh . The Marines were attacked by North Vietnamese forces .
 The Johnson administration establishes the Civilian Operations and Revolutionary Development Support organization to coordinate the pacification effort in South Vietnam . The organization was under military control .
 U.S. policy in Vietnam is assailed in a nationwide “teach-in’in” staged at more than 80 colleges . The event is being held in Vietnam at over 80 colleges across the country .
 Nguyen Cao Ky informs the cabinet that he will run for president on September 3 . Cao Ky tells the cabinet he will be running for president in Vietnam . He will be the first elected president of Vietnam .
 Nguyen Van Thieu says it is “entirely possible” that he will run against him . He says it’s possible that he could run against the current president . Nguyen Van Than Than Thanh says it's possible he'll run against Van Thanh .
 Task Force Oregon conducts Operation Malheur I-II in Quang Ngai Province, I Corps. Task Force. Oregon . The operation is part of the U.S. Army's Vietnam War effort .
 The purpose of the operation is to keep Route 1 open to the Binh Dinh Provincial border and to assist in the area’s revolutionary development programs . The operation is being carried out to help in the revolutionary development program .
 For the second time, pilots of the 8th Tactical Fighter Wing, stationed at Ubon Royal Thai Air Force Base, shoot down seven MiGs in a single day's action .
 Premier Chou En-lai and four other Chinese officials threatened to send troops into North Vietnam if U.S. troops invade the North . The Chicago Daily News reports that Chou Enlai threatened the move .
 The Chinese Foreign Ministry denies that the interview ever took place . The interview never took place, according to the Chinese foreign ministry .
 Operation Kole Kole is a search and destroy operation in Hau Nghia Province, III Corps . The U.S. 25th Infantry Division conducted the operation . The operation was part of the U.N. Army's 3,000-strong III Corps.
 The United States Defense Department reports that a United States F-105 Thunderchief might have crashed in Communist China . The U.S. Defense Department says that the Thunderchief may have crashed .
 United States forces just south of the DMZ come under heavy fire from North Vietnamese artillery . U.S. marine positions between Dong Ha and Con Thien are pounded by North Vietnam artillery .
 On May 18, a force of Marines from 5th Regiment fire at the enemy near the DMZ, May 1967 . Marines were on patrol in South Korea .
 16 Senate critics of Vietnam policy on Vietnam issue a warning to Hanoi that while they might be critical of the administration’s handling of the war, they oppose unilateral United States withdrawal .
 This is the first major marine incursion into the DMZ and involves the relocation of more than 10,000 civilians from the buffer zone to Cam Lo refugee area . This is a major military incursion and involves relocation of thousands of civilians .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara recommends a cutback of the bombing to the 20th parallel . Only 30,000 more troops would be deployed for General Westmoreland . McNamara's memo was sent to President Johnson in 1964 .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara orders a new study of bombing alternatives . McNamara ordered a study of alternatives to bombing .
 Colonel Robin Olds, pilot, and 1st Lieutenant Steven Croaker, his weapons systems officer, down two MiG17s over the Bak Le rail yards, giving Olds four aerial victories in Vietnam .
 He had also recorded 12 victories in World War II, making him the only ace to down enemy aircraft in non-consecutive wars . He had recorded 12 wins in WWII .
 President Johnson issues a proclamation designating Memorial Day as a day of prayer and peace . Memorial Day commemorates the day of remembrance for those who have fallen ill .
 He pledges to continue to resist aggression, but to hold open the door to an honorable peace . "He pledges to ... hold open a door to ... honorable peace"
 After-action reports following the battles in the hills surrounding Khe Sanh indicate an estimated 50 percent failure rate for the M-16 rifles used by the U.S. Marines .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff submits three memoranda renewing earlier recommendations for more than 200,000 new troops and for air attacks on Haiphong . The memoranda also renews recommendations for air raids on eight major railways .
 Air raids over North Vietnam resume with attacks on two rail-lines carrying supplies from Communist China to Hanoi . After a 24-hour truce in honor of the Buddha’s birthday, air raids resume .
 As part of Operation Hickory, elements of two United States Marine battalions assault a North Vietnamese position on Hill 117, three miles west of the base at Con Thien .
 U.S. 1st Marine Division and ARVN troops conduct Operation Union II against North Vietnamese forces in Quang Nam and Quang Tin Provinces, I Corps . The operation was part of I Corps I Corps, which was formed from I Corps in 1968 .
 Two companies from the 4th Marines make heavy contact with an NVA force in bunkers and trenches five miles southwest of Con Thien . As part of Operation Prairie IV, two companies make contact with the NVA forces .
 The JCS also asserts that the McNamara-McNaughton memorandum “fails to appreciate the full implications for the free world of failure” in Vietnam . JCS says the memorandum fails to appreciate “the full implications” of failure in Vietnam.
 Prime Minister Holt gives President Johnson a pledge of Australia’s support in the Vietnam conflict . President Johnson was the prime minister of the Vietnam War .
 Captain Howard Levy, 30, is convicted by a general court-martial at Fort Jackson, South Carolina . He was convicted of willfully disobeying orders and making disloyal statements about U.S. policy in Vietnam .
 A marine patrol is ambushed by elements of a 2,900-man North Vietnamese regiment near Tam Ky, 30 miles southwest of Danang . North Vietnamese forces ambushed the patrol in the area .
 Soviet Union files protest claiming two crewmen were wounded . U.S. planes bombed Soviet ship Turkestan in port of Cam Pha, 50 miles north of Haiphong .
 The Soviets warn that “appropriate measures’ will be taken to ensure the safety of other ships . The Soviets say “ appropriate measures” will be made to ensure other ships are safe .
 Undersecretary of State Nicholas Katzenbach proposes that the U.S. add 30,000 ground troops “in small increments over the next 18 months” and “concentrate bombing on lines of communication throughout” North Vietnam but shift away from strategic targets around
 Two separate mortar attacks strike Pleiku in the Central Highlands, killing 27 people . Most of the shells were directed at a pacification school for Montagnard tribesmen . Most shells were fired at a school for tribesmen, most of which was attacked .
 Chinese armed forces claim they have shot down a pilotless U.S. reconnaissance plane . The plane was over the southern part of the Kwangsi Chuang autonomous region of China .
 Operation Billings was a drive into War Zone D, 50 miles north of Saigon, in an effort to trap three Viet Cong battalions . Troops of the U.S. 1st Infantry Division were on the move to trap the three battalions in the area .
 Premier Nguyen Cao Ky says informal contacts have been made with Laos to extend into Laos the proposed barrier against infiltration . The proposed barrier would be the first barrier against Chinese infiltration .
 National Liberation Front Radio warns that captured Americans will be executed if "the United States Aggressors and their Saigon stooges" execute “three Vietnamese patriots” sentenced to death by a special military tribunal .
 The United States apologizes to the Soviet Union for what it calls an inadvertent U.S. air attack on the Soviet ship Turkestan on June 2 . The Soviet Union says the attack was an "accidental attack"
 French president links Middle East conflict to U.S. intervention in Vietnam . Charles de Gaulle links the conflict to Vietnam intervention in the Vietnam .
 Seventy-six paratroopers are killed and 34 wounded before help can arrive . Paratroopers were killed in the attack . The attack was the first of its kind in Afghanistan .
 American troops entering the battleground the next day find that most of the American dead were killed execution style . Point-blank gunshots to the head are the most common method of killing Americans .
 Johnson and Kosygin meet in Glassboro, New Jersey, to discuss world problems . President Johnson and Soviet premier Aleksey Kosyin meet in New Jersey . Johnson was president of the United States in 1961 .
 Unarmed F-4 Phantom jet strays off course and is shot down by Chinese pilots near Hainan island . Unarmed U.S. jet was shot down in China .
 The two crewmen parachute from the plane and are rescued unhurt from the China Sea by a United States Navy helicopter . U.S. Navy helicopter rescues the crewmen unhurt .
 General Duong Van Minh, in exile in Bangkok, announces that he will be a candidate for the presidency in September . He is in exile from Vietnam and has been living in exile since 2003 .
 Armed Forces Council resolves rival claims to the presidency in favor of Nguyen Van Thieu, chief of state . Armed forces council resolves rivals' claims to presidency . Armed Forces council resolves rival claim to presidency, favors chief-of-state .
 Nguyen Cao Ky is forced to accept second place on the presidential ticket . Cao Ky had announced on May 11 that he would run for president . Nguyen had announced he would be running for president in May 11 .
 Several sources report attacks by U.S. planes on foreign ships in Haiphong harbor . Several sources say attacks by United States planes .
 The Soviet government charges that a second Russian merchant vessel, Mikhail Frunze, was bombed by U.S. planes in Haiphong on June 29 . The Soviet Government charges that the second Russian ship was bombed in the same way .
 A protest is delivered to the U.S. embassy in Moscow on June 30 . A protest was delivered to Russia's embassy in the United States embassy .
 The North Vietnamese News Agency reports that two other foreign ships have been struck in Haiphong Harbor . The North Vietnam News Agency says the ships were struck by foreign ships .
 Four battalions of U.S. Marines conduct Operation Buffalo south of the DMZ in Quang Tri Province, I Corps. Operation Buffalo is one of the largest operations in the history of Operation Buffalo in Vietnam .
 Operation launched in response to North Vietnamese efforts to attack Con Thien, one of the key points in the Strong Point Obstacle System . Operation launched to counter North Vietnamese attempts to attack the key point in the system . Operation is launched in a response to N.V. efforts to launch
 Reinforcements are rushed to the scene by both sides, and the fighting increases in intensity . Both sides rush reinforcements to the site .
 One of the artillery shells scores a direct hit on a marine outpost, killing nine men and wounding 21 . The shells were fired at an outpost in eastern Afghanistan . The shell hit the outpost and killed nine people and wounded 21 .
 A four-day conference on Vietnam begins in Stockholm, Sweden . Peace movement and Swedish Society for Peace and Arbitration to discuss Vietnam . Vietnam is a major source of conflict in Vietnam .
 The official obituary of the senior NVA general who had been in charge of the war in the South says that he died in Hanoi of a heart attack . It was later wrongfully rumored that he had died in the south during a U.S. bombing attack .
 Congress’ Joint Economic Committee issues a report stating that the Vietnam War has created “havoc” in the United States economy during 1966 . The report predicts that the war will cost $4 billion to $6 billion more in 1967 than the $20. billion requested by
 On McNamara’s final evening in Saigon, he and Westmoreland agree on a 55,000-man troop increase . The increase will bring the total U.S. commitment to 525,000 troops in Vietnam .
 Outnumbered South Vietnamese troops repel an attack by two battalions of the 141st North Vietnamese Regiment on a military camp in Binh Long Province . The attack took place five miles east of An Loc and 60 miles north of Saigon .
 Communist forces capture a third of the base camp before they are thrown back with the assistance of the United States and South Vietnamese air and artillery strikes . The U.S. and South Vietnam air and military strikes throw back the troops .
 United States forces suffer heavy casualties in two separate battles in the Central Highlands . U.S. forces suffered heavy casualties during the two battles . The battle was one of the most significant in the United States' history .
 In the second Highlands clash, 35 soldiers of the United States 4th Infantry Division are killed and 31 wounded . 35 soldiers were killed in the second clash .
 Operation Fremont aims to screen western approaches to Hue and Phu Bai . U.S. Marines conduct the operation in Thua Thien Province, I Corps .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara has said that resources now available in Vietnam are not being well used . It is reported that . McNamara said resources now . available in the country are not well used in Vietnam .
 Despite the presence of 464,000 American troops in South Vietnam, only 50,000 are available for offensive ground operations . Despite the U.S. presence of more than 4,000 troops in the country's South Vietnam .
 Disagreement over the administration’s policies in Vietnam grows in Congress . Congress is divided on the administration's Vietnam policy .
 Senator Mike Mansfield warns against further escalation of the war and urges an alternative to expansion by putting the entire question before the United Nations . Mansfield urges a defensive barrier south of the DMZ separating North from South Vietnam .
 Beijing claims that its planes chased four U.S. jets after they attacked a Chinese frontier post near Tun Ghing with missiles . Beijing says it chased four United States jets after an attack on its frontier post .
 President johnson declares in a press conference that “we are very sure we are on the right track” militarily in Vietnam, but acknowledges that more troops will be needed . President Johnson says more troops are needed .
 This announcement comes amid renewed reports that some in the administration disagree with Westmoreland and other U.S. commanders in Vietnam who have requested a substantial increase in United States troops . This announcement is the latest in a series of reports that the White House is considering a troop increase .
 12 Americans killed and 40 wounded in attack on U.S. air base at Danang . 50 Communist rockets strike during 45-minute attack on Danang air base .
 The AFL-CIO conducts a survey of its membership and reports that 42 percent are uneasy about the war, but the majority believe that President Johnson is doing the best he can . The majority of members believe that the war is a success .
 U.S. 3rd Marine Division conducts Operation Kingfisher in the area south of the DMZ . Operation screens enemy movement into Quang Tri Province, I Corps.
 Operation includes pitched battles between the marines and North Vietnamese forces . The operation includes a number of pitched battles with the marines .
 The White House calls on the National Liberation Front and North Vietnam to permit an impartial inspection of U.S. POWs . North Vietnam should allow the inspection of United States POWs, White House says .
 A Hanoi delegation headed by Deputy Premier Le Thanh Nghi leaves for Beijing on first leg of trip to secure additional weapons and other aid from Communist countries . A delegation headed for Beijing leaves for first leg in first leg to secure more weapons, other aid .
 President Johnson is reported to have added 16 targets to the approved bombing list for North Vietnam, including an airfield, a railroad yard, two bridges, and 12 barracks and a supply area . All within restricted circles around Hanoi and Haiphong .
 This represents a markedly different strategy from that of de-escalation recently urged by Defense Secretary McNamara . The U.S. military says it will continue to engage with the Obama administration in Afghanistan .
 On their return, they report no major disagreements on any aspect of the war . No major disagreements are reported on the return of American troops .
 The number of non-Communist ships calling at North Vietnamese ports has increased from 20 during JulyDecember 1966 to 39 during January-June 1967 .
 A Gallup Poll reports that 52 percent of the American people disapprove of the president’s handling of the Vietnam war . 41 percent think the U.S. made a mistake in sending troops to Vietnam in the first place. 41 percent of those polled think the United States sent troops to
 56 percent think the U.S. is losing the war or that progress is stalled . Over half, 56 percent, think the United States is losing its war efforts .
 Viet Cong commanders meet in Cambodia to begin planning for the general offensive-general uprising . General uprising would be the first general offensive offensive in the country since 1968 .
 Cambodia rejected a May 27 suggestion for talks as a step toward preventing the use of Cambodian territory by North Vietnamese troops . The U.S. State Department reports that Cambodia rejected the idea for talks .
 Communist troops will continue to use Cambodian territory for base camps and as a sanctuary from which to strike into South Vietnam . The Communist forces will use the territory as a base camps .
 In combat operations in the Mekong Delta, two U.S. helicopters return fire against a group of Viet Cong in the village of Phu Vinh, 60 miles south of Saigon, killing 40 South Vietnamese civilians and wounding 36 . The incident occurred 60 miles from Saigon .
 President Johnson calls for a 10 percent surtax on individual and corporate income . U.S. troop ceiling in Vietnam to be raised to 525,000 . Johnson announces he will raise the troop ceiling .
 Second Lieutenant Henry H Howe was sentenced to dismissal from the service and a year of hard labor for participating in an antiwar demonstration . Howe's conviction was upheld by the U.S. Court of Military Appeals in Washington .
 The PRC signs a new aid pact with North Vietnam in a ceremony in Beijing . The deal was signed by the Communist Party of China and North Vietnam .
 Johnson adviser Clark Clifford and retired general Maxwell Taylor return from a trip to the capitals of America’s Asian Allies . Clifford reports that the Allies unanimously agree that bombing North Vietnam should be continued at present or even higher levels .
 The election campaign opens amid opposition charges that the military slate is deliberately impeding the campaign efforts of the 10 civilian presidential candidates . The military slate headed by Nguyen Van Thieu and Nguyen Cao Ky is seen as a two-point favorite .
 Communist China has signed an agreement to give Hanoi an undisclosed amount of aid in the form of an outright grant . The North Vietnamese newspaper Nhan Dan reports that the agreement was made in 2007 .
 The VC shoot down five U.S. helicopters along the Saigon River four miles from Saigon . The VC shot down five United States helicopters . The US helicopters were shot down by the VC .
 House Republican leader Gerald Ford of Michigan attacks Johnson administration for “pulling punches” in bombing North Vietnam while sending more Americans to die in the ground war . Ford: Johnson administration was ‘pulling . punches’ in bombing, but more Americans were killed in ground war
 President Johnson approves the extension of Operation Rolling Thunder to include the approval to bomb previously prohibited targets in North Vietnam . President Johnson also approves the approval of the bombing of North Vietnam targets .
 Troops of the 1st Cavalry Division land near a fortified North Vietnamese position in the Song Re Valley, 25 miles west of Due Pho, Quang Ngai Province, I Corps . Five United States helicopters are shot down during the operation .
 The Senate Preparedness Subcommittee holds closed hearings on the conduct of the war . The hearings are closed .
 Testimony is given by high-ranking military officers, all of whom emphasize the need to continue and expand the air war against North Vietnam . The testimony is given in the book .
 Secretary McNamara says North Vietnam has not reduced the flow of enemy supplies into South Vietnam; not broken the morale of the North Vietnamese; and not seriously damaged the economy .
 North Korea signs a military pact with North Vietnam . North Korea and Vietnam signed the pact in a ceremony in Pyongyang .
 For the first time, U.S. pilots are authorized to bomb road and rail links in the Hanoi-Haiphong area . The area was formerly on the prohibited target list . It is now on a restricted list .
 U.S. aircraft can bomb targets within 25 miles of the Chinese border . They can also engage other targets with rockets and cannon within 10 miles of China's border .
 The 1st Marine Division conducts Operation Cochise, a continuation of search and destroy operations in the old Union II area in the Que Son valley, Quang Tin Province, I Corps. The 1nd Marine Division conducted the operation in the area .
 B-52s bomb North Vietnamese positions north of the DMZ in strikes that continue to continue for seven days . North Vietnamese forces were attacked by U.S. forces in the early 1980s .
 The bombings are directed against North Vietnamese troops and installations in the DMZ and just north of the buffer area . The bombings have been directed towards North Vietnamese forces and installations .
 Concerns in Saigon about ‘massive country-wide military strike’ by Communists . Communists to improve their positions prior to the commencement of peace talks .
 The Senate Foreign Relations Committee holds hearings on U.S. foreign commitments . The hearings are expected to be held in Washington .
 Senator William Fulbright attacks President Johnson’s broad interpretation of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution . Fulbright feels that Johnson has no mandate to conduct the war on the present scale .
 Governor Ronald Reagan of California proclaims, “my idea of honorable disengagement is that you win the war.” Reagan: “My idea of honorably disengagement ... is that I want you to win it’s the war’
 Presidential candidate Thieu seeks to dispel any idea that the military would oppose the accession of a civilian regime . Thieu: "The military would not be happy with the idea that a civilian government could be overthrown"
 Associated Press survey shows U.S. Senate support for war policy has eroded . Of senators replying to the survey, only 44 generally support war politics, while 40 disapprove .
 The 20th Engineer Brigade deploys to Vietnam from Fort Bragg, North Carolina, to provide engineer support for U.S. forces . The brigade is based in Vietnam .
 Two U.S. Navy A-6A Intruder jet fighter-bombers from the carrier Constellation are pursued by North Vietnamese MiG fighters . They stray over the Chinese border, where they are shot down .
 Chief of staff of the air force, General John P McConnell, states before a Senate subcommittee that adopting a graduated bombing policy in 1965, rather than launching a massive blow, was a mistake .
 Richard M Nixon calls for “massive pressure” short of nuclear weapons to shorten the war . Former vice president calls for 'massive pressure' short of using nuclear weapons .
 Hanoi's Administrative Committee orders all workers in light industry and all craftsman and their families to leave the city . Only persons vital to the city’s defense and production are to remain .
 This is the most pessimistic appraisal of the bombing campaign to date . The most pessimistic assessment of the campaign has been made by the British government .
 Several senators reply that the U.S. may as well “get out” if McNamara is correct . Several senators say that the United States may well "get out" if the truth is true . McNamara: "Get out"
 Major George E Day is captured and severely tortured after being shot down over North Vietnam . He is badly injured after his North American F-100F was shot down . He was captured and tortured by North Vietnam soldiers .
 After several attempts to signal U.S. aircraft, he is ambushed, recaptured, and later moved to a prison in Hanoi . He continues to offer maximum resistance to his captors .
 The Viet Cong launch an offensive in South Vietnam . The heaviest hit areas are Can Tho in the Mekong Delta and Hoi An in Thua Thien Province .
 Reverend Thomas Lee Hayes, speaking for the National Mobilization Committee, announces that there will be a massive protest march on October 21 in Washington . Rev. Hayes: The march will take place in Washington, DC .
 In the Senate, Mike Mansfield makes a proposal endorsed by 10 other senators to bring a peace plan before the United Nations . Mansfield: Peace plan should be brought before U.N. Security Council .
 General Vo Nguyen Giap says President Johnson is engaging “backwards logic” in thinking that bombing the North would ease the pressure on the South . Giap writes in a communist newspaper .
 VC forces attack a radio monitoring station at the Phu Bai marine helicopter base . VC forces attacked the base at the base . The base is located in the southern Vietnamese city of Hana .
 This station is a secret facility manned by Chinese Nationalists, who monitor North Vietnamese and Chinese Communist communications . The station is also known as a Chinese Nationalist facility .
 10 marines were killed and 30 wounded in the attack . Eighteen helicopters were damaged; 10 marines died and 30 injured .
 U.S. Marines establish a base at Khe Sanh, near the Laotian border in I Corps, to serve as a potential launch point for ground operations to cut the Ho Chi Minh Trail . The base is located near the Laos border .
 Thailand deploys its ‘Queen’s Cobra’ Regiment to Vietnam for combat operations in III Corps . The “Queen” Regiment is deployed to Vietnam in the country's 3rd Corps .
 President Johnson says there is no “deep division” within his administration concerning the bombing of North Vietnam . Johnson: There is no "deep division" within the administration concerning bombing of Vietnam .
 Premier Pham Van Dong declares that “ United States imperialism is aggressive and warlike by nature.” The Vietnamese premier declares that the U.S. imperialist is aggressive by nature .
 Hanoi wants an unconditional halt in U.S. raids on the North is a prerequisite for negotiations . He reiterates his government’s position that an unconditional . halt in United States raids on North is necessary for talks, he says .
 North Vietnamese artillery and mortars pound the U.S. Marine base at Con Thien, five miles below the DMZ, initiating what will become a siege by North Vietnamese regulars . North Vietnamese regular forces will take control of the base in the fall .
 The adjacent bases of Dong Ha, Camp Carroll, and Cam Lo are also shelled regularly during this period . Dong Ha and Camp Carroll are also regularly shelled .
 Since August 13, B-52s have struck 83 times along the DMZ, helping, along with United States artillery, relieve pressure on Con Thien .
 President Thieu touts his country’s attitude toward free speech . Two opposition newspapers are shut down on the same day that he touts free speech in Vietnam .
 In addressing election observers from 24 nations, he says he will abide by the results of the national election . He says he'll abide by election observers' verdict .
 Nguyen Van Thieu wins a four-year term as president of South Vietnam with Premier Ky as vice president . Premier Ky is vice president of Vietnam . Thieu was elected to the post in a landslide victory .
 Peace candidate Truong Dinh Dzu wins second highest presidential vote . They receive 35 percent of the votes cast, with the rest divided among the other 10 candidates . The rest of the vote is divided among other candidates, with 35 percent .
 Two companies of the 4th Marines clash with a company of NVA regulars a half-mile south of the fire base . The siege of Con Thien continues when two companies clash with the NVA .
 Six marines are killed and 47 are wounded; 38 NVA soldiers killed and one captured . Six marines were killed and . 47 were wounded . 38 N VA soldiers were killed .
 Governor George Romney says “brainwashing” in Saigon by U.S. generals and diplomats brought about his previous support of the war . Romney: "Brainwashing’s role in the war brought about my support of war"
 There are allegations of corruption in the national election, but a favorable impression of the election process is reported by 22 prominent Americans who are in Vietnam as election observers . The election is being held in a national election in Vietnam .
 Task Force X-Ray from the 1st Marine Division conducts Operation Swift in Quang Nam and Quang Tin Provinces, I Corps. Task Force x-Ray conducted Operation Swift .
 Purpose of operation is to prevent enemy disruption of national elections . Purpose of the operation is . to prevent . enemy disruption . of the national elections. purpose of the . operation .
 The heaviest fighting in this operation is in the Que Son Valley, 35 miles south of Danang . Four-day battle is a fierce four-day operation in the region .
 The ROK 2nd Marine Brigade begins Operation Dragon Fire in Quang Ngai Province, I Corps. The operation is part of the I Corps . The 2nd and 3rd Marine Brigade is based in the province's I Corps area .
 The concept is criticized by Westmoreland and marine commanders who dislike the idea of a static defense . The concept has been criticized .
 Eleven Democratic senators propose that the war be discussed in the U.N. They say the war should be discussed at the United Nations . Eleven senators propose to discuss the war in the United States .
 The U.S. ambassador to the United Nations admits that he has discussed a new peace plan . The peace plan involves some concessions by the United States .
 Governor George Romney attempts to correct the apparent damage to his presidential prospects arising from his September 4 reference to what he called his “brainwashing” by senior military and civilian leaders in the Johnson administration . Romney says he has been ‘brainwashed’ by military, civilian leaders
 The first U.S. air raid on North Vietnamese ports occurs when the port area of Cam Pha, 46 miles northeast of Haiphong, comes under attack by United States aircraft . The first United States air raid occurs during the attack .
 U.S. warplanes carry out raids on Haiphong and its suburbs in a major effort to isolate the area from the rest of the country .
 All rail traffic from the port and most road movement from Haiphong is reportedly halted . Several foreign ships in the harbor are reportedly damaged .
 Task Force Oregon conducts Operation Wheeler in Quang Tin Province, I Corps. Task force Oregon conducted Operation Wheeler . Operation Wheeler was launched in April 2010 .
 Operation Coronado V is a search and destroy mission in the Mekong Delta 47 miles southwest of Saigon . Mobile Riverine Force and South Vietnamese troops conduct Operation Coroado V . The operation is part of a search operation to destroy and destroy the area .
 French and Canadian sources suggest that North Vietnam can be persuaded to come to the negotiating table . North Vietnam has not been drawn into a direct confrontation with the U.S. government .
 Peace talks could begin three to four weeks after cessation of U.S. bombing attacks, sources say . Peace talks are expected to begin after the cessation of United States bombing .
 U.S. State Department officials express doubt that North Vietnam’s position has changed . North Vietnam's position has not changed, they say . United States State Dept. officials say North Vietnam has changed its position .
 Giap says the Allied pacification program for winning control of the South Vietnamese countryside has failed . U.S. troops needed to make it effective had to be shifted to the area below the DMZ to reinforce United States Marines under heavy attack there .
 VC attack U.S. Navy’s Mobile Riverine Force on the Rach Ba River in the Mekong Delta . VC attack the United States Navy's Mobile . Riverine force on the river .
 173rd Airborne Brigade and 1st Air Cavalry Division conduct Operation Bolling/Dan Hoa in Khanh Hoa and Phu Yen Provinces, II Corps . The 173rd airborne Brigade was part of the operation .
 The purpose of the operation is the conduct of search and destroy operations to protect the rice crop . The operation is being carried out in a bid to protect rice crops .
 The Nationalist Chinese embassy in Saigon was heavily damaged by a bomb explosion . It was his 1 00th combat mission over North Vietnam, September 1 967 .
 United States aircraft carry out a bombing raid within seven miles of the Chinese border . The That Khe bridge is the closest that United States bombing has yet come to the Communist Chinese frontier . U.S. bombing has not yet come close to the border .
 President Johnson accused of 'brutally cancelling' peace initiative . Private peace initiative was started by journalist Harry Ashmore . President Johnson is accused of ‘effectively cancelling’ the initiative .
 Centre magazine alleges Johnson sent a negative letter to Ho Chi Minh after Ashmore had negotiated with Ho. Ho. Minh . Centre magazine alleged Johnson sent the letter to the Vietnamese leader .
 Senator William Fulbright says that it shows that U.S.-North Vietnamese negotiations could have begun had the United States been more flexible . Fulbright: The story shows that the U.N. was more flexible and willing to negotiate .
 General Westmoreland welcomes 1,200 Thai troops upon their arrival in Saigon . The Thai troops arrived in the country's capital, Vietnam, in April 1968 .
 The arrival of the Thai force brings to six the number of Allied countries that have sent troops to Vietnam . Six of the six countries involved in the Vietnam war have sent forces to Vietnam.
 United States Navy planes return to Haiphong and destroy the last intact bridge on the Kie Nan highway leading from the city . U.S. Navy planes destroy the bridge .
 Soviet Union signs a new aid agreement with North Vietnam in Moscow . Soviet Union signed the deal in a Moscow ceremony . The Soviet Union and North Vietnam signed the agreement in a ceremony .
 The Court of Military Appeals upholds the court-martial convictions of three army privates who had refused to go to Vietnam . The three privates were convicted of refusing to leave the country for Vietnam .
 In Saigon, Hue, and Danang there are demonstrations against the election of Thieu and Ky . Buddhist faction charges that the elections were rigged and demand that the Constituent Assembly cancel the results .
 The Americal initially consists of the 196th Light Infantry Brigade . The soon-to-arrive 11th and 198th Light . Infantry Brigades will join the Americal by the end of the year .
 Two navy A-6A Intruder attack aircraft return to aircraft carrier USS Kitty Hawk after bombing raids over North Vietnam . Two pilots were involved in the bombing of North Vietnam during the war .
 Carrier-based Grumman A-6 Intruder bombers attack two key bridges near the center of Haiphong . The bombers were attacked by the U.S. in the early 1950s .
 Laotian premier Souvanna Phouma expresses opposition to any extension of the ‘McNamara line’ into Laos . Laos is the only country in the world to allow a direct link between Laos and the U.S.
 Senator Thurston B Morton says President Johnson has been “brainwashed” by the “military-industrial complex” into believing a military victory can be achieved in Vietnam . Morton says that President Johnson was “brilliantly’ed by the military-industrial
 The United States 1st Infantry Division conducts Operation Shenandoah II in Binh Duong Province and the Loc Ninh area of Binh Long Province, III Corps . The U.S. 1st . Infantry Division conducted the operation in the area .
 A Viet Cong Military Region 4 directive secretly orders intensification of political and military action in the Saigon area . The directive also secretly orders intensified political, military action .
 United States Navy pilots from the carrier Coral Sea attack and partially destroy the bridge that carries the only major road and rail line out of Haiphong . U.S. Navy pilots .
 This makes four bridges in Haiphong that have been destroyed since September 11 . A concerted drive was launched to cut off the port area from the rest of North Vietnam . This is the latest in a series of bridges destroyed by the government .
 President Johnson declares that the U.S. will stop bombing North Vietnam if Hanoi agrees to negotiations . In a Texas speech that becomes known as the “San Antonio Formula,” President Johnson declared that the United States would stop bombing if negotiations began .
 U.S. Navy planes bomb Loi Dong trans-shipment point on the Cua Cam River estuary four miles northeast of Haiphong . U.N. planes bomb the Loi .
 Other planes pound the Kie Nan MiG base, the Ke Pha army barracks, and the Phuc Loi petroleum storage area near Vinh .
 Constituent Assembly meets to discuss whether to legalize the election results . 2,000 students demonstrate outside . Constituents meet to discuss legalizing the results of the election .
 There have been a reported 2,724 cases of irregularities affecting over 1 million of the 5,853,251 votes cast . Over 1 million people have been affected by irregularities .
 If these votes are discarded, Thieu’s margin over his nearest rival would actually increase . However, if these votes were discarded, his margin over the next challenger would actually rise .
 The Hue City Committee of the National Liberation Front orders development of grassroots organizations and plans for future occupation of the city . Hue City is Hue City of Hue City, Hue City .
 People’s Army of Vietnam forces begin attacks near the U.S. Marine base at Khe Sanh . People's Army of . Vietnam forces began attacks on the base .
 The United States 198th Infantry Brigade deploys to Vietnam from Fort Hood, Texas . The brigade will join the Americal Division for combat operations in I Corps .
 U.S. public opinion on the war shifts when polls reveal that more Americans now oppose than support the war . Polls show more Americans oppose the war now than support it .
 The increased U.S. aerial offensive against North Vietnam has slowed the flow of war supplies from Communist China to Hanoi . The bombing of bridges has halted the movement of military materiel on the key rail line from Dong Dang, near the Chinese border .
 U.S. officials concede that Communist military equipment is reaching Hanoi by other means . However, United States officials concede they are sending military equipment to the communist country .
 Senator John Sherman Cooper urges the U.S. to take the “first step” toward negotiations . Cooper urges an “unconditional cessation” of the bombing of North Vietnam . Cooper: The bombing of Vietnam should be the first step toward negotiations with the United States
 U.S. aircraft strike key bridges at Loc Binh and Cao Bang in North Vietnam only 10 miles from the Chinese border . United States strikes key bridges in Vietnam only ten miles from China border .
 Senate Republican Whip Thomas Kuchel says unilateral halt in Vietnam would be of “enormous value to the North Vietnamese” by permitting them to supply their forces with no impediment .
 Senator Stuart Symington proposes that the U.S. stop all military action in South Vietnam and pressure Saigon to enter into negotiations with the National Liberation Front . Symington: Saigon should enter into talks with the N.L. Front .
 Troops from the United States 1st Cavalry Division and 196th Light Infantry Brigade conduct Operation Wallowa in southern I Corps . Troops were part of the U.S. 1,000-strong I Corps. Troops took part in the operation .
 United States aircraft strike the Lang Son railway bridge and the Chien Chiang highway bridge close to the Chinese border . U.S. aircraft again strike the railway and highway bridges .
 United States planes strike the Kep, Kie Nan, and Hoa Lac MiG bases and pound a petroleum storage area two miles northwest of the center of Haiphong . U.S. planes strike Kep and Kie nan bases and strike a petroleum depot .
 Hanoi’s Minister of Education Nguyen Van Huyen charges that a U.S. air raid on a North Vietnamese school on September 20 killed 33 children and wounded 28 . Hanoisian education minister says 33 children were killed and 28 wounded .
 Senator Charles Percy introduces a resolution urging President Johnson to intensify efforts to have the free nations of Asia make a greater contribution of economic and military aid to the South Vietnamese cause .
 U.S. Navy pilots fly 34 missions as they again strike the Chien Chiang and the Lang Son bridges near the Chinese border . A rail yard near Mo Trang, a bridge 39 miles northeast of Hanoi, and two antiaircraft sites south of Dong Hoi
 Also attacked are the Nam Dinh power plant, 45 miles southwest of Haiphong, a railway and highway bridge 24 miles southeast of Hanoi, and eight buildings in the Yen Bac military storage area . Also attacked were a power plant and railway bridge .
 United States planes strike at Soviet-built helicopters on the ground 30 miles west of Hanoi . U.S. planes strike on Soviet-made helicopters .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk makes controversial comments in which he says that congressional proposals for peace initiatives, which include a bombing halt or limitation, UN action, and a new Geneva conference, are futile because of Hanoi’s opposition .
 Without the pressure of the bombing, “where would be the incentive for peace,” he asks . “Without the pressure, there would be no incentive to peace, he asks.”
 United States Navy aircraft conduct heavy strikes against shipyards and docks in Haiphong . U.S. Navy aircraft carry out heavy strikes on shipyards, docks and docks .
 Australian Communist correspondent Wilfred Burchett files an eyewitness report October 14 saying that these attacks were directed against a large hospital complex, which was almost completely destroyed . The hospital complex is located in central Sydney, Australia .
 Burchett says he visited the port area after the raid and found no evidence of air damage . The port area was hit by the air raid, but no damage was caused by the attack, he says .
 Haiphong mayor says a third of the city’s residential areas have been destroyed since the heavy raids started September 1 . He quotes the mayor as saying that the city has been destroyed by the raids .
 Operation MacArthur/Binh Tay is one of a series of continuing operations designed to contest North Vietnamese troop and logistical build-ups in the western highlands . The United States 4th Infantry Division, in conjunction with the 173rd Airborne Brigade and ARVN units, conducts Operation
 Con Thien, just below the DMZ, and a nearby marine base at Gio Linh come under increasingly heavy North Vietnamese shelling . The DMZ and the marine base are under attack from North Vietnam .
 Senator J William Fulbright charges Secretary of State Rusk with carrying on a ‘McCarthy-type Crusade’ against those who do not agree with the war and the administration’s handling of it .
 United States jets bomb several targets in the Hanoi-Haiphong area that hitherto have been spared . U.S. jets bombed several targets that hitherto were spared .
 The planes pound a barge building and repair yard IV 2 miles west of Haiphong and an early warning radar station at Kie Nan . The planes were also pounding an early-warning radar station .
 Hanoi Radio reports that the NLF has formed a new organization designed to spur antiwar sentiment in the United States . The organization was formed in response to the U.S. anti-war efforts in Vietnam .
 Hanoi rejects the Johnson terms for negotiations expressed in his San Antonio statement of September 29 . Johnson: "Hanoi rejected terms for talks expressed in San Antonio"
 A special enlarged plenum of the NLF’s Central Committee meets to assess the battlefield situation . NLF's Central Committee will assess the situation in a special enlarged meeting .
 In Washington, D.C., an estimated 50,000 people protest U.S. policy in the Vietnam War . The demonstration continues until the early hours of October 23 .
 The Washington antiwar protest is paralleled by similar demonstrations in Japan and Western Europe . The Washington protest is similar to similar protests in Western Europe and Japan .
 For the first time United States Navy jets bomb the North Vietnamese naval base at Nui Dong, seven miles northeast of Haiphong . The base is located seven miles north of the city .
 United States aircraft conduct heavy raids in the Haiphong-Hanoi region . U.S. aircraft carry out heavy raids on the region in the early 1950s .
 The United States command in Saigon acknowledges the loss of 13 aircraft, but the North Vietnamese report downing 35 . The U.S. acknowledges the losses, but North Vietnam reports 35 downed aircraft .
 General Lewis B Hershey tells local boards to conscript anti-draft activists as early as possible . General Hershey is heavily criticized for telling local boards not to draft activists . Hershey has been criticized for his role in the draft program .
 More than 65 U.S. planes attack North Vietnam’s largest airbase, Phuc Yen, 18 miles northwest of Hanoi . The strike was a combined air force, navy, and marine strike .
 Demonstrations are held on two university campuses against the Dow Chemical Company . Dow Chemical is a manufacturer of napalm used in Vietnam .
 Senator Mike Mansfield and 54 co-sponsors introduce a resolution in the Senate . The resolution urges the president to ask the UN Security Council to consider a United States proposal to discuss the Vietnam conflict .
 U.S. planes carry on a sustained attack on targets in the Hanoi-Haiphong area . United States planes carry out a sustained assault on targets .
 On 25 October, jets bomb the Long Bien bridge, Hanoi’s only rail and road link with Haiphong and the Chinese border . The bridge is the only link to the Chinese and Vietnamese border . It is one of Vietnam's last remaining links to China .
 The following day navy planes bomb a 32,000-kilowatt thermal power plant about a mile north of the center of Hanoi . Navy planes bomb the plant .
 Air force planes from Thailand bomb targets three miles south of Hanoi on 27 October . The Thai air force planes bomb targets in a series of attacks .
 On successive days, United States planes pound the Kie Nan, Kep, and Hoa Lac MiG bases and the Yen Bai airfield . U.S. planes pounded the bases and airfield on successive days . The United States bombed the airfield in Vietnam .
 North Vietnamese 88th Regiment attacks the South Vietnamese base at Song Be in Phuoc Long Province, near the Cambodian border . The attack is the first of its kind in the region .
 Loc Ninh is a rubber plantation town in Binh Long Province, north of Saigon . It is the site of a Special Forces camp, and is the focus of fierce fighting in recent months . The town has been the scene of clashes between anti-Vietnam rebels and the
 NVA and VC troops from the 273rd Regiment attempt to take and hold the town, but are repulsed by a force of 1,400 ARVN and United States 1st Infantry Division troops after bitter house to house fighting .
 The battle is the first time that a large NVA and VC force attempts to capture and hold an urban area . This battle is particularly significant because of the first attempt at capturing and holding a large urban area. This battle was particularly significant .
 In Hanoi, the National Assembly standing committee approves a decree on punishment for counter-revolutionary activity . The decree was approved by a standing committee in the National National Assembly .
 A reception in the Independence Palace is marred by the explosion of three mortar shells . Three mortar shells explode on the lawn .
 Hanoi appeals to the international community to put pressure on the U.S. to bring the bombing of North Vietnam to an end . North Vietnam has been bombed by the United States since April 1968 .
 Defense Secretary McNamara secretly recommends termination of U.S. bombing of North Vietnam and limitation of ground involvement in South Vietnam . McNamara also recommends limitation of United States bombing of N. Vietnam .
 The 1,000 U.S. troops there are reinforced with 3,500 troops of the United States 4th Division and the 173rd Airborne Brigade . Operation MacArthur is part of ongoing Operation MacArthur .
 Strong Point A-3 of the Strong Point Obstacle System is designed to prevent enemy interference . Operation Kingfisher is a follow-on to Operation KingFisher . Strong Point O-3 is the latest attempt to stop enemy interference with the construction of Strong Point .
 Elements of the U.S. 3rd Marine Division conduct Operation Scotland in the westernmost part of Quang Tri Province to help support and defend the base at Khe Sanh . Operation Scotland is part of Operation Scotland .
 The base will be besieged for 77 days beginning January . During this period, beginning January, beginning in January, the base will remain besieged .
 The marines estimate that an additional 10,000-15,000 NVA are killed due to the massive bombings around Khe Sanh during the siege . The marines and air force estimate that a total of 15,000 people were killed in the siege.
 President Johnson convenes a meeting of senior unofficial advisers, known as the “Wise Men,” which includes former secretary of state Dean Acheson, General of the Army Omar Bradley, Ambassador-at-Large W Averell Harriman .
 In effect, they decide that the American people must be given more optimistic reports . The White House decides that they must give optimistic reports to the public .
 Selective Service director Lewis B Hershey confirms that there is a policy to require early induction of draft-eligible persons interfering with draft procedures . Hershey: There is an early induction policy .
 United States Ambassador to the United Nations Arthur Goldberg says that the Johnson administration will support the participation of the NLF in UN Security Council discussions or in a reconvened Geneva conference on ending the war . U.S. ambassador to the U.N. Arthur Goldberg: The Johnson administration
 USAF aircraft from Korat Air Base in Thailand bomb the Gia Thuong storage complex, three miles from the center of Hanoi, a target hitherto on the restricted list . The storage complex was previously on a restricted list, but was previously restricted .
 United States planes bomb rail facilities 21 miles from the Chinese border . U.S. planes bombed rail facilities in China's Guangzhou Province .
 Other planes attack the An Ninh Goia shipyard and repair facilities 12 miles west of Haiphong . It is the first time these targets have been attacked in Vietnam .
 Captain Gerald O Young’s Sikorsky HH-3E is shot down in Laos . While attempting to rescue an army reconnaissance team, the plane was shot down .
 Badly burned, he gives aid to a crew member who also escapes from the wreckage . The crew member is badly burned but survives .
 After 17 hours of leading enemy forces away from his injured crewman, and himself evading capture, the two are rescued . The two were rescued after 17 hours .
 Captain Young was awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions . Captain Young will later be awarded the medal of Honor .
 General Westmoreland publicly declares that the aim of the NVA attack at Dak To is to steal the thunder of the recent inauguration of President Thieu as South Vietnamese president . General Westmoreland says the attack is an attempt to steal away the thunder from Thieu's inauguration .
 United States officials in Saigon express disappointment that Thieu does not include at least some of the defeated civilian candidates . U.S. officials say they are disappointed with Thieu's refusal to form a government of national unity . Thieu is expected to form government of unity .
 The cabinet is made up entirely of ministers who had served in the previous government . With the exception of two new officials, two new ministers have been appointed .
 Captain Lance P Sijan ejects from his disabled McDonnell-Douglas F-4C . He evades capture for more than six weeks .
 Captain Sijan will posthumously be awarded the Medal of Honor . For his conspicuous gallantry as a POW, he will be given the medal of Honor posthumous .
 President Johnson begins a Veterans Day tour of eight military installations to shore up support for the war . President Johnson toured the country on Veterans Day to shore-up support for war .
 During one stop, the president declares that “our statesmen will press the search for peace to the corners of the earth” and suggests that negotiations should be held aboard a neutral ship at sea .
 Three U.S. POWs, two of them African Americans, are released by the Viet Cong in a ceremony in Phnom Penh, Cambodia .
 The three men are turned over to Tom Hayden, a “new Left” activist and member of the United States committee formed to help the three men . Tom Hayden is a member of a committee formed in the U.S. to help them .
 United States officials in Saigon say that the released prisoners have been “brain-washed,” but the State Department denies this . The State Department says that the prisoners are not brain-washed . The U.S. State Department in Vietnam says the prisoners have not been �
 The VC release is a response to antiwar protests in the United States and a gesture toward the “courageous struggle” of blacks in the U.S. The VC announce that the release is .
 The next day the convention approves a resolution condemning the administration’s Vietnam policy . The resolution was passed by the House of Representatives .
 Americal Division conducts Operation Wheeler/Wallowa, search and destroy operations to clear the enemy out of Quang Nam and Quang Tin Provinces, I Corps. I Corps . The Americal division conducted the operation in Vietnam .
 Operation Wallowa was launched by the 1st Cavalry Division on October 4 . This is an extension and enlargement of Operation Wallow, which was launched in October 4, 2014 .
 The 7th Marine Regiment and Marine Special Landing Force Bravo carry out Operation Foster/Badger Hunt in retaliation for Viet Cong raids in the Dai Loc and An Hoa areas, Quang Nam Province, I Corps. Operation Foster and Badger Hunt .
 President Johnson is briefed on the situation in Vietnam by Westmoreland, Ambassador Bunker, and the head of the CORDS program, Robert W Komer . President Johnson was briefed on Vietnam in the early 1950s .
 Major General Bruno Hochmuth, commander of the 3rd Marine Division, is killed when the helicopter carrying him is shot down . Major General Bruno Hochchmuth was killed when he was killed .
 He is the most senior U.S. officer to be killed in action in the war to date . He is most senior United States officer to have died in action .
 General Westmoreland tells the House Armed Services Committee that U.S. military withdrawal from Vietnam can begin within two years if progress continues . Westmorelands says withdrawal can begin in two years, if progress is made .
 His message on U.S. military prospects in Vietnam is continuously optimistic . During his visit, his message on United States military prospects was continuously optimistic.
 The NLF proclaims a three-day cease-fire for both Christmas and New Year’s . A seven-day truce is also declared for Tet holiday .
 The Senate Foreign Relations Committee approves 14-0 a resolution to curb the commitment of U.S. armed forces in Vietnam . The resolution urges the president to take the initiative to have the conflict brought before the UN Security Council .
 In California, police attack students demonstrating against Dow Chemical Company . Police attack students after they refuse to disperse . Students demonstrate against Dow at San Jose State .
 The next day the students defy Governor Ronald Reagan’s warning against further demonstrations and again stage an anti-Dow demonstration . The students defied Reagan's warning that further demonstrations would be banned .
 Document removed from the body of a dead NVA soldier on November 6 said that the Dak To battle was to be the beginning of a winter/spring offensive by the B-3 Front . The document was found in a dead soldier's body .
 MACV officially reduces its estimate of Communist strength in South Vietnam from 294,000 to 223,000-248,000 men . MACV says it has reduced the number of Communist forces in Vietnam to 294,00 men . The MACV estimates the Communist strength is now 223,00
 This is a controversial move that causes consternation among many in the intelligence community . This is the first time the U.S. government has made such a move .
 Senator Robert F Kennedy says President Johnson has shifted war aims set out by President Kennedy before his assassination . President Kennedy says these war aims have seriously undermined the moral position of the United States .
 President Johnson announces that Robert McNamara will step down as secretary of defense to become president of the World Bank . McNamara steps down as defense secretary to become head of the world bank .
 Eugene McCarthy announces he will enter primaries to challenge President Johnson for the Democratic presidential nomination in 1968 . McCarthy would run on a platform advocating a negotiated settlement of the war in Vietnam .
 Hanoi reiterates its position that the U.S. must stop bombing before serious negotiations can begin . Hanois says the United States must stop its bombing before diplomatic talks begin .
 The 11th Light Infantry Brigade deploys to Vietnam from Hawaii . The brigade will join the Americal Division in Quang Ngai Province, I Corps .
 The 101st Airborne Division deploys to Vietnam from Fort Campbell, Kentucky, to join its 1st Brigade elements already in-country for combat operations in II Corps .
 Australia deploys 3rd Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, to join First Australian Task Force for combat operations in III Corps . The Australian Army deploys the 3rd battalion to join forces in the Middle East .
 New Zealand deploys an infantry company to Vietnam to join the Aussies in III Corps . The Kiwi joins the Aussie's III Corps in the battle in Vietnam .
 South Vietnamese police arrest a Viet Cong representative on his way to meet with U.S. embassy officials . He was arrested on suspicion of meeting with United States embassy officials in Vietnam .
 He is identified on December 2 as Nguyen Van Huan and is intercepted after the CIA had arranged a meeting between him and Ambassador Bunker . He is reportedly intercepted by the CIA after a meeting with Bunker .
 A Washington report concedes that U.S. and South Vietnamese officials have been in touch with NLF representatives in previous months . But it says the contacts have dealt with prisoners and similar matters and not negotiations .
 The NLF sought to send representatives to the United Nations in October to discuss the Vietnamese conflict with the General Assembly . In a related matter, the Washington Post reports on December 1 that the NLF had sought to go to the U.N.
 Operation Klamath Falls in Binh Thuan and Lam Dong Provinces, II Corps. The 1st Brigade, 101st Airborne Division, and a battalion from the 1st Cavalry Division conduct Operation . The operation is part of II Corps' Second World War II .
 The purpose of the operation is to eliminate the headquarters of the enemy’s Military Region 6 and all enemy forces in the area of operations . The operation is aimed at eliminating the HQ of the military region 6 and the enemy forces .
 Officials in Bangkok report that Thailand has received United States ground-to-air missiles . The missiles are to protect itself against possible retaliation for permitting the United States to use Thai airbases for the launching of U.S. air strikes against North Vietnam .
 General Westmoreland and General Cao Van Vien, chief of the Republic of Vietnam Joint General Staff, discuss Christmas, New Year’s, and Tet cease-fires . In Saigon, they discuss the possibility of a cease-fire in Vietnam .
 In a coordinated action with the Vietnamese, United States troops surround and attack a Viet Cong battalion . U.S. troops surrounded and attacked the battalion in a coordinated attack .
 They are reinforced by another battalion from the 9th Infantry Division, brought in by helicopters . Another battalion is also reinforced by helicopters bringing in troops .
 Republican leaders Senator Everett Dirksen and Representative Gerald Ford say that the Johnson administration has not done all it could to negotiate a settlement of the war . Republican leaders say that Johnson administration did not do all possible to reach a settlement .
 Hubert Humphrey suggests that non-Communist members in the NLF might agree to talk with the South Vietnamese .
 The United States 25th Infantry Division conducts Operation Yellowstone in War Zone C, Tay Ninh Province, III Corps . Operation Yellowstone is part of the U.S. 25th Division in Vietnam .
 U.S. artillery base camp 50 miles north of Saigon repels North Vietnamese/Viet Cong attack, killing 124 . 124 killed in the attack .
 The NLF’s proposals for a peace settlement in South Vietnam are rebuffed by the United States when they are placed before the United Nations . The U.S. rebuffed the NLF's proposals for the peace settlement .
 The proposals include a coalition government, free elections, and land reform . Land reform proposals include land reform, land reform and free elections .
 United States planes bomb rail yards at Yen Vien, six miles east of Hanoi . U.S. planes bombed rail yards in Vietnam in the 1980s .
 A North Vietnamese report claims that homes in the northeastern section of Hanoi were destroyed in the attack . The report says the homes were destroyed .
 U.S. pilots granted permission to fly through two previously restricted target areas in North Vietnam . The 25-mile strip along the Chinese Communist border and the outer 20-mile circle around Hanoi were previously restricted .
 White House permission is still required to bomb targets in both sections of the U.S. However, the White House still needs permission to attack targets .
 MACV turns over responsibility for Saigon’s defense to South Vietnamese armed forces . MACV is responsible for the defense of Saigon, Vietnam .
 Six battalions from the 101st Airborne Division arrive in Vietnam from Fort Campbell, Kentucky .
 III Corps will be assigned operational areas of responsibility in III Corps . They will be deployed to the U.S.
 The ROK Capital Division launches Operation Maeng Ho 9 in Binh Dinh Province, II Corps. The operation is part of the ROK capital Division . The ROC Capital Division launched the operation in the province .
 The United States 199th Light Infantry Brigade conducted Operation Uniontown in Bien Hoa Province, III Corps. The U.S. 199th light Infantry Brigade was part of the III Corps . The operation took place during the fall of Vietnam in 1968 .
 The purpose of the operation is to prevent rocket and mortar attacks on the Bien Hoa-Long Binh complex . The operation is being carried out to prevent rockets and mortars being fired .
 The 1st Battalion of the 20th Infantry, 11th Light Infantry Brigade, arrives in Vietnam to join the Americal Division . The battalion will be stationed at Due Pho, Quang Ngai Province, I Corps .
 General David M Shoup, retired U.S. Marine commandant, says it is “pure unadulterated poppycock” to believe the United States presence is necessary in South Vietnam to prevent a Communist invasion of the U.N. Shoup says .
 The 11th Light Infantry Brigade, part of the 23rd Infantry Division, officially arrives in South Vietnam . The brigade is stationed at Due Pho in I Corps .
 I Corps. Americal Division conducts Operation Muscatine in Quang Ngai Province, I Corps . Americal . Division conducted operation Muscatin .
 The objective of the operation is the relief of the ROK 2nd Marine Brigade and support of the pacification programs in the province . The operation is being carried out by the South Korean military .
 General Westmoreland cables Washington that Communists have decided on an intensified countrywide effort to win the war . Westmorelands: Communist Party has decided on intensified efforts to win war . Communists have also decided on intensifying countrywide war effort .
 President lohnson attends a memorial service for Australian prime minister Harold Holt . He then visits Vietnam, Thailand, and the Vatican .
 President Johnson says talks between Saigon government and members of the National Liberation Front “could bring good results” Johnson praises Thieu’s flexible and “statesmanlike position” in agreeing to hold informal talks with N.L. Front .
 President Thieu and Johnson meet in Canberra on December 21 and issue a joint communique affirming that Thieu is ready “to discuss relevant matters with any individual now associated with the NLF” but the front will not be recognized as an independent organization by the Saigon government
 Johnson warns that “kamikaze” attacks are coming in South Vietnam . That day, Johnson was speaking to the Australian cabinet .
 Johnson then flies to Rome and meets with Pope Paul VI for over an hour with only interpreters present . Johnson then flew to Rome to meet with Paul VI and meet with him .
 A Vatican statement says that the Pope had advanced proposals toward attaining peace in Vietnam in his conversations with the president . The Pope says that he has advanced proposals to the president in Vietnam . The Vatican says the Pope has advanced peace proposals to Vietnam .
 An estimated 35,000-45,000 Communist troops are located in or just above the zone . The area is home to an estimated 45,000 communist troops .
 USAF B-52s carry out raids on Communist positions inside the DMZ on December 22 . The raids were carried out during the Cold War .
 Ho Chi Minh addresses a national rally in Hanoi, calling for increased efforts in both North and South Vietnam to win the war .
 Ground action is largely halted and air operations suspended because of a Christmas truce . Ground action has been largely halted because of the truce . Air operations have also been suspended .
 North Vietnam says the U.S. violated the truce by carrying out air strikes against eight targets . North Vietnam charges that the United States violated it by air strikes . The United States says the strikes violated the ceasefire by striking targets .
 Viet Cong commanders reconnoiter assigned objectives in Saigon during the Christmas cease-fire . Cease-fire in preparation for renewed combat operations .
 South Vietnamese troops encounter the 416th VC Battalion during a search-and-destroy mission . The mission was aimed at providing security for pacification teams in Quang Tri Province . U.S. troops backed by United States artillery and air strikes .
 The note is made public after Cambodia broadcasts the text of its reply . Cambodia says it is not being used as a base for Communist forces involved in Vietnam .
 The United States again disavows intentions of expanding the Vietnam War . The U.S. has been involved in Vietnam since 1968 .
 Prince Sihanouk warns that if U.S. troops invade Cambodia in search of North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces, his government will ask China, Russia, and “other anti-imperialistic powers” for new military aid .
 North Vietnamese troops have started a general offensive against government forces in southern Laos . Laotian premier Souvanna Phouma reports that North Vietnamese forces have started an offensive . The offensive is expected to last for several days .
 North Vietnam denies that its forces have begun a drive in Laos . North Vietnam on December 29 denies that it has launched a drive into Laos .
 Operation Badger Tooth is launched to clear the “Street Without Joy’s area near the coastal village of Thon Tham Khe . The area is located on the border of Quang Tri and Thua Thien Provinces . Operation is launched on the ‘Street
 About 1,000 marines land by boat and helicopter along the coast of Quang Ngai Province and exchange fire with entrenched Communists . The operation is part of a military operation to counter the Communist Party .
 Foreign Minister Nguyen Duy Trinh announces that North Vietnam will enter into negotiations with the U.S. if bombing and other acts of war against the North are stopped . Messengers deliver Ho Chi Minh’s Tet poem to officials and diplomats .
 U.S. Marines interrogate Viet Cong suspect during Operation BadgerTooth in December 1967 . Marine interrogate suspect during operation Badger Tooth . Marines were involved in the operation .
 Ho Chi Minh extends New Year’s greetings to Americans opposed to U.S. policies in Vietnam . Ho Chi-Minh: "I’m not going to be surprised if you’ve got a lot of support for the United States"
 U.S. troop levels have reached 485,600,600 with 16,021 American combat deaths to date . United States troop levels are now at 48,600 . 16,000 American soldiers have been killed in combat .
 99,742 U.S. servicemen were wounded in action during the year . Another 99, 742 U .S. soldiers were wounded during the war .
 South Vietnamese armed forces strength has increased to 798,000 (including Regional and Popular Forces), with 60,428 South Vietnamese personnel killed in action to date . South Vietnamese forces strength now stands at 7,000, including regional and popular forces .
 In the air war since February 1965, the U.S. and South Vietnamese air forces have dropped more than 1,500,000 tons of bombs on North and South Vietnam . The attacks have cut North Vietnam’s electrical generating capacity by 85 percent .
 Operation Clearwater begins to interdict enemy bases and lines of communication on inland waterways in I Corps . United States Navy begins operation Clearwater on June 28, 1944 . U.S. Navy: Clearwater is interdicting enemy bases, lines of communications in inland waterways .
 Operation Rolling Thunder forces North Vietnam to divert manpower from industrial and agricultural production to military tasks, forcing Hanoi to seek ever greater amounts of aid from its Communist allies . North Vietnam has been forced to divert considerable manpower from . industrial and . agricultural production from industrial production .
 Saigon expels Newsweek reporter Everett Morton for writing articles critical of the South Vietnamese army . Saigon later expelled him from the country .
 The Cambodian government announces that it has accepted military aid from Communist China . The government repeats claims that it feels threatened by the United States .
 The Soviet Union charges that United States planes damaged a Russian merchant ship during raids on Haiphong . U.S. planes damaged the ship and demanded that those responsible be punished . Soviet Union says the U.N. bombed the ship during the raids .
 The United States expresses its regret, but adds that it is impossible to eliminate such risks . The U.S. expresses its regrets, but says it will not eliminate risks .
 Foreign Minister Nguyen Duy Trinh announces for the first time that North Vietnam “will hold talks with the United States” after it has “unconditionally’t halted bombing and “other acts of war” against North Vietnam .
 Benjamin Spock and three others are indicted for counseling draff resistance . Spock and others were charged with counseling for counseling resistance .
 Major Patrick Brady rescues 51 severely wounded soldiers from positions where other aircraft had failed or been shot down . Major Brady was a medical evacuation pilot . He flew three missions and rescued 51 wounded soldiers .
 Saigon government officials assert that the demonstration was part of a VC campaign to destabilize the Saigon regime . Government officials say the VC was behind the demonstration . The demonstration was a demonstration against the regime .
 VC forces overrun a United States airfield at Kontum, killing seven Americans and wounding 25 . Seven Americans were killed and 25 were wounded in the attack .
 General Westmoreland orders redeployment of United States forces from border areas to positions closer to Saigon . U.S. forces redeployed to positions near Saigon after consultation with commander of II Field Force .
 U.S. 9th Infantry Division conducts Operation AKRON V in Bien Hoa Province, III Corps, to eliminate enemy forces in Base Area 303 . Operation AKron V was part of the U.N. effort to eliminate enemies in the area .
 U.S. and Cambodia announce substantial agreement on measures designed to isolate Cambodia from the war . Prince Sihanouk and Ambassador to India Chester Bowles led the talks . U.K. and the U.N. have been in talks with the Prince of Cambodia .
 North Vietnamese-Pathet Lao force captures Nam Bac, a supply center 60 miles north of the royal capital of Luang Prabang . Royal Lao troops suffer a major defeat when a combined North-Vietnamese and North Vietnamese force captures the town .
 A group of South Vietnamese intellectuals issues a call for elections, with National Liberation Front participation . The group calls for elections with participation of the N.L. Front .
 General Westmoreland warns of Communist attacks before or after Tet at a United States Mission Council meeting in Saigon . The U.S. general says the Communist attacks took place before and after Tet .
 Republican presidential candidate George Romney of Michigan says Vietnam War will be his principal campaign issue in the New Hampshire primary . Romney: Vietnam War to be a primary issue in New Hampshire .
 NLF presidium begins two-day meeting to discuss impending military action . NLFPresidium presidium meets with members of the U.S. military to discuss upcoming military action against Syria .
 In his State of the Union message, President Johnson declares that the bombing would “stop immediately if talks would take place promptly and with reasonable hopes that they would be productive” President Johnson declared that the bombings would stop if talks were held .
 Eartha Kitt at White House luncheon blames crime and race riots on Vietnam War . Kitt blames crime on the Vietnam War for riots .
 Operation Niagara is a joint U.S. Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps air campaign launched in support of marines manning the base at Khe Sanh . Operation Niagara begins with an intensive intelligence and surveillance effort in the area .
 24,000 tactical fighter-bomber sorties and 2,700 B-52 strategic bomber sorties will be flown between the start of the operation and March 31,1968, when it will be terminated . Using sensors installed along the nearby DMZ and reconnaissance flights to pinpoint targets
 President Johnson names Clark Clifford to succeed McNamara as secretary of defense effective March 1,1968 . Clark Clifford succeeds McNamara, who died in March 1968 .
 The 3rd Battalion, 26th Marines, and a North Vietnamese battalion entrenched between two hills northwest of the base . The battle is one of the most publicized and controversial battles of the Vietnam War .
 The base will be surrounded for 77 days, while intense fighting continues on the surrounding hills . The base is expected to be surrounded by the surrounding areas for the duration .
 Operation McLain is a reconnaissance-in-force operation in support of pacification efforts in Binh Thuan Province, II Corps . The U.S. 173rd Airborne Brigade conducted the operation . The operation is part of a U.N. effort to pacify the region
 NVA forces overrun the village of Khe Sanh, and North Vietnamese long-range artillery begin to shell the marine base itself . The base was hit by its main ammunition dump and detonated 1,500 tons of explosives .
 Operation Lancaster II is a search and clear operation in western Quang Tri Province, I Corps . Several battalions from the 3rd Marine Division conduct Operation Lancaster I .
 The military command of the NLF issues orders calling for the ‘annihilation’ of all pacification teams and any forces supporting them . The NLF has been fighting in the Syrian conflict for more than two years .
 Prince Sihanouk and Yugoslav president Josip Tito express full support for North Vietnam and the NLF . In a joint communique, they express support for the NVA and NLF forces .
 Pershing II is a clearing and pacification operation in the coastal lowlands of Binh Dinh Province . The operation was part of the U.S. 1st Cavalry Division of the II Corps .
 Operation Jeb Stuart is the division’s first operation in I Corps . The division's first operation was the first to take part in the division's I Corps.
 A combined force of United States and South Vietnamese soldiers turns back a North Vietnamese attack on Quang Tri . During the operation, a combined force was turned back by the U.S. and South .
 North Korea seizes the U.S. intelligence ship Pueblo and its 84-man crew in waters off Korea . The ship was seized by the North Korean state of North Korea .
 The ship was on the same type of Operation De Soto patrol that the Maddox had been on during the Gulf of Tonkin incident August 2-4,1964 . North Korea is alleged to have violated the 12-mile territorial limit .
 Ambassador Bunker and General Westmoreland cable Washington that the Communists may break the Tet truce and urge the South Vietnamese government to cancel truce in I Corps Tactical Zone . Ambassador Bunker said in a cable cable to Washington D.C. U.S. cable Washington .
 General Westmoreland reports that the situation at Khe Sanh is critical and may represent the turning point of the Vietnam War . Westmorelands: The situation may be the 'turning point' of the war .
 President Johnson calls 14,787 reservists to active duty in the Korea crisis . President Johnson orders nuclear carrier Enterprise toward Korea .
 North Vietnamese troops strengthen their position in the northwest corner of South Vietnam by capturing an outpost inside the Laotian border . The outpost was captured nine miles west of Khe Sanh . North Vietnamese forces strengthen position .
 VC units move to villages on the outskirts of Can Tho and Vinh Long in the Mekong Delta . VC units are deployed to villages in the region of Vietnam .
 Major General Nguyen Due Thang quits his position as head of South Vietnam’s pacification program . Major General Thang was head of the country's pacification efforts .
 Communist seven-day cease-fire for Tet begins . ARVN troops are restricted to their posts and all leaves are canceled under last-minute orders . Communist 7-day ceasefire begins .
 President Johnson asks for $26.7 billion to continue the war in Vietnam . Johnson also announces an increase in taxes .
 Allied Tet cease-fire is cancelled in I Corps Tactical Zone . Cease-fire takes effect in the rest of South Vietnam at 1800 hours .
 Vietnamese troops launch surprise attacks on Danang, Pleiku, Nha Trang, and nine other cities in I Corps and II Corps . But commanders in Viet Cong Region 5 have started the Tet Offensive 24 hours too early, apparently because they are following the lunar calendar in effect .
 The timing and scope of the attacks finds Allied forces alert but unprepared for an offensive of such magnitude . Allied forces are unprepared for such a major offensive, the British commander says .
 A 19-man suicide squad seizes the ground floor of the United States embassy and holds it for six hours . A force of United States paratroopers lands by helicopter on the building’s roof and kills or captures them .
 Nearly a thousand VC troops have infiltrated the capital city and it will take a week of bitter fighting to defeat them . It will take the VC troops a week to defeat the insurgents .
 Some of the most intense fighting is in Cholon, the Chinese section of the city . The fighting has been ongoing for years in the Chinese city .
 In I Corps, North Vietnamese and VC forces capture Hue, the imperial capital of Vietnam . Hue is the capital of the Vietnamese city of Hue . North Vietnamese forces capture the capital in Hue .
 U.S. Marines and ARVN forces counterattack to recapture the city . United States Marines and . ARVn forces counterattacked . U.N. forces recaptured the city.
 President Thieu declares countrywide martial law . Allied forces fight to turn the Communists back all over the country . Allies fighting to turn Communist forces back .
 The American news media is dominated by accounts of the Tet Offensive . CBS and NBC present 30-minute special reports on the Tet offensive .
 In Hanoi, children and old people are evacuated to the countryside in preparation for the anticipated U.S. bombing attacks .
 Heavy fighting continues in South Vietnam although the number and intensity of attacks begin to ebb . The number of attacks is ebbing but the intensity of the attacks are beginning to lessen . Heavy fighting is still ongoing in the region .
 The president says the American people will see that when they know the facts, the enemy has failed . As for a “psychological victory,” the president says, “when the . American people know the . facts, they will . see that here, too, the
 Operation Hue City retaking of the imperial capital of Vietnam . U.S. Marines and South Vietnamese forces supported by elements of the 1st Cavalry and 101st Airborne .
 The bitter fighting results in the destruction of a large part of the city and heavy loss of life on both sides . Both sides were involved in the fighting which resulted in heavy losses of life .
 Walter Cronkite of CBS News conducts an interview with the commanding officer of the 1 st Battalion, 1 st Marines, during the Battle of Hue City, February 1 968 . Walter Croncite of . CBS News conducted the interview during the battle .
 News cameras record the incident and the pictures and video shown on the nightly news stun Americans who see it . The incident was captured on camera on a camera hidden behind a wall of darkness .
 Senator Eugene McCarthy accuses the Johnson administration of deceiving itself and the American people about the progress of the war . Given the ferocity of the Tet Offensive, Senator McCarthy says the U.S. was deceived by the administration .
 Administration officials defend Johnson’s war policy . Administration officials appear on television interview programs to defend Johnson's war policy.
 South Vietnamese forces conduct Operation Tran Hung Dao in the Saigon area, with six South Vietnamese marine, four Ranger and five airborne battalions to defeat the forces who had attacked .
 MACV reports that fighting has diminished throughout most of South Vietnam, but heavy fighting continues in Cholon and Hue . General Westmoreland claims that Allied forces have killed more enemy troops in the past seven days than the United States has lost in the entire war .
 A spokesman in Saigon reports 21,330 enemy troops killed since Tet began . A spokesman for the Vietnamese government says 21,000 enemy troops have been killed in Tet .
 In Washington, 2,000 persons led by Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr., march through Arlington National Cemetery to protest the “cruel and senseless” war . The march took place in Washington, D.C. and Boston .
 Westmoreland responds the next day, asking that the additional troops be deployed . The next day he responds to the request, asking for more troops to be deployed in the U.S.
 Senator Robert F Kennedy says Tet Offensive has shattered official illusions about the war in Vietnam . Senator Kennedy: Tet Offensive shattered illusions about war .
 U.S. forces from the 199th Light Infantry Brigade land by helicopter to clear Communist troops in the area around the Phu Tho racetrack in Saigon .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara asks Joint Chiefs of Staff to prepare plans for General Westmoreland’s emergency reinforcement . McNamara: Joint Chiefs should prepare plans to prepare for General W.M. D.E.’S. C.E., D.C. C
 Saigon government announces the call-up of 65,000 more men in response to the new enemy offensive . Saigon announces the new offensive against the enemy .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff submits to Secretary McNamara three plans for reinforcing General Westmoreland . They argue against dispatching any reinforcements at this time because it would seriously deplete the strategic reserve . They hope to force the president to call up the reserves .
 The 82nd Airborne Division and two-thirds of the marine division air wing could be deployed . They recommend, however, that measures be taken for possible deployment of the 82nd .
 U.S. Marines cross to the north side of the Perfume River to begin the battle to retake the citadel from Communist forces . The battle began in Hue, Hue, on the south side of a river on the north .
 A Louis Harris poll reports U.S. public support for the war has increased in wake of Tet attacks . Louis Harris Poll reports United States public support has increased since Tet attack .
 A Gallup poll reports that 50 percent of Americans disapprove of President Johnson’s handling of the war . 50 percent disapprove of Johnson's handling of war, poll says .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara authorizes deployment of 10,500 troops . A brigade of the 82nd Airborne Division and 27th Marine Regimental Landing Team are deployed .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff immediately sends McNamara a memorandum asking that 46,300 reservists and former servicemen be activated . Joint chiefs of Staff then sends a memorandum to McNamara asking for the troops to be activated.
 U.S. planes bomb targets near Hanoi, hitting a bridge, two airfields, and several missile sites . The heaviest aerial attacks against North Vietnam in six weeks were carried out in Vietnam .
 President Johnson flies to Fort Bragg, North Carolina, to visit reinforcements departing for Vietnam . President Johnson then flies to the carrier Constellation at sea in the Pacific to visit with the crew .
 Senator Stuart Symington reports that the cost of the Vietnam War for fiscal year 1969 was $32 billion . The Vietnam War cost was estimated to be at least $30 billion .
 F-4 Phantom shot down over Hanoi becomes 800th U.S. aircraft lost in three-year air war over North Vietnam . 800th United States aircraft lost over three years in Vietnam .
 President Johnson says rumors that Westmoreland may be relieved of command are false and may have originated abroad . Johnson also announces that additional troops will be approved for Vietnam as needed .
 Tet Offensive has created 350,000 new refugees, U.S. officials say . 800,000 refugees were listed as refugees prior to January 30 . U.N. officials in Saigon say 350,00 refugees have been created .
 ROK Capital Division launches Operation Maeng Ho 10 in Binh Dinh Province, II Corps. ROK capital Division launches operation Maeng . Ho 10 . Operation is part of the R.K. Capital Division .
 U.S. command deploys AC-130 gunship to Vietnam to bolster Allied defenses around Khe Sanh . AC130 gunships were used to bolster defenses around the base in Vietnam .
 This specialized propeller-driven attack aircraft is armed with a variety of guns and equipped with electronic sensors . It is equipped with sensors capable of locating the enemy despite fog, darkness, and jungle .
 Hanoi turns over three U.S. pilots shot down during the previous fall to representatives of the American Mobilization Committee Against the War . Three pilots were shot down in the fall .
 The United States reciprocates by releasing three North Vietnamese sailors . They are the first prisoners freed by Hanoi; in late March the U.S. released three sailors .
 Communist gunners shell 45 cities and bases, including Tan Son Nhut air base and Saigon . Ground attacks were launched against four cities, including four cities .
 The 3rd Brigade, 82nd Airborne Division, arrives in Vietnam after deploying from Fort Bragg, North Carolina . The division is part of the U.S. Army's largest military force in the world .
 The brigade is stationed at Hue-Phu Bai in Thua Thien Province, I Corps. The brigade has been stationed in the province since 2003 .
 The Senate Foreign Relations Committee begins hearings on U.S. policy in Vietnam . The committee is expected to hold hearings next week on Vietnam policy .
 At issue is whether the administration had provided Congress with truthful data at the time it was seeking passage of the Tonkin Gulf Resolution in August 1964 . The resolution broadened the president’s war-making authority in Southeast Asia .
 National Council of Churches calls for an immediate bombing halt as a prelude to peace talks . In a major policy statement, the group calls for a halt in the bombing .
 The aircraft carrier Bonhomme Richard arrives in Vietnam for its fourth combat deployment . It is the aircraft carrier's fourth deployment in Vietnam .
 General Wheeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, departs for South Vietnam to confer with General Westmoreland . General Wheeler was chairman of Joint chiefs of Staff at the time .
 Westmoreland replies that the expanded war effort would require an additional 206,000 troops . The expanded effort would need to be expanded to include more than 200,000 soldiers .
 There is a basic disagreement developing between the American and South Vietnamese commands regarding enemy military objectives during the recent Tet Offensive . Meanwhile, there is also a disagreement developing .
 General Westmoreland and his staff believe that Saigon and Khe Sanh are the major enemy targets . ARVN general Cao Van Vien contends that the enemy’s primary goal is to split South Vietnam .
 The Department of Defense announces a Selective Service call for 48,000 men, the second-highest number of the Vietnam War . Back in the U.S., the Department of Service calls for the second highest number of men .
 At Khe Sanh, Communist gunners bombard the marine defenders with 1,307 artillery rounds . The heaviest shelling of the siege was the heaviest shelling . The siege was held by the Communists at the end of the year .
 South Vietnamese troops storm the former imperial palace in the citadel in Hue . Soldiers tear down the National Liberation Front flag and replace it with the Republic of Vietnam flag .
 The Battle of Hue is not officially declared over for another week . This is the last major engagement of the main phase of the Tet Offensive . The battle of Hue will not be declared over until next week .
 The United States command in Saigon admits for the the first time that pacification efforts have suffered a severe setback as a result of the Tet Offensive . Also this day, the U.S. command in . Saigon admitted for the . first time this day that pacifying efforts have
 U.S. planes bomb the Red River wharves and warehouses of Hanoi for the first time . United States planes bomb Red River warehouses and warehouses in Vietnam .
 Senator Mike Mansfield calls for a trial suspension of the bombing . Senator Mansfield also calls for the bombing trial to be suspended .
 There are 5,113 reported enemy casualties during the course of the bitter fighting there . United States and South Vietnamese troops retake control of Hue .
 Hundreds of bodies are found in several mass graves in Hue . More bodies will be found later in the year, providing additional evidence of VC massacre of Republic of Vietnam supporters .
 U.S. 1st Marine Division conducts Operation Houston in the Thua Thien and Quang Nam areas of I Corps . Operation Houston takes place in I Corps' I Corps.
 Purpose of the operation is to secure Highway 1 and the Hai Van Pass while providing security for crews working on the railroad between Hue and Danang . The operation is scheduled to take place in Hue, Vietnam .
 Walter Cronkite tells Americans he is certain “the bloody experience of Vietnam is to end in a stalemate” He says it is time for the U.S. to seek a negotiated end to the war . The war in Vietnam is expected to end soon .
 President Johnson orders secretary of defense-designate Clark Clifford to form a task force to conduct a complete review of U.S. policy in Vietnam . The task force includes the increased troop request .
 North Vietnamese forces launch three attacks against the 37th ARVN Ranger Battalion at Khe Sanh, but are turned back each time . North Vietnam forces launched three attacks, but were turned back by the enemy .
 Representative L Mendel Rivers declares that the U.S. should use either tactical nuclear weapons at Khe Sanh or withdraw from the base . Rivers is chairman of the House Armed Services Committee . He declares the United States should use nuclear weapons .
 U.S. Marines conduct Operation Napoleon/Saline along the Cua Viet River to keep this critical supply line open to the port facility in the Dong Ha area of Quang Tri Province, I Corps .
 The 27th Marine Regiment of the 5th Marine Division deploys to Vietnam to join the 1st Marine Division for combat operations in I Corps . The 27rd Marine Regiment will be deployed to Vietnam for combat .
 Clark Clifford sworn in as the new secretary of defense, replacing Robert McNamara . Clifford replaces McNamara, replacing him as defense secretary .
 President Thieu dismisses seven provincial chiefs in unprecedented move . Many consider it a major step toward carrying out his promise to combat corruption and inefficiency . Thieu says he wants to fight corruption, inefficiency in Vietnam .
 Operation Truong Cong Dinh is launched by ARVN forces and elements of the United States 9th Infantry Division in Dinh Tuong and Kien Tuong Provinces in the Mekong Delta to provide security for Highway 4 and My Tho .
 48 U.S. troops are killed and 28 wounded in one of the costliest ambushes of the war . The ambush took place four miles north of Tan Son Nhut Air Base .
 Pacification teams begin returning to hamlets abandoned a month earlier during the opening days of the Tet Offensive . The Tet Offensive is the first major offensive in North Korea since 1968 .
 Clifford group recommends immediate dispatch of 22,000 more U.S. troops to Vietnam . Reserve call-up of 250,000 men, increased draff calls, and further study of the situation .
 Group advises that the deployment of the remaining 185,000 men requested by General Westmoreland remain contingent on future developments . However, the group says the deployment is still uncertain .
 President Johnson asks that the memorandum be sent to General Westmoreland, who, in a reply four days later, welcomes the additional 22,000 troops . President Johnson says he still needs the full 206,756 reinforcement by year’s end .
 Senator J William Fulbright, chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and other senators interrupt a debate on civil rights to publicly demand that President Johnson consult Congress before making any new troop increases in Vietnam . Senator Fulbright and others interrupted a debate about civil rights .
 The U.S. Navy deploys a new plane, the A-7 Corsair II, to help repel enemy troops threatening Khe Sanh . The new plane is the first of its kind to be deployed in Vietnam .
 In a cablegram to the president, General Westmoreland welcomes the additional 22,000 men proposed by the Clifford group, but sticks by his request for the full 206,756-man reinforcement by the end of 1968 .
 The Americal Division, the 3rd Brigade of the 82nd Airborne Division, elements of the 1st Brigade, 101st Division, and troops from the ARVN 1st Infantry Division conduct Operations Carentan I-II in Quang Tri and Thua Thien Pro
 Gallup poll reports a new wave of pessimism among Americans about the war in Vietnam . Gallup poll: Americans are pessimistic about the Vietnam War .
 President Johnson is reportedly “furious” at the leak, which gives his political adversaries more ammunition for their attacks on his administration .
 In Saigon, Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky declares that the recent enemy offensive has made a general mobilization necessary . Vice President Cao Ky: "Recent enemy offensive" has made an enemy offensive necessary .
 Operation Quyet Thang, largest operation to date, is conducted in the Saigon area and five surrounding provinces of III Corps . The operation is conducted by elements of the United States 1st, 9th, and 25th Divisions and the ARVN .
 The purpose of the operation is to eliminate a persisting threat to the capital city . The operation was launched in response to a persistent threat to capital city, police say .
 McCarthy wins 42 percent of the vote to Johnson’s 48 percent . McCarthy was an outspoken critic of the war in Vietnam .
 Anti-Johnson, rather than anti-war, sentiment provided the basis for McCarthy’s performance . A Harris poll later shows that anti-Johnson sentiment provided that . McCarthy's performance was based on that sentiment .
 North Vietnamese troops are sighted for the first time in the Mekong Delta . North Vietnamese forces sighted in the first place in the region .
 Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorenson meet with Secretary of Defense Clifford to discuss a possible U.S. commission to reverse the government’s Vietnam policy, but Johnson rejects the plan .
 Former secretary of state Dean Acheson says U.S. victory in Vietnam is not feasible within the limits of public tolerance . Report to President Johnson: Victory in Vietnam 'not feasible'
 Senator Robert F Kennedy announces his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination . Polls indicate polls indicate Kennedy is now more popular than President Johnson .
 Lieutenant William Calley orders his men to go in shooting . Although the platoon does not receive any opposing fire as it approaches the hamlet, the platoon leader orders them to shoot .
 Several old men are bayoneted, some women and children praying outside the local temple are shot in the back of the head, and at least one girl is raped before being killed . Some old men and some children praying in front of the temple are also killed .
 Operation Duong Cua Dan provides security for engineers working on Route 4 . Route 4 is the main route between Saigon and the Mekong Delta in IV Corps . The U.S. 9th Infantry Division and ARVN 7th Division conduct operation .
 The House of Representatives passes a resolution calling for an immediate congressional review of U.S. policy in Southeast Asia . The resolution calls for a review of the United States policy in the region .
 Two North Vietnamese defectors report that North Vietnam’s intelligence agencies provide as much as 24 hours notice of U.S. B-52 raids . North Vietnam's intelligence agencies reportedly provide 24 hours of notice of raids . The United States military officials are embarrassed .
 Pressure on the marine combat base at Khe Sanh lessens . Bru tribesmen report that North Vietnamese artillery units have withdrawn into Laos . North Vietnam artillery units withdraw into Laos, according to tribesmen .
 Retired USMC commandant David Shoup estimates that up to 800,000 men are required just to defend South Vietnamese population centers .
 U.S. can achieve military victory only by invading North Vietnam, argues that such an operation would not be worth the cost . He further states that the United States can achieve victory only through invasion of North Vietnam .
 The Khe Sanh combat base receives 1,100 rounds of rocket and mortar fire . The base receives more than 1,000 rounds of fire at a time .
 U.S. Air Force F-Ills fly their first combat mission against targets in North Vietnam . The F-Is were the first F-IIs to carry out combat missions in Vietnam .
 President Johnson announces that General Westmoreland will become army chief of staff in mid-1968 . Creighton Abrams will assume command of Military Assistance Command, Vietnam . Abrams will take command of the military Assistance Command in Vietnam .
 General Wheeler secretly flies to meet with Westmoreland at Clark Field in the Philippines and tells him that President Johnson will approve only 13,500 additional soldiers out of the original 206,000 requested . Wheeler also instructs the South Vietnamese to urge the South Vietnam to expand their own war effort
 A Harris poll reports that in the past six weeks, “basic” support for the war among Americans has declined from 74 percent to 54 percent . 60 percent of those questioned regard the Tet Offensive as a defeat of United States objectives in Vietnam .
 An outbreak of bubonic plague in Tay Ninh Province has reached epidemic proportions and is beginning to spread toward Saigon . The outbreak is spreading to Saigon, Vietnam .
 President Johnson convenes a nine-man panel of retired presidential advisers . Panel includes respected generals Omar Bradley and Matthew Ridgway, State Department figures like Dean Acheson and George Ball .
 After two days of deliberation the group reaches a consensus and advises the president against further troop increases . The group recommends that the administration seek a negotiated peace with the Taliban .
 Johnson is reportedly furious at their conclusions, since this group had previously recommended that he stay the course in Vietnam . Johnson reportedly angry at the conclusions, which he had previously agreed to stay .
 U.S. Marines and PAVN troops engage in a three-hour battle near Khe Sanh . The battle was the last major ground combat of the 77-day siege .
 A Gallup poll reports that 63 percent of those polled disapprove of President Johnson’s handling of the war . The poll is an all-time low in public approval of his performance .
 Operation Cochise Green/Dan Sinh was a search and destroy operation in Binh Dinh Province, II Corps . The operation was part of the U.S. 173rd Airborne Brigade, the 4th and Americal Divisions, and 22nd ARVN Division .
 There are now 50 U.S. combat battalions operating in I Corps, a total of 170,000 troops . That's an increase of 30,000 in the last three months . There are 50 battalions of I Corps .
 U.S. aircraft dropped more than 110,000 tons of bombs on North Vietnamese forces during Operation Niagara . B-52s dropped 76,000 tonnes of bombs during the operation . Operation Niagara ended in victory over North Vietnam .
 Operation Pegasus/Lam Son-207 reopens Route 9 to the marine base at Khe Sanh, I Corps. The U.S. 1st Cavalry Division in conjunction with United States Marine and ARVN airborne troops, a total of 17 United States and four ARV
 The base is officially relieved by elements of the 1st Cavalry Division on April 8, ending the 77-day siege . The base was finally relieved on April 6, 2013 .
 Operation Toan Thang is largest operation to date to destroy VC and North Vietnamese forces within the Capital Military District, III Corps . 42 United States and 37 South Vietnamese battalions are involved in the operation .
 Operation Burlington Trail is a combat sweep in Quang Tin Province along the Quang Nam Province border in I Corps . The U.S. 198th Infantry Brigade and other elements of the Americal Division conduct the sweep . The operation is part of I Corps' I Corps.
 U.S. troops recapture Special Forces camp at Lang Vei, are driven out by NVA counterattack, but then retake the camp a second time . In three days of intense fighting, United States troops retake camp, drive NVA out of camp and are driven back .
 Defense Secretary Clifford announces call-up of 24,500 military reservists to serve as support forces in Vietnam . Call-up is part of the plan to replenish the army’s Strategic Reserve .
 Troops ceiling for U.S. strength in Vietnam has been raised to 549,000 . Troops in Vietnam now have a troop ceiling of 547,000, says President Obama .
 Operation Scotland II is a follow-on to Operation Pegasus in I Corps . The U.S. Marines and soldiers from the 1st Cavalry Division conduct Operation Scotland Operation Scotland . Operation Scotland I Corps is part of the I Corps.
 President Johnson discusses recent Allied and enemy troop deployments with U.S. military leaders . At a series of meetings in Honolulu, Hawaii, Johnson meets with United States military leaders.
 He also confers with South Korean president Park Chung Hee to reaffirm U.S. military commitments to Seoul . He also reaffirm United States military commitments .
 The United States command in Saigon discloses figures showing that the South Vietnamese government lost control over 1. million people as a result of the Tet Offensive . U.S. forces lost control of 1.1 million people in Tet Offensive in Vietnam .
 Operation Delaware/Lam Son-216 preempts enemy preparations for another pending attack on the Hue area of I Corps . Elements of the United States 1st Cavalry Division, 101st Airborne Division, 196th Light Infantry Brigade plus ARVN 1st Division and Airborne Task
 A high-ranking NVA defector exposes enemy plans to conduct a second wave of attacks on Saigon beginning April 22 . A second attack is planned for April 22, according to defector .
 Students in various universities around the world cut classes as part of an antiwar strike . The strike was organized by the Student Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam .
 F-111 raids resume after suspected technical malfunctions grounded for three weeks . The planes had been grounded due to suspected problems with the planes .
 Vice President Hubert Humphrey announces his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination . Humphrey announced his candidacy on January 1, 1962 .
 Hanoi sources report formation of new political organization in South Vietnam . Alliance of National, Democratic, and Peace Forces prepared to conduct peace talks with U.S. Sources say new political group is prepared to hold peace talks .
 The alliance reportedly represents non-Communist South Vietnamese nationalists . The U.S. State Department refuses to recognize the group .
 Opposition and independent members in the lower house of South Vietnam’s National Assembly issue a statement calling for a change of government because of corruption in high places . The statement was released by members of the National Assembly .
 During the Tet Offensive in Hue, NVA and Viet Cong forces executed more than 1,000 civilians and buried them in mass graves . 19 of the mass graves have been recently uncovered .
 Task Force Funston from the United States 9th Infantry Division conducts Operation Kudzu in Dinh Tuong Province, IV Corps . Task Force funston from U.S. 9th . Infantry Division .
 The objective of the operation is to provide security for the division base at Dong Tam . The operation is being carried out in support of the Dong Tam base .
 The United States and North Vietnam have agreed to begin formal negotiations in Paris on May 10 or shortly thereafter . President Johnson announces that, after 34 days of discussion, the U.S. and N. Vietnam will begin formal talks .
 Hanoi discloses that ex-foreign minister Xuan Thuy will head the North Vietnamese delegation at the talks . Ex-Foreign Minister Xuan Tuy will be the head of the North Vietnam delegation .
 U.S. Marine Corps units conduct Operation Allen Brook west of Hoi An City in southern Quang Nam Province, I Corps. The operation is part of the U.N. Marines' first major operation in the area .
 The principal enemy target is Saigon where, following a major ground assault, the fighting quickly spreads to Cholon, the Phu Tho racetrack, and Tan Son Nhut air base .
 The battle climaxes on May 12, when United States jets, dropping napalm and high-explosive bombs, pound a vital Viet Cong stronghold in the slum district around the Y bridge . The U.S. troops were preparing for an assault by United States troops .
 President Thieu declares that his government will never recognize the National Liberation Front, even if the U.S. should negotiate an end to the war . The government declares that it will not recognize the N.L. Front .
 The 101st Airborne Division will be converted into an airmobile division . The U.S. Army announced the change in order to bolster its firepower and mobility .
 Separate reconnaissance squadrons will be attached to each of the five remaining infantry divisions in Vietnam . It also discloses that separate reconnaissance squads will be assigned to each remaining infantry division .
 The 1st Cavalry Division conducts Operation Concordia in Quang Tri Province, I Corps. The 1-Cavalry Division conducted the operation in Quan Tri Province .
 1,400 personnel evacuated from Kham Due Special Forces camp in Quang Tin Province, I Corps . Operation Golden Valley evacuates the camp 60 miles west of Chu Lai . The Americal Division conducted the evacuation .
 During the evacuation, a battalion from the 1st Infantry fights a major battle with soldiers from the North Vietnamese 2nd Division . The battle was fought in the aftermath of the fall of Vietnam .
 Delegates from the United States and North Vietnam hold their first formal meeting at the Majestic Hotel in Paris . North Vietnam and the U.S. meet for the first time in Paris since Vietnam split in 1979 .
 For the time being, participation will be restricted to representatives of the U.S. and North Vietnam . They agree that, for the time, participation is restricted to members of the United States .
 Unarmed Fairchild C-123 transport lands at forward outpost at Kham Due, South Vietnam, in rescue attempt .
 After a rocket-propelled grenade fired directly at his aircraft proves to be a dud, Colonel Jackson takes off with the team on board and lands at Danang .
 The United States asks that the peace talks be moved into secret session . The U.S. wants to break an impasse at the Paris peace talks .
 Operation Nevada Eagle is a continuation of earlier cordon and search operations in central Thua Thien Province, I Corps . The U.S. 101st Airborne Division conducted the operation in the area .
 Newly appointed premier Tran Van Huong declares his opposition to negotiations with the National Liberation Front . Huong asserts that peace talks should be between Saigon and Hanoi, rather than the United States and North Vietnam .
 The United States 1st Marine Division conducts Operation Mameluke Thrust in central Quang Nam Province, I Corps. The U.S. 1st Marines conducted the operation in the area .
 Operation Hearts Together aims to resettle Saigon families made homeless by fighting . Allied command in Saigon announces the start of a new program . Saigon is located in the city of Saigon, Vietnam .
 Chief North Vietnamese delegate to Paris peace talks declares that negotiations will remain deadlocked until the United States unconditionally terminates all bombing raids on North Vietnam . Xuan Thuy, chief North Vietnam delegate to peace talks, declares that talks will continue until U.S. terminates bombing raids .
 Ambassador Harriman replies that a bombing halt must be accompanied by mutual troop withdrawals along the DMZ . Thuy rejects the proposal, charging that it is the United States, not North Vietnam, that has violated the buffer zone .
 The United States Marine Corps makes its first use of the North American OV-10A “Bronco’s” light observation aircraft . The aircraft is a light observation plane .
 John Paul Vann and other U.S. advisers issue a report recommending widespread changes in the pacification effort in Long An Province . The report was published by the United States at the conclusion of an experimental civic affairs program .
 Report: Saigon has little understanding of its people’s needs and has failed to provide adequate funds and services for grass-roots programs . The report states that Saigon . has little . understanding of . its people's needs . Saigon.
 As a result, the Viet Cong continue to collect taxes and recruit troops from hamlets that the government claims it has pacified . The government says it has been pacified, but many hamlets are still at issue .
 Premier Tran Van Huong announces the formation of a new 19-member cabinet in which a faction supporting Vice President Ky is given only one post . The new cabinet has 19 members, including a faction of the vice president .
 In the previous 17-member cabinet, the Ky faction had controlled seven ministries . The previous government had 17 ministries .
 The Viet Cong launch their third major assault of the year on Saigon . The Tet Offensive is actually a part of the overall Tet Offensive that will extend into the fall .
 The heaviest fighting occurs during the first three days of June, and again centers on Cholon . U.S. and South Vietnamese forces use helicopters, fighter-bombers, and tanks to dislodge Viet Cong infiltrators .
 A captured enemy directive indicates that the Viet Cong see the offensive as a means of influencing the Paris peace talks . The United States command makes public on May 28, the U.S. says .
 Thai Premier Thanom Kittikachorn announces that, at President Johnson’s request, he will send 5,000 more troops to Vietnam .
 The USMC’s Task Force Hotel conducts Operation Robin North/ Robin South to prevent enemy attacks on Khe Sanh and northern Quang Tri Province, I Corps . The operation is part of the U.S. Army's Operation Robin South .
 Information Minister Ton That Thien issues a directive lifting press censorship, which has been in effect since the beginning of the Tet Offensive . Press censorship has been banned in Vietnam since the Tet offensive .
 Australia deploys its 4th Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, to Vietnam to replace the regiment’s 2nd Battalion and conduct combat operations in III Corps .
 Recent government directives on pacification indicate that, since the Tet Offensive, the program’s focus has shifted from school-building, health care, and providing other forms of aid to self-defense teams and bolstering hamlet security .
 Operation Toan Thang II is a continuation of post-Tet Offensive operations throughout III Corps to maintain pressure on the enemy . U.S. and South Vietnamese units conduct operations throughout the III Corps . The operation is part of a series of operations to counter the Tet Offensive .
 Robert Kennedy was a leading critic of administration policy in Vietnam . He was shot after announcing his victory in California’s Democratic presidential primary; he dies the next day .
 General Westmoreland turns over his command to General Creighton Abrams . General Abrams will take command of the Army in the fall of the year .
 It is impossible to “cut a surface line of communication with other than ground operations,” Washington’s ban on ground attacks to interdict Communist infiltration through Laos precludes the achievement of military victory .
 Westmoreland denies, however, that the military situation is stalemated . He says the situation is not currently at a stalemate .
 Open arms minister Phan Quang Dan is dismissed for suggesting that the government hold direct talks with the National Liberation Front . Dan suggested that the talks should be held with the N.L. Front .
 Benjamin Spock and three others were accused of conspiring to aid, abet, and counsel draft registrants to violate the Selective Service Law . Spock and the others were found guilty of conspiracy to help draft registrant .
 President Thieu signs a general mobilization bill in Hue . Men between the ages of 18 and 43 will be subject to induction into the regular armed forces .
 Men between the ages of 44 and 50 and 16and 17-year-old youths will be eligible to serve part-time in the civilian People’s Self Defense Organization .
 An estimated 90,000 17-year-olds in the People’s Self Defense Organization may be transferred to the regular army . The People's Self Defense Organisation may be disbanded .
 By the end of 1968, the law will provide for an additional 200,000 men . It is believed to provide for the induction of an additional 100,000 troops .
 Deputy U.S. delegate to peace talks appeals to North Vietnam to scale down level of military violence . Cyrus Vance seeks to break impasse in negotiations by appealing to N. Vietnam for some sign that it is taking steps .
 Xuan Thuy rejects the initiative and repeats Hanoi’s demand that all U.S. bombing raids on North Vietnam be unconditionally terminated .
 Thuy also insists that the Saigon government be replaced by a coalition regime committed to a neutral foreign policy and eventual reunification . Thuy says Saigon should be replaced with a coalition government committed to neutral foreign policies and reunification.
 MACV announces that United States forces are departing the military base and attributes the pullback to a change in the military situation . MACV: The pullback is due to a military situation in the U.S.
 Allied forces are adopting a more “mobile posture,” thus making retention of the outpost at Khe Sanh unnecessary . To cope with increased NVA infiltration and activity in the DMZ area, Allied forces have adopted a more "mobile posture"
 Lieutenant Colonel Richard A McMahon denounces the “body count” as a “dubious and possibly dangerous” method of determining the enemy’s combat potential . Lt. McMahon: Body count is “a ‘possibly dangerous’ method .
 Prince Souvanna Phouma declares that the U.S. should continue to reject Hanoi’s demands for a bombing halt until North Vietnam agrees to withdraw its forces from Laos . The U.N. must continue to refuse to halt its bombing campaign until Hano
 Socialist Phan Ba Cam announces formation of new South Vietnamese political party . Vietnam People’s Force committed to ending the war peacefully, unifying North and South Vietnam, and building a socialist economy .
 At President Johnson’s request, Congress passes a $6 billion supplemental appropriations bill to sustain U.S. operations in Vietnam . The bill was passed by President Johnson at the request of President Johnson .
 South Vietnamese premier Tran Van Huong expresses concern that the U.S. is making too many concessions at the peace talks . Huong believes the North Vietnamese interpret the concessions as a sign of weakness . He says the United States has made too much concessions to end the war .
 South Vietnamese forces patrol the Saigon area uncover a huge arms cache containing rockets and other weapons . For the second time in three days, the arms cache is uncovered in the area .
 MACV believes that capture of the materiel has caused the Viet Cong to postpone plans for another assault on Saigon from Vietnam, July 1968 .
 General Westmoreland replaces General Harold K Johnson as army chief of staff . He replaces General Johnson as Army chief of Staff . General Johnson will be the first African African general to hold the post .
 MACV releases figures showing that more Americans were killed during the first six months of 1968 than in all of 1967 . MACV: More Americans killed in the first half of 1968 were killed in Saigon than in 1967 .
 United States troops conducting a sweep near Saigon uncover an enemy arms cache containing 56 Soviet and Chinese rockets . Three more caches were discovered two days later west and northwest of the capital .
 In 2 1 /2-hour-long battle, U.S. troops repulse combined North Vietnamese and Viet Cong attack on base at Dau Tieng, 40 miles northwest of Saigon . United States infantrymen from the 25th Infantry Division repulse a combined North Vietnam and
 President Thieu postpones a planned visit to the United States . Thieu announces that the possibility of another enemy offensive has caused him to postpone a planned U.S. visit .
 A formal complaint to the United Nations charges that Allied helicopters killed 14 Cambodians working in their rice fields more than 6,000 yards from the border . The U.N. complaint was filed against Allied helicopters that killed 14 .
 Le Quang Chanh reaffirms the NLF’s goal of overthrowing the present Saigon regime in a statement . He says no elections can be held to form a postwar government in South Vietnam until all United States and Allied forces have withdrawn .
 Bui Diem, chief South Vietnamese observer at the Paris peace talks, reiterates Saigon’s call for direct negotiations between North and South Vietnam . Diem: Saigon calls for direct talks between the two countries .
 Saigon fears U.S. and North Vietnam might conclude a settlement inimical to the South’s interests . His statement reflects a growing fear on the part of the Saigon government that the United States and North . Vietnam .
 The proposal calls for a mutual troop pullback and interposition of a neutral peacekeeping force . The withdrawal of all North Vietnamese and most Allied units from South Vietnam, free elections under international supervision, and direct negotiations on reunification .
 Defense Secretary Clifford visits South Vietnam to confer with U.S. and South Vietnamese leaders . Clifford visits Vietnam and South Vietnam for talks . Clifford: "It's a great honor for the United States to visit South Vietnam"
 A senior U.S. military source in Saigon reveals that enemy units have withdrawn toward the west . An attack on the capital has been postponed, the source says .
 President Johnson meets President Thieu in Honolulu to discuss relations between Washington and Saigon . President Johnson met Thieu to discuss U.S.-Saigon relations .
 Thieu states that he has “no apprehensions at all” concerning the United States commitment . Thieu says he has no apprehensions about the U.S. commitment to Vietnam .
 The two presidents also agree that South Vietnam “should be a full participant playing a leading role in discussions concerning the substance of a final settlement” to the conflict . South Vietnam should be a "full participant" in discussions, the presidents say .
 South Vietnam observes National Shame Day, the anniversary of the 1954 Geneva Accords . The 1954 Accords were signed by South Vietnam in 1954 .
 Ho Chi Minh marks the anniversary of the Geneva Accords by issuing an appeal to step up the war of resistance against U.S. imperialism . The U.N. should step up its own war against the United States imperialism, he says .
 Widows of South Vietnamese military officers and government officials killed during a tour of the Saigon battlefront on June 2 . U.S. authorities say what they say was a misdirected United States helicopter rocket . Widows say the U.N. deliberately murdered their husbands, all of
 A joint U.S.-South Vietnamese investigating board will confirm that a malfunctioning rocket was responsible for the deaths . Three days later, the board will also confirm that the rocket malfunctioned . The rocket is believed to have been carrying out an accident .
 North Vietnamese spokesman says U.S. remains "infinite obstinate" in support of Saigon government . Le says the United States is still determined to support the ‘puppet government” in Saigon .
 Task Force South is organized by combining a battalion from the 173rd Airborne Brigade and one from the 101st Airborne Division with logistics, aviation, and artillery units . Task force South is based in Fort Hood, Texas .
 TF South is stationed at Dalat in Tuyen Due Province and Phan Tiet in Binh Thuan Province, II Corps. TF South was stationed in Vietnam's second largest province .
 Truong Dinh Dzu was a peace candidate in the September 1967 presidential elections . He was sentenced to five years at hard labor for urging the formation of a coalition government as a step toward ending the war . Truong Dzu is a former peace candidate for Vietnam's first time .
 Three U.S. pilots released by Hanoi arrive in Laos and report that they have been well treated . They say they were treated well in Laos . The pilots say they are happy to return to Laos .
 Ambassador Averell Harriman informs North Vietnamese negotiators in Paris that the U.S. will reciprocate by turning over 14 seamen . Five days later, Ambassador Harrimans informs North Vietnam negotiators that the United States will reciprocately turn over 14 North Vietnamese seamen. The
 Harriman hopes that more prisoner exchanges can be arranged in the future . He also hopes that he hopes that the prisoner exchange will be more successful .
 A combined U.S.-ARVN task force conducts Operation Somerset Plain/Lam Son-246 in the A Shau Valley, Thua Thien Province, I Corps. The operation is part of a joint effort to combat the enemy .
 Operation Quyet Chien took place in Kien Giang Province, IV Corps . The operation was part of the U.S. 9th Infantry Division, Mobile Riverine Force, and Vietnamese marines .
 The Vietnam plank adopted during the convention calls for an honorable negotiated peace and “progressive de-Americanization” of the war . The plank calls for a negotiated peace .
 During the convention, Richard M Nixon and Spiro T Agnew are chosen as the presidential and vice presidential nominees for the upcoming election . Nixon and Agnew were both nominated for the election .
 This is the lowest weekly United States death toll since August 12,1967 . The death toll is lowest weekly U.S. death toll for the past week . This week's death toll was the lowest for the United States since August 1967 .
 F-100 Super Sabre jet accidentally strafes unit of 101st Airborne Division in A Shau Valley, killing eight and wounding five . Air Force jet strafs unit of the 101st . Airborne division in the area .
 Heavy fighting erupts again in Mekong Delta between VC and Allied troops . Allied troops are part of a 75-battalion force guarding infiltration routes into Saigon .
 XXIV Corps was established to coordinate U.S. Army combat operations in I Corps . XXIV was established in 1973 to coordinate operations in the I Corps. XXIV is the largest corps in the United States .
 Heavy fighting intensifies in and around the DMZ, as ARVN and U.S. troops engage a North Vietnamese battalion . North Vietnamese troops engage ARV and United States troops .
 U.S. Marines attack three strategic positions just south of the DMZ, killing 56 North Vietnamese soldiers . At the same time, United States Marines kill 56 North Vietnam soldiers . U.N. troops were killed in the attack .
 U.S. aircraft have flown 117,000 missions over North Vietnam since February 1965, dropping over 2 million tons of bombs and rockets . Men and supplies continue to pour into South Vietnam, but men and supplies are still pouring in .
 The North Vietnamese and Viet Cong launch a limited offensive with 19 separate attacks throughout South Vietnam . The attacks were the result of a joint offensive between the two sides .
 Communist troops attack key positions along the Cambodian border in Tay Ninh and Binh Long provinces, northwest of Saigon . Heavy fighting in the heaviest fighting in three months, the heaviest three months .
 U.S. reinforcements from the 25th Infantry Division are rushed to the scene . After a day of house-to-house fighting, the Communists are expelled from the city .
 A Harris survey indicates that 61 percent of those polled are against calling for a halt to the bombing . A Harris poll shows 61 percent want to end the bombing in Syria .
 For the first time in two months, Viet Cong forces launch a rocket attack on Saigon, killing 18 and wounding 59 . 18 people were killed and 59 wounded in the attack .
 Administration officials denounce this attack as a direct repudiation of President Johnson’s peace overture of August 19 . Administration officials say this attack is a repudiated of Johnson's August 19 overture .
 Communist forces launch rocket and mortar attacks on numerous cities, provincial capitals, and military installations . Communist forces attack numerous cities and provinces, including provincial capitals .
 The heaviest shelling is on the United States airfield at Danang and the cities of Hue and Quang Tri . The U.S. airfield is at the center of the heaviest shelling .
 Camp falls but is retaken by Allied relief column led by U.S. Special Forces troops on August 25 . Camp falls during World War II but is taken back by Allied forces on August 26 .
 Operation Tien Bo claimed 1,091 North Vietnamese and Viet Cong killed or wounded . ARVN 23rd Division conducted operation in Quang Due Province, II Corps, in Quan Due Province .
 On the 28th, this confrontation results in a contentious three-hour debate inside the convention hall while a full-scale riot erupts outside . Antiwar protesters battle with police and National Guardsmen outside the Convention hall .
 Vice President Hubert Humphrey and Senator Edmund Muskie from Maine are the party nominees for the upcoming election . The administration plank is adopted and ultimately the delegates choose Vice President Humphrey .
 Over 30 United States troops from the 101st Airborne Division are killed during a Viet Cong attack at Ap Trung Dau . Over 30 U.S. troops killed during the attack .
 North Vietnamese forces overrun a U.S. Special Forces camp at Ha Thanh, 14 miles west of Quang Ngai . Allied troops will retake the outpost three days later . North Vietnam forces overrun the camp .
 The United States 27th Marines of the 5th Marine Division, attached to the 1st Marines Division, leave South Vietnam . The U.S. 27th and 1st Marine Division left South Vietnam in March 1968 .
 Lieutenant Colonel William A Jones III leads a rescue mission of a downed pilot near Dong Hoi, North Vietnam . The rescue mission was the first of its kind in Vietnam .
 Colonel Jones attacks a nearby gun emplacement . Colonel Jones finds the downed pilot and attacks the nearby gun .
 On his second pass, Colonel Jones’s aircraft is hit and the cockpit of his Douglas A-1H is set ablaze . Colonel Jones's plane was hit and his cockpit was set alight by the fire .
 He then reports the exact position of the downed pilot before receiving medical treatment for his burns . He then returns to base and reports the location of the pilot before getting medical treatment .
 Colonel Jones will die in an aircraft accident in the United States before he can be presented with the Medal of Honor for his actions the day of the attempted rescue .
 The United States command orders the heaviest bombing in weeks along infiltration routes leading into Saigon . The U.S. command ordered the heaviest bombings in weeks . The bombing is believed to be targeting infiltration routes into the Vietnamese capital .
 Allied concern that North Vietnam will celebrate its annual National Day with another assault on the capital . North Vietnam is celebrating its National Day this year . Allied fears it will carry out another assault against the capital in the capital next month .
 Troops from the Americal Division and 2nd ARVN Division conduct Operation Champagne Grove in Quang Ngai Province, I Corps . Troops were deployed in the region during the operation . The operation is part of the I Corps.
 Action results in a major battle with a regiment from the 3rd NVA Division three miles northwest of Quang Ngai City . The battle took place in the area three miles from the city center .
 Brigadier General Truong Quang An becomes the first ARVN general killed in action when his aircraft is shot down near Due Lap . Brigadier general Truong quang An is the first Vietnamese general to be killed in a combat plane crash .
 At another point in the speech, the president reveals his concern over the mounting cost of the war . The president says he is concerned about the cost of war .
 A battalion from the 101st Airborne Division joins with the 54th ARVN Regiment in Operation Vinh Loc . The operation is a cordon and search of the island 15 miles east of Hue, I Corps. The 101st will be the first of its kind .
 Captured VC tell their interrogators that more than 80 percent of the Communist infrastructure on the island was wiped out during the operation . The operation wiped out the communist infrastructure .
 About 1,500 VC and PAVN troops launch a major attack on Tay Ninh in III Corps Tactical Zone . About 1.500 VC, PAV and . PAVn troops launched a major . attack in the region .
 Also on September 16, a convoy from the U.S. 25th Infantry Division is ambushed nine miles southeast of Tay Ninh . The convoy was ambushed by a small group of American soldiers .
 Major General Keith L Ware, commander of the 1st Infantry Division and Medal of Honor recipient in World War II, is killed in a helicopter crash near the Cambodian border in Binh Long Province, III Corps . Ware was killed in the helicopter crash .
 On September 17, 2,000 marines are airlifted into the area and B-52s, striking for the first time in a month, hit targets on both sides of the Ben Hai River, part of the demarcation between North and South Vietnam . The area is part
 An additional 4,000 marines attack into the buffer zone in a coordinated pincer movement designed to trap remaining Communist forces . Ten days later, an additional 2,000 troops attack into a buffer zone . The pincher movement was designed to traps remaining Communist troops .
 Major General Duong Van Minh argues that only the introduction of participatory democracy at the village level can restore unity in South Vietnam and create a political system .
 MACV defends use of defoliants in Vietnam at a news conference in Saigon . MACV claims their use in selected areas in South Vietnam has neither appreciably altered the country’s ecology, nor produced any harmful effects on human or animal life .
 A heated argument develops in the United Nations, when Secretarygeneral U Thant seems to encourage an anti-U.S. resolution .
 MACV discloses that the enemy has substantially increased its use of Cambodia as a staging area and sanctuary . The enemy has "substantially increased" use of the country, MACV says .
 Recent intelligence reports indicate that NVA-VC military activity in the region nearest Saigon has “increased threefold” since November 1967 . NVA and VC military activity has ‘increased’ in region near Saigon since then, reports say .
 A battle begins for the Special Forces camp at Thuong Due, 20 miles southwest of Danang . The camp is located 20 miles south of the city, about 20 miles from Danang.
 The Communists briefly capture the base before being driven out by air and artillery strikes . The Communists are driven out of the base by air, artillery strikes.
 The marines launch Operation Maui Peak on October 6 to relieve the base . They then besiege the base, but the base is then besieged by the U.S. troops . The base is surrounded by troops, but they are able to reach it .
 Hubert Humphrey says he will halt bombing of North if there is evidence of Communist willingness to restore DMZ . If elected, he would halt the bombing of the North if “evidence, direct or indirect, by deed or word” of . restoring the DMZ between North
 USS New Jersey arrives in Vietnamese waters and goes into action, shelling North Vietnamese positions in the DMZ with its 16-inch guns . The world's only active battleship, the world’s only active battle ship, arrives in Vietnam waters .
 General Curtis E LeMay, running mate of independent presidential candidate George Wallace, causes a storm of controversy by seeming to advocate using nuclear weapons in Vietnam . LeMay was George Wallace's running mate .
 A United States Army CH-47 helicopter collides with a United States C-7 Caribou transport aircraft over Camp Evans, 11 miles north of Flue . Twenty-four U.S. personnel die when the collision occurs .
 United States planes destroy 45 supply craft and 31 trucks and sever roads in more than 20 places . U.S. planes destroy supply craft, 31 trucks in heaviest raid over North Vietnam since July 2, United States says .
 United States Marines reoccupy the abandoned base at Khe Sanh to establish an artillery position to support ongoing search and destroy operations in the area . The U.S. Marines are reoccupying the base to establish a artillery position .
 A statement issued by the North Vietnamese Water Conservation Ministry charges that the U.S. is intensifying its air strikes against dikes, dams, and other water management projects . The statement says the United States has intensified its strikes on dikes and dams .
 Operation Sealords (Southeast Asia Lake, Ocean, River, and Delta Strategy) is launched with the objectives of cutting enemy supply lines from Cambodia and disrupting enemy base areas in the Mekong Delta and other inland waterways . U.S. Navy-South Vietnamese navy operation is launched in
 Operations will be conducted in conjunction with the U.S. 9th Infantry Division’s Riverine Assault Force, ARVN, and South Vietnamese marines . Operations will also be conducted with the United States .
 The U.S. Navy’s participation in the operations will cease in 1971, when the operation will become a South Vietnamese navy responsibility .
 North Vietnamese representative in Paris asks Ambassador Harriman whether the U.S. would “stop the bombing if we give you an affirmative clear answer to the question of Saigon participation” in the talks . U.N. ambassador: Saigon bombing would stop if U.
 President Johnson turns to General Abrams and Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker in Saigon for their assessment of the query . Harriman immediately relays the proposal to President Johnson, who turns it down .
 Johnson instructs Bunker to present the matter to President Thieu . When they respond that they “interpret the exchange to mean that Hanoi is ready for a shift in tactics from the battlefield to the conference table”
 The South Vietnamese ieader agrees to a bombing halt, but insists that Allied military pressure in South Vietnam be continued . The South Vietnam ieader agreed to a cease-fire, but insisted that Allied pressure continued .
 After rumors of an attempted coup, President Thieu asserts on national television that his government is under no threat . Thieu: "I'm not going to be afraid. I'm not scared. I'll be happy to be safe"
 ARVN troops in the capital were put on a state of maximum readiness on Monday . The previous day, however, ARN troops had been put on state-of-prepared .
 Army and Marine Corps will be sending about 24,000 men back to Vietnam for involuntary second tours . Officials cite length of war, high turnover of personnel resulting from one-year duty tours, and tight supply of experienced officers .
 MACV reports that NVA regular troops appear to have withdrawn to border areas to regroup and that infiltration into the South has declined . MACV also reports that communist military activity has decreased in recent months .
 The enemy is using the current battlefield lull to prepare for another offensive, U.S. officials say . They do not reject the possibility that this is a political signal intended to break the present impasse in the Paris negotiations .
 Ambassador Harriman suggests that Hanoi would be eligible for various forms of economic aid if a negotiated settlement can be reached . Ambassador says that a breakthrough in the talks may be imminent . Ambassador: "Hanoi is a very small country in a very large part of the world
 President Thieu insists that North Vietnam agree to three conditions prior to a bombing halt . North Vietnam must respect neutrality of the DMZ, stop shelling South Vietnamese cities and towns, and agree to South Vietnamese participation in Paris talks .
 The ARVN 2nd Regiment conducts Operation Lam Son-271 in Quang Tri Province . The operation is part of the ongoing ongoing conflict in Vietnam's Quang tri Province .
 President Thieu states that he is no longer against a cessation of bombing . Appearing to soften his previous stance somewhat, he says he no longer opposes a cessation .
 Operation Henderson Hill is a continuation of Operation Mamaluke Thrust . The U.S. 5th Marine Regiment conducts a search and clear effort in Quang Nam Province, I Corps. The operation is part of the ongoing search for the missing .
 U.S. 1st Infantry Division troops attacked in Tay Ninh Province, 59 miles north of Saigon near the Cambodian border . First major enemy ground assault in over a month .
 U.S. B-52s conduct 22 strikes in the Tay Ninh area in an effort to disperse a reported massing of North Vietnamese forces . North Vietnam forces are reported to be massing in the area .
 An estimated 50,000 persons march through the streets of London protesting the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War ended in 1968 .
 The U.S. Army’s 1st Cavalry Division begins its move from I Corps Tactical Zone to an area northwest of Saigon in III Corps . The division will be moved to a new area in the north of Vietnam .
 General Abrams secretly returns to Washington and in talks with President Johnson states that, given current battlefield conditions, he can accept the military consequence of a complete cessation of the bombing of North Vietnam .
 President Johnson announces on national television that, due to favorable developments in the Paris talks, he has ordered a complete halt to the bombing and naval bombardment of North Vietnam . Five days before the presidential election, Johnson announced on national TV that he has stopped bombing .
 Domestically, the president’s action draws widespread acclaim with both major presidential candidates expressing their full support . Both major presidential presidential candidates express their support for the action .
 President Thieu issues a communique declaring that the U.S. has acted unilaterally in its decision to halt the bombing . The reaction in Saigon, however, is much more subdued .
 Operation Rolling Thunder comes to an end with President Johnson’s announcement of a bombing halt . President Johnson announced the end of the bombing campaign on June 4, 1964 .
 After three years and nine months, the results of the bombing campaign are unimpressive . The bombing campaign has been ongoing for more than three years .
 304,000 sorties have been flown over North Vietnam with little impact on the war in the South . A total of 304,00 sorties were flown over the North Vietnam border .
 United States Air Force launches Operation Commando Hunt, a joint-service effort to interdict enemy supply lines along the 1,700-mile length of the Ho Chi Minhh Trail . The U.S. Air Force launched the operation in 2007 .
 The program focuses on identifying, infiltrating, and destroying the VC infrastructure . The program targets the upper echelon of NLF political cadres .
 The North Vietnamese will later admit that the program was very effective in targeting the VC infrastructure . It becomes one of the most controversial operations undertaken by United States personnel in Vietnam .
 U.S. officials in Washington disclose that there will be a threefold increase in the number of air strikes along the Ho Chi Minh trail in Laos to compensate for the cessation of bombing over North Vietnam .
 President Johnson is believed to have approved intensified attacks on enemy infiltration routes to obtain support from U.S. military commanders .
 The United States mission in Saigon initiates the Le Loi program, an intensified civic action campaign . The campaign was intended to repair the damage done by the enemy’s 1968 offensive .
 President Thieu states that South Vietnam will boycott the Paris talks because the NLF has been admitted as a separate delegation . In a speech before the South Vietnamese National Assembly, president Thieu said that South Vietnamese will boycott Paris talks . South Vietnam is boycotting Paris talks due to the NL
 Nixon supporter influenced Thieu and Ky by offering them better terms after Nixon was elected if they refused to participate . It is later revealed that a prominent Nixon supporter offered Thieu better terms .
 Elements of the United States 1st Cavalry Division and the 1st ARVN Division conduct Operation Comanche Falls III, a combined sweep of an area approximately 20 miles northwest of Hue in Thua Thien Province, I Corps. elements of the U.S. First Cavalry
 The United States 1st Cavalry Division, 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment, and two ARVN Ranger battalions conduct Operation Sheridan Sabre in Binh Long, Phuoc Long, and Tay Ninh Provinces, III Corps. The United. States 1th Caval
 The objective of the operation is to block North Vietnamese infiltration from Cambodia . The operation is being carried out in Cambodia and Cambodia .
 President Thieu proposes a two-sided conference: “Each side is to consist of a single delegation headed by the principal party.”
 "Our delegation will include the United States and, if necessary, our other allies," says President Obama . "We will send a delegation to Washington"
 The other side is the side of the Communist aggressors, to be headed by North Vietnam . North Vietnam is headed by the Vietnamese government .
 U.S. B-52s conduct air strikes against a suspected enemy force of 35,000 men about five miles from the Cambodian border, in Tay Ninh Province .
 Saigon files a protest with the International Control Commission . Saigon government files a claim that enemy forces have shelled population centers in 14 provinces since the bombing halt .
 North Vietnamese guns firing from inside the DMZ, shell U.S. Marine positions just south of the buffer zone for the first time since President Johnson announced the halt . Marine air and artillery counterattack destroys 10 enemy bunkers . North Vietnam guns, firing from . inside the . DM
 President-elect Richard Nixon was briefed at the White House by key members of the Johnson administration . Nixon was inaugurated in 1964 .
 He promises that he wili let Johnson speak for him on the war until he assumes office in January 1969 .
 Defense Secretary Clifford warns that if South Vietnam does not agree soon to participate in the talks, the U.S. may conduct negotiations without them . Clifford: The United States may conduct talks without South Vietnam participation .
 Johnson administration says recent North Vietnamese artiilery strikes from inside the DMZ have violated the agreement upon which the bombing halt is based . The Johnson administration charges that recent . North Vietnamese strikes inside the . DMZ violate the agreement .
 A North Vietnamese official in Paris later denies the accusation in a statement . North Vietnam says the U.S. has violated the buffer zone with naval and ground fire . The North Vietnam official says the United States violated the zone .
 North Korea says U.S. reconnaissance flights over the North constitute further violations . The North says the U.N. has violated its sovereignty by flying over North Korea .
 The South Vietnamese government closes down a Saigon newspaper for publishing a detailed account of Defense Secretary Clifford’s criticisms of the Thieu regime . The paper was published in Saigon for its defense secretary's criticisms of Thieu .
 It is the 10th newspaper that the government has suspended or shut down in the past three weeks . The government has shut down 10 newspapers in three weeks, including one newspaper .
 Aerial observations also reveal that work crews have repaired all bombed-out bridges between the 17th and 19th parallels . Aerial observations show that work has been completed on all bombed out bridges .
 The Cambodian government charges that South Vietnamese patrol boats shelled the village of Prek Koeus in Kampot Province, killing 12 civilians and wounding another 12 . The government says 12 civilians were killed and another 12 wounded in the attack .
 President Johnson presents Medals of Honor to Capt. John Sutter . Capt. Sutter was awarded the Medal of Honor for his bravery in World War II .
 U.S. Marines conduct Operation Meade River, a cordon and search operation in support of the Le Loi, or “accelerated pacification,” program in Quang Nam Province, I Corps. The operation is part of a larger effort to pacify
 U.S. 9th Marines place a cordon around an area believed to contain 1,400 enemy troops . They then move in to engage the trapped NVA and VC forces . The area is located 10 miles south of Danang .
 Hanoi Radio broadcasts an NLF directive calling for a new offensive to “utterly destroy” Allied forces . NLF calls for new offensive calling for an attack on Allied forces to ‘utterly’ destroy’ Allied forces.
 Operation Speedy Express took place in the Mekong Delta south of Saigon . U.S. 9th Infantry Division, including the Mobile Riverine Force, conducted the operation .
 The U.S. 1st Marine Division conducts Operation Taylor Common in the An Hoa Basin in Quang Nam Province, I Corps. The operation is part of I Corps' annual combat exercises in Vietnam .
 U.S. mission in Saigon declares 73. percent of South Vietnamese live in relatively secure areas . William Colby, head of CORDS, visits RF/PF troops . The United States says 73 percent of the South Vietnamese are in relatively safe areas .
 North Vietnamese and NLF demands that the four delegations to the Paris negotiations be seated at separate tables . Nguyen Cao Ky refuses to consent to any seating plan that will place the NLF on an equal footing with Saigon .
 The issue is one of several procedural points, to include the shape of the table, that will deadlock the talks . The shape of a table will be one of the key procedural points that will be deadlocked .
 U.S. B-52s pound numerous targets north of Saigon in apparent effort to disrupt an expected enemy offensive . U.N. forces bombed targets in an apparent attempt to disrupt the expected enemy attack .
 Defense Secretary Clifford says U.S. has no obligation to keep 540,000 troops in Vietnam until political settlement is concluded . Clifford suggests that the administration and the North Vietnamese arrange a de-escalation once talks begin .
 The Americal Division conducts Operation Fayette Canyon in Quang Nam Province, I Corps. I Corps . I Corps is based in the region .
 The Supreme Court refuses to review the federal government’s constitutional right to send reservists to Vietnam in the absence of an official declaration of war . 57 military reservists appealed to the Supreme Court .
 Senator George McGovern characterizes Nguyen Cao Ky as a “little tinhorn dictator” in a statement complaining that Saigon is deliberately trying to delay the peace talks . McGovern: Saigon has deliberately tried to delay peace talks with Vietnam .
 A Gallup Poll indicates that the majority of Americans are now ready to let South Vietnam take over the fighting and assume a leading role in the peace talks . The poll also indicates that many Americans are ready to allow South Vietnam to lead the peace negotiations .
 U.S. can accept neither military defeat nor externally imposed change in the South Vietnamese government, he says . Once North Vietnam has withdrawn its forces from the South, the United States has no obligation to maintain the Saigon government by force, he writes .
 Allied forces announce that they will not observe a 72-hour New Year’s cease-fire unilaterally declared by the Viet Cong .
 14,314 U.S. military personnel have been killed during this year, bringing the total American losses since 1959 to 30,610 . United States military personnel in Vietnam number 536,100; 14, 314 killed in Vietnam this year .
 20,482 South Vietnamese troops killed during 1968, bringing to 88,343 the total number of South Vietnamese military personnel killed in action to date . South Vietnamese strength has increased to 820,000 .
 Estimated NVA/VC losses for the year are 35,774 KIA, bringing the total number of reported killed since 1961 to 439,000 . The total number killed in the U.S. since 1961 has been 438,000 since 1961 .
 Operation Rice Farmer in the Mekong Delta, IV Corps; operation will result in 1,860 enemy soldiers reported killed . 1,800 enemy soldiers were reported killed in the operation .
 Operation Quyet Thang is a multi-division yearlong search and clear operation in support of pacification programs in the Mekong Delta, IV Corps . The United States 9th Infantry Division and the ARVN 7th, 9th, and 21st Divisions conduct Operation Qu
 U.S. and North Vietnamese negotiators meet in Paris for four hours in an attempt to break the impasse in peace talks . Talks have stalled due to a controversy over the shape of the conference table .
 President-elect Nixon announces that he will ask Ellsworth Bunker to remain at his post as ambassador to South Vietnam . Bunker was asked to remain in his post by Nixon . Bunker died at the age of 92 .
 President-elect Nixon names Henry Cabot Lodge to succeed W Averell Harriman as chief U.S. negotiator at the Paris peace talks . Lodge will succeed Harrimans as chief United States negotiator at peace talks in Paris .
 Le Minh Tri, education minister in the government of South Vietnam, dies 10 hours after a bomb is thrown in his car . The education minister was killed by a bomb that was thrown into his car in Vietnam .
 Tri had made many enemies in fighting corruption in the educational system and had received many death threats . Police refuse to specifically blame the VC as Tri had been making enemies in the education system . Tri had received death threats in the past, police say .
 The VC ambush and wipe out a nine-man U.S. patrol near Dong Tam in the Mekong Delta . The VC also mortar several town and military bases elsewhere in the region .
 Sweden announces it will establish full diplomatic relations with North Vietnam . Sweden will become first country to establish diplomatic ties with the communist country . Sweden has already established diplomatic relations between North Vietnam and Sweden .
 A U.S. helicopter was shot down by Cambodian antiaircraft gunners . A United States helicopter is shot down in the Cambodian desert .
 Prince Norodom Sihanouk charges that the helicopter intruded into Cambodian territory . Cambodia's prime minister says the helicopter was in Cambodia's territory .
 All special leaves for South Vietnamese troops are cancelled . In preparation to counter an anticipated enemy offensive, all special leaves were cancelled .
 U.S. Marines and troops from the 2nd ARVN Division land on the Batangan Peninsula . Operation Bold Mariner is the largest amphibious assault of the war . The operation is part of a search mission in Quang Ngai Province .
 During the course of Bold Mariner and Russell Beach, more than 12,000 civilians are checked out and relocated off the Batangan Peninsula to the Quang Ngai City area .
 President Johnson urges the country to press its “quest for peace” in Vietnam . In a combined State of the Union address and final message to the nation, he urges the U.S. to press for peace . Johnson's final message: "Quest for peace" in Vietnam
 A government spokesman proposes that U.S. forces start a “gradual, phased withdrawal” from South Vietnam . A spokesman proposes a ‘gradual withdrawal’ from the South Vietnam.
 President Johnson sends his final budget to Congress calling for Vietnam war-related expenditures of $25,733,000,000 for the fiscal year 1970 . President Johnson's final budget calls for Vietnam War-related spending of $24,000 per cent .
 This includes a $3,500,000,000 reduction in spending for the war, the first since the U.S. entered the conflict in Vietnam . This is the first reduction in the war budget since the United States entered Vietnam .
 Agreement reached in Paris for the opening of expanded peace talks . Representatives of the United States, South Vietnam, North Vietnam, and the National Liberation Front will sit at a circular table without nameplates, flags or markings .
 This compromise allows the U.S. and South Vietnam to speak only of two sides, while allowing North Vietnam and the NLF to speak of four sides . The United States, South Vietnam and North Vietnam will speak of only two sides .
 President Thieu confirms that he has requested withdrawal of some U.S. troops from South Vietnam in 1969 . Thieu says he requested the withdrawal of troops from Vietnam in the same year .
 The expanded Paris peace talks open . Negotiators agree to hold the first plenary session on substantive issues early next week . The first session is expected to be held in Paris early next Friday .
 The United States 9th Marine Regiment conducts Operation Dewey Canyon north of the A Shau and Da Krong valleys in Quang Tri and Thua Thien Provinces, I Corps. The operation is part of the U.S. 9th Marines' "Operation Dewey
 The purpose of the operation is to disrupt enemy logistics and base areas threatening Hue . The operation was launched in 2007 in Hue, Vietnam .
 Saigon city government bans firecrackers during the lunar new year . The VC used firecracker noise during Tet in 1968 to conceal its attack in 1968 .
 The first fully attended meeting of the formal Paris peace talks was held . The first meeting was held at the end of last week's Paris summit .
 Lodge suggests withdrawal of ‘external’ military forces and early release of prisoners of war . Lodge also suggests a mutual withdrawal of "external" military forces . Lodge: Mutual withdrawal of 'external' military forces is a good idea .
 They demand that a reduction in the fighting must be tied to a political settlement . They say a reduction of fighting is tied to political negotiations .
 The UN Secretariat receives documents and charges made by the Cambodian government that U.S. and South Vietnamese forces killed and wounded civilians on Cambodian territory on December 14 and during three raids in November 1968 .
 A three-month pacification program ends as officials report that one million South Vietnamese have been added to those under the ‘relatively secure” control of the Saigon government . Officials say one million people have now been added .
 A goal is set for the remainder of 1969 to bring 90 percent of the South Vietnamese population under government control . The goal is to bring the country under control .
 The United States Navy turns over 25 heavily-armed river boats to the South Vietnamese navy . The U.S. Navy turns the 25 heavily armed river boats over to Vietnam .
 An American troop reduction in Vietnam is high on his list of priorities, says President Nixon . There will have to be progress in the peace talks before he can announce any reduction, he says .
 The United States and South Vietnam urge North Vietnam and the NLF to reconsider their proposal to take military steps to reduce the fighting . North Vietnam, NLF negotiators restate their earlier rejection and accuse the U.S of trying to separate the military questions from the political problems .
 South Vietnamese vice president Nguyen Cao Ky says his government will negotiate a political settlement with the Viet Cong after North Vietnam withdraws its troops from South Vietnam . North Vietnam has withdrawn its forces from Vietnam in 2007 .
 A Gallup poll indicates that the number of people who want the U.S. to pull out of Vietnam immediately has risen from 21 to 35 percent of the population . The poll shows that 35 percent want to withdraw from Vietnam immediately .
 Allied troop strength reaches an all-time high of 1,610,500 . There are now 539,000 American soldiers in South Vietnam . Allied troops in Vietnam now number 1,600,000 .
 Operation Toan Thang III was an effort to maintain pressure on the enemy following the 1968 Tet Offensive . U.S. and South Vietnamese forces conduct multiple search and destroy operations throughout the III Corps .
 President Nixon orders a full investigation to determine whether the attacks violate the accord that was responsible for the U.S. bombing halt of North Vietnam on November 1, 1968 . President Nixon responds to the series of enemy attacks .
 Communist forces continue shelling towns and military bases, but the attacks diminish as only about 60 targets are struck . Communist forces still continue to shell towns, military bases .
 ARVN 2nd Division conducts Operation Quyet Thang-22 in Quang Ngai Province, I Corps . The ARVn 2nd division conducted the operation in the province . The operation is part of the I Corps.
 Communist troops assault two major installations near Saigon . Communist troops shell more than 50 towns and bases in the fourth consecutive day of attacks . More than 50 cities and bases are attacked in four days .
 The 25th Infantry Division headquarters base at Cu Chi was hit by sappers . 38 U.S. troops were killed in the attack, including 38 Americans .
 Two U.S. positions just south of the DMZ come under heavy attack . Meanwhile, two United States positions in the area are attacked by the Taliban .
 Thirty-six U.S. Marines are killed during one attack by the NVA suicide squad . The Marines were killed in the attack . The NVA is known for its brutality and brutality .
 The United States losses are described as the highest in a single battle in nearly six months . The U.S. losses described as as the most in the past six months.
 North Vietnam also denies that it agreed to any conditions in return for a bombing halt . North Vietnam denies that they agreed to a halt in exchange for a cease-fire deal .
 The United States argues that the post-Tet attacks violate the U.S.-North Vietnamese understanding that led to a halt of the bombing of North Vietnam . The U.N. says the shelling of population centers in South Vietnam violates the understanding between the two nations .
 U.S. Marines conduct Operation Purple Martin in Quang Tri Province, I Corps. The operation is part of the U.N. Vietnam's first major operation in Vietnam .
 Operation Kentucky Jumper is a continuation of Nevada Eagle aimed at eliminating enemy base areas, lines of communication, and infiltration routes . Troops from the United States 101st Airborne Division and 1st ARVN Division conduct the operation in Thua Thien Province .
 President Nixon meets with Ambassador Lodge and South Vietnamese vice president Nguyen Cao Ky in Paris . Nixon was in Paris at the time of the visit .
 President Nixon declares that the U.S. “will not tolerate” additional attacks . Nixon warns that an appropriate response will be made . Nixon: The United States will not tolerate further attacks .
 Communist forces fire seven rockets into Saigon, resulting in 22 civilian deaths . 22 civilians killed and a large number of wounded . The rockets were fired by Communist forces .
 Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Earle Wheeler arrive in South Vietnam for a five-day visit . The visit is part of a tour of South Vietnam by the U.S. military .
 Ambassador Lodge reminds North Vietnam and the NLF that the understanding that led to the bombing halt is still in effect . Ambassador Lodge says the agreement is still under effect .
 Prince Norodom Sihanouk says he will release four U.S. pilots, captured after their observation plane was downed on February 12, but protests the violation of Cambodian airspace . Prince Norroodom says he plans to release the pilots but protests violation of Cambodiaian
 Communist gunners increase attacks on military targets, striking about 50 locations . Ground fighting also increases as ground fighting also intensifies .
 I Corps seize about a dozen hilltops just north of Dong Ha, as part of Operation Dewey Canyon, begun in late January . Elsewhere in I Corps, marines seize about 12 hilltops near Dong Ha .
 Communist gunners shell 35 military positions and six civilian communities . Communist gunner shell 35 . military positions, six civilian . communities .
 President Thieu establishes five new cabinet posts and fills several other government positions in a further consolidation of power . The new government posts are part of a further consolidating of power in Vietnam .
 Four U.S. pilots, captured by Cambodian forces, arrive in Thailand after a letter from President Nixon to Prince Sihanouk brings them freedom . President Nixon wrote a letter to the Prince of Cambodia to secure their release .
 President Nixon says that there is no prospect for a U.S. troop reduction in the foreseeable future . Nixon: No prospect for troop reduction because of the enemy offensive .
 The prospects for withdrawal will hinge on the level of enemy activity, progress in the Paris talks, and the ability of the South Vietnamese to defend themselves, he says . The prospect of withdrawal will depend heavily on progress in Paris talks .
 United States Marines move about one mile into the southern section of the DMZ . It is the first U.S. military force in the area since November 1968 .
 Fighting breaks out three miles north of Gio Linh after a United States patrol observes Communist rocket emplacements firing into South Vietnam . U.S. patrol observes rockets fired into Vietnam from North Vietnam .
 Operation Maine Crag is a complementary operation to Dewey Canyon . Troops from the United States 5th Infantry Division, United States Marines, 2nd ARVN Regiment, and 7th ARVVN Cavalry conduct the operation in the southwest corner of Quang Tri as a
 Ho Chi Minh urges the Vietnamese people and armed forces to press the fight until the United States is defeated . Ho Chi-Minh: "The Vietnamese people, armed forces and . armed forces should press the . fight against the US."
 Senator George McGovern accuses President Nixon of continuing the “tragic course” of the Johnson administration . McGovern: Nixon continues to continue the ‘tragic’ course’ of the administration .
 Cuba establishes formal diplomatic relations with the National Liberation Front . Cuba establish formal diplomatic ties with the N.L. Front . Cuban President Castro Castro Castro was assassinated by the Liberation Front in 1968 .
 The United States begins the covert and illegal bombing of Cambodia by U.S. B-52 bombers striking staging areas and troop concentrations in eastern Cambodia to a depth of five miles from Vietnam border .
 The first mission targeting Base Area 353, formally designated Operation Breakfast, was approved by President Nixon at a meeting of the National Security Council on March 15 . Operation Breakfast was the first mission to target the base .
 Additional missions targeting other base areas are code-named Supper, Lunch, Dessert, and Snack . Additional missions are code named Supper and Lunch .
 The series of B-52 strikes inside Cambodia become known as the ‘Menu’ bombings . The bombings were the first of its kind in the country .
 A total of 3,630 flights over Cambodia will drop 110,000 tons of bombs over a 14-month period through April 1970 . The bombs were dropped over Cambodia over the course of the year .
 Secretary of Defense Laird asks for $156,000,000 for a program to increase the capability of South Vietnamese troops . Laird: Program would allow them to replace U.S. forces even before all outside forces have been withdrawn .
 A federal grand jury indicts eight persons on charges of conspiracy to incite riot during the 1968 Democratic convention in Chicago . The indictment is under anti-riot provisions of the 1968 Civil Rights Act .
 Eight policemen are also indicted, seven on charges of assaulting demonstrators . Eight policemen were also indicted . Seven of them were arrested in the incident .
 Operation Quyet Thang-25 is conducted by the ARVN 4th Regiment in Quang Ngai Province, I Corps . The ARVn 4 Regiment is conducting the operation in I Corps I Corps.
 A Gallup poll of 1,500 Americans indicates that 32 percent favor greatly escalating the war or “going all-out” 26 percent favor pulling out, 19 percent favor continuation of current policy . 21 percent have no opinion .
 In Washington, D.C., nine antiwar demonstrators, including five Roman Catholic clergymen, are arrested after ransacking Dow Chemical offices . Five Roman Catholics are arrested in Washington, DC .
 President Nixon nominates Lieutenant General William B Rosson as deputy commander of U.S. forces in Vietnam . Rosson nominates him for a fourth star .
 Women Strike for Peace demonstrators picket Washington, D.C., in the first large antiwar demonstration since Nixon’s inauguration . First large protest since Nixon's inauguration .
 U.S. officials find a mass grave near Hue containing at least 57 bodies of civilians killed by the Communists in last year’s Tet Offensive . The mass grave is believed to contain 57 bodies believed to have been killed by Communists .
 Operation Oklahoma Hills clears North Vietnamese troops from the area southwest of Danang in Quang Nam Province, I Corps . Operation OKH Hills was a U.S. effort to clear the area from North Vietnam troops . Operation OkH Hills is one of the most successful operations in Operation Oklahoma
 B-52 bomber raids in South Vietnam will be decreased by more than 10 percent as a result of further cuts in next year’s defense budget .
 The Liberation News Agency claims that the ongoing offensive has “shattered” the strategic plan conceived by General Abrams following the 1968 Tet offensive . General Abrams' strategic plan was conceived following the Tet offensive in 1968 .
 Laird: U.S. is moving to ‘Vietnamize’ the war as rapidly as possible . Laird warns it does not serve the United States’ purpose to discuss troop withdrawals while the enemy is conducting an offensive . He says the U.N.
 The weekend of antiwar protests ends with demonstrations and parades in San Francisco, Los Angeles, Washington, D.C. and other cities .
 President Thieu offers the enemy a policy of “national reconciliation” in which former Viet Cong members would enjoy full political rights in exchange for withdrawal of North Vietnamese troops from South Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia . North Vietnamese forces would pull out of South Vietnam and Laos, Cambodia .
 Thieu stresses that Viet Cong members will be able to participate in South Vietnamese politics only as individuals and not as members of the NLF or any other official Communist party . Thieu: Viet Cong will not be allowed to join the Communist Party .
 MACV reports that five waves of B-52s hit suspected enemy camps near the Cambodian border . MACV: Five waves of planes hit suspected camps near Cambodia's border .
 The Chicago Eight were indicted on March 20 on federal charges of conspiracy to incite riot at the 1968 Democratic convention in Chicago . They plead not guilty . The Chicago 8 have pleaded not guilty to the charges .
 Workers uncover 65 bodies from a grave near Hue, apparent victims of Viet Cong execution squads in the city during the 1968 Tet offensive . The bodies are believed to have been the victims of execution squads .
 The Communist offensive continues with 45 mortar and rocket attacks during the night . 45 mortar, rocket attacks carried out during night attacks .
 Increased ground fighting is reported in the Mekong Delta and in the area northwest of Saigon .
 Operation Washington Green I-II is part of a pacification operation in the An Lao Valley of Binh Dinh Province, II Corps . The U.S. 173rd Airborne Brigade and 4th Infantry Division were part of the operation . The operation was part of Operation Washington
 Sihanouk reports that he is ready to resume diplomatic relations with the U.S. He says he's ready to return diplomatic ties with the United States .
 At the 13th plenary session, the Paris talks continue to show no progress . Communist negotiators reject Allied proposals for mutual troop withdrawals and repeat their earlier demand that United States forces must leave unconditionally and at once .
 President Nixon says prospects for peace in Vietnam have improved since he took office . He cites political stability of Saigon government and improvement in the South Vietnamese armed forces . Nixon says he feels peace prospects have improved .
 ARVN 22nd Division conducts Operation Dan Thang-69 in Binh Dinh Province, II Corps . The ARVn 22nd division conducts Operation . Operation . The operation is part of the II Corps.
 The United States turns over the first 20 of 60 jet fighter-bombers to be transferred to the South Vietnamese air force . The U.S. turns over 20 of the 60 jets to the Vietnam Air Force .
 A new political party is formed in Saigon opposed to both communism and critical of President Thieu . A new party was formed to oppose the president and criticize him .
 The party is officially called the Progressive Nationalist Movement . It is headed by Dr. Dr. David Cameron . Dr. Cameron is the leader of the party's largest party .
 Nguyen Ngoc Huy, a member of South Vietnam’s delegation to the Paris talks, is a key member of the South Vietnam delegation to Paris . Huy is one of the country's representatives at the Paris summit .
 Operation Putnam Tiger is a continuation of screening efforts along the South Vietnam/Cambodian border in Kontum and Pleiku Provinces, II Corps. The United States 4th Infantry Division conducts Operation Putman Tiger . Operation Putnam Tiger is part of a screening
 United States Marines and North Vietnamese forces clash between Cam Lo and “The Rockpile” in Quang Tri Province, I Corps. North Vietnam forces clash with U.S. Marines and N.V. forces . U.N. troops clash with North Vietnamese troops in
 Eight Marines were killed and 17 wounded; 14 North Vietnamese soldiers were killed . Eight Marines died and 17 were wounded in the attack; 14 N. Vietnamese soldiers also died .
 U.S. planes and artillery attack North Vietnamese gun positions in Cambodia near the border . Communist assault on a United States artillery base on the frontier on the border follows a Communist assault .
 Prince Sihanouk withdraws his assent to the resumption of diplomatic relations with the United States . The U.S. fails to mention its stand regarding the status of a group of offshore islands, including Dao Phu Duoc, claimed by both Cambodia and South Vietnam
 Operation Virginia Ridge aims to prevent further infiltration across the DMZ in northern Quang Tri Province, I Corps . The U.S. 9th Marine Regiment of the 3rd Marine Division conducted the operation . The operation is part of the U.N. effort to stop further infiltration into
 George Aiken urges the Nixon administration to begin an immediate withdrawal of U.S. forces from South Vietnam . The speech is widely regarded as the end of a self-imposed moratorium on criticism .
 Beijing says four U.S. jets bombed the southern Chinese town of Nin Mong on May 2 . The town is 20 miles north of the North Vietnamese border . Beijing says the United States bombed Nin Mong, 20 miles from the North Vietnam border .
 U.S. helicopter crashes and burns 75 miles north of Saigon, killing 34 soldiers . It is believed to be the worst helicopter disaster of the war . 34 soldiers died in the crash .
 The NLF presents a 10-point program for an “overall solution” to the war, calling for an unconditional withdrawal of U.S. and Allied troops from Vietnam . South Vietnam to setde its own affairs “without foreign interference,” the NLF
 Henry Kissinger, presidential assistant for national security affairs, contacts J Edgar Hoover, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, asking him to find the governmental sources of Beecher’s article . Within hours, Henry Kissinger had been informed of the government sources of the article .
 General Alexander Haig coordinates the FBI wire tapping of the telephones of a number of reporters and National Security Council staff members . During the next two years, Haig, a key Kissinger assistant, coordinates the tapping of telephones . Haig was one of Kissinger's key aides .
 The Foreign Ministry in Saigon says South Vietnam is prepared to discuss three of the NLF’s 10 points . The exchange of captives, the restoration of the neutrality of the DMZ and the application of the 1962 agreement on Laos .
 The United States 5th Marines engage North Vietnamese troops near Hill 67 in the ‘Arizona’ area, about five miles northeast of An Hoaa . The U.S. Marines were in an effort to defend the area’s rice fields .
 The United States 9th Marine Regiment, 3rd Marine Division, and elements of the 101st Airborne Division conduct Operation Apache Snow in western Thua Thien Province, I Corps . The U.S. 9th and 3rd Marines were involved in the operation .
 The purpose of the 2,800-man sweep of the A Shau Valley is to cut off the North Vietnamese there and stop any infiltration from Laos that threatens Hue to the northeast and Danang to the southeast .
 In fierce fighting against the 29th NVA Regiment, the mountain comes under heavy Allied air strikes, artillery barrages, and 10 bloody infantry assaults . The mountain was attacked by the NVA, directed by Major General Melvin Zais .
 Friendly fire from two Cobra gunships kills two and wounds 35 at command post of the 3rd Battalion, 187th Infantry . 35 were wounded in the attack, including two killed by friendly fire from Cobra .
 United States forces will abandon the hill on May 27 . More than 1,000 North Vietnamese have reoccupied the hill . U.S. intelligence will report on June 17 that more than a thousand North Vietnamese are reoccupied .
 In a Communist attack on a U.S. camp near the Laotian border, 20 Americans are killed and 65 wounded . 20 North Vietnamese are reported killed in the attack . 20 Americans were killed, 65 wounded in the incident .
 President Nixon responds to the 10-point plan offered by the National Liberation Front . Nixon's first full-length report to the American people on the Vietnam War was published in 1968 .
 Nixon proposes a phased withdrawal of major portions of U.S., Allied, and North Vietnamese forces from South Vietnam over a 12-month period . The remaining non-South Vietnamese forces would withdraw to enclaves and abide by a cease-fire until withdrawals are completed .
 Nixon also insists that North Vietnamese forces withdraw from Cambodia and Laos at the same time . Nixon also recommends internationally supervised elections for South Vietnam .
 Nixon’s offer of a “simultaneous start on withdrawal” represents a revision of the last formal proposal offered in October 1966, known as the “Manila formula,” in which the United States stated that the withdrawal of United States forces would be completed
 Tran Buu Kiem says the 10-point program put forth by the NLF “forms a whole” and says he is opposed to only partial acceptance of the program . Kiem: "I am opposed to partial acceptance"
 Communist forces shell Danang as 22 South Vietnamese are reported killed and 21 are wounded . 22 people are reported to have died and 21 wounded .
 Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore cautions against hasty U.S. withdrawal from Vietnam . President Nixon met with President Nixon at the White House in Vietnam in 1968 . Singapore's prime minister cautions Nixon against withdrawal .
 Eight Democratic members of the House of Representatives introduce legislation asking President Nixon to withdraw 100,000 troops unconditionally and to call for a cease-fire . The legislation would ask the president to withdraw the troops .
 Elements of the Americal and 101st Airborne Divisions conduct Operation Lamar Plain southwest of Tam Ky in Quang Tin Province, I Corps. The operation is part of the U.S. Army's first major offensive offensive in Vietnam .
 More than 1,500 Communist troops attack U.S. and South Vietnamese camps near Xuan Loc, 38 miles east of Saigon in III Corps . More than 2,000 Communist troops attacked United States and South Vietnam camps . The attack was the first of its kind in Vietnam since the
 At the United States camp, 14 Americans are killed and 39 wounded; 24 enemy soldiers are killed . At the U.S. camp,14 Americans were killed, 39 were wounded .
 At the South Vietnamese camp, four South Vietnamese are killed and 14 wounded, with 54 Communist soldiers reported killed and nine captured . The camp was also attacked by Communist troops .
 A MACV spokesman in Saigon defends the battle for Ap Bia Mountain as necessary to stop enemy infiltration and protect Hue . The battle is still ongoing in Vietnam .
 In Phu Bai, Major General Melvin Zais says his orders were “to destroy enemy forces” in the A Shau Valley . He says that he did not have any orders to reduce casualties by avoiding battle .
 The U.S. military command in Saigon states that the recent battle for Ap Bia was an integral part of the policy of “maximum pressure” that has been pursued for the last six months . No orders had been received from President Nixon to modify the basic strategy,
 North Vietnamese delegation calls for U.S. to abandon support of South Vietnamese government . President Nixon and the NLF have "points of agreement" on Nixon's proposals . North Vietnam delegation says U.N. must abandon support for talks to progress .
 When this is reported in the U.S. there is much dismay that this terrain will be abandoned after the bloody battle to capture it has resulted in great loss of life .
 American planes make the first raids against North Vietnam since the bombing halt of November 1,1968 . The raids were in retaliation for the shooting down of a reconnaissance aircraft . The U.S. bombed North Vietnam in 1968 .
 In another battle, 10 U.S. Marines killed and 24 wounded near Khe Sanh, Vietnam . 10 Marines killed, 24 wounded in another battle .
 Danang is struck by 45 rockets in three separate attacks . Four U.S. airmen were killed and 37 wounded in the attacks . Danang was struck in three attacks in which four airmen died and 37 injured .
 President Nixon announces withdrawal of 25,000 U.S. combat troops before end of August . Nixon also announces withdrawal from Vietnam in 1968 .
 Nixon and Thieu underscore the point that U.S. forces will be replaced by South Vietnamese forces . Nixon: "The United States forces will ... replace them with the South Vietnamese"
 "Vietnamization" is a new program designed to turn the war over to the South Vietnamese as U.S. troops are withdrawn . This is the official announcement of “Vietnameseization’s”
 Thai Black Panther Division display enemy weapons captured after a battle with the Viet Cong in Binh Long Province in June 1969 .
 Operation Mont300 was a follow-on operation to Apache Snow to deny the North Vietnamese use of the A Shau Valley in Thua Thien Province, I Corps . The 101st Airborne Division and 3rd ARVN Regiment were involved in the operation . The U.S
 President Thieu attempts to counter the pessimism following President Nixon’s announcement at Midway on the previous day by saying “this is a replacement, not a withdrawal.” President Nixon .
 An NLF spokesman says the refusal of Nixon and Thieu to accept a coalition government for South Vietnam is “an obstacle to progress” in the Paris negotiations . The two leaders are refusing to accept the South Vietnam coalition government .
 Nixon challenges North Vietnam to begin withdrawing forces or begin serious negotiations or both . Nixon challenges N. Vietnam to withdraw forces or start serious negotiations . Nixon: "It's time for serious negotiations"
 The NLF and other opponents of the Saigon regime form the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam . The government was formed by the NLF .
 The position of the PRG is declared to be no different in substance from NLF policy . The PRG's position is declared no different from that of the NLF .
 The formation of the PRG is seen as a challenge to the Thieu government for political control of South Vietnam . The PRG has been formed by pro-Vietnamese nationalists .
 Communist forces stage heavy ground attacks on two United States bases south of Danang . U.S. bases are located in the region of Vietnam, which borders Vietnam .
 Viet Cong troops cut through the defense perimeter and fight the defenders in hand-to-hand combat at a base at Tam Ky . The base is 35 miles south of Danang, 35 miles from Danang .
 16 Americans are killed and 62 Communist soldiers are reported KIA in the bitter fighting . Sixteen Americans were killed in the fighting .
 Provisional Revolutionary Government presents a 12point “program of action’s” 12point program of action in Paris . In Paris, the government presents a news conference .
 The NLF program is basically the same as that set forth by the NLF in its earlier 10-point program . The program is similar to that of the earlier 10 points set forth in its 10-points program .
 The NLF would remain the “organizer and leader” of the resistance to the ‘aggression” by the U.S. Under the new political arrangement, the PRG will be responsible for internal and foreign policy, while the NLF will be the �
 Bulgaria, Cambodia, China, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Mongolia, North Korea, North Vietnam, Poland, Rumania, Syria, and Syria recognize the Provisional Revolutionary Government . Yugoslavia recognizes the government .
 The U.S. government discloses it used wiretapping devices to eavesdrop on the “Chicago Eight’s” antiwar activists . Antiwar activists were indicted for inciting riots during the 1968 Democratic national convention .
 The government contends that it had the right to eavesdrop without court approval on members of an organization it believed to be seeking to attack and subvert the government . The government says it has the right .
 Laos's premier acknowledges publicly that U.S. planes regularly carry out bombing raids in Laos . Premier Souvanna Phouma says bombing will continue as long as North Vietnam uses Laotian bases and infiltration routes .
 B-52 bombing missions over the Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos will rise to 5,567 in 1969, up from 3,377 in 1968 . Pentagon statistics show that the missions will rise . The bombing missions will be over 5,500 in 1969 .
 B-52s are no longer permitted to bomb North Vietnam since the November 1968 bombing halt . They are increasingly diverted to Laos and, in secret, to Cambodia .
 Nearly 160,000 tons of bombs will be dropped on the Ho Chi Minhh Trail in 1969, a 60 percent increase from 1968 . The trail will be a major focus of the Vietnam War .
 The total number of bombing sorties by U.S. land and sea-based warplanes will rise to 242,000 in 1969 . In 1969, the number of sorties will rise by more than 250,000 .
 MACV announces that three combat units are to be withdrawn; they include the 1st and 2nd Brigades, 9th Infantry Division, and Regimental Landing Team 9, 3rd Marine Division . A total of about 13,000-14,000 men will be withdrawn from the
 North Vietnamese forces twice attack 3rd Brigade headquarters of the 101st Airborne Division atop a 2,000-foot peak just east of Ap Bia Mountain . North Vietnam forces twice attacked 3rd . Brigade headquarters . The 101st . Airborne division was attacked by North Vietnamese troops atop
 United States intelligence reports that 1,000 North Vietnamese troops have reoccupied Ap Bia Mountain . U.S. intelligence reports an estimated 1,00 North Vietnamese soldiers have reoccupy Ap Bianja Mountain .
 U.S.-South Vietnamese search-and-destroy operation launched June 8 in the A Shau Valley, 28 miles southwest of Hue . United States officials disclose the launching of the operation on June 8 . The operation is part of a joint effort to destroy the land in Vietnam .
 Communist forces shell 12 targets near the city of Tay Ninh, 50 miles northwest of Saigon . Six attacks on the city itself and its surrounding villages followed by six attacks .
 Allied and Communist troops fight in the streets of the city . About 1,000 civilians flee their homes as Allies and Communists clash in the city streets .
 Elsewhere in the same province, VC units ambush a United States convoy . Elsewhere, a U.S. convoy was ambushed by VC units in the province of Bua Province .
 Ben Het, a U.S. Special Forces camp located six miles from the junction of the Cambodian, Laotian, and South Vietnamese borders, is besieged and cut off by 2,000 North Vietnamese troops using artillery and mortars . The camp is located near the junction
 The United States Navy turns over to the South Vietnamese navy 64 river patrol gunboats valued at $18. million . The transfer is described as the largest single transfer of military equipment in the war thus far .
 The transfer raises the total number of boats in the South Vietnamese navy to more than 600 . The transfer of the boats brings the number of vessels in the country's navy to over 600 .
 U.S. units remain in advisory role and supply only air and artillery support . United States units remain an advisory role in the region .
 MACV reportedly considers the Ben Het campaign a test of the ability of the South Vietnamese forces to stand up against the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces .
 North Vietnamese infiltration into South Vietnam in January-May was 40 percent lower than in the corresponding 1968 period . U.S. sources in Saigon report that North Vietnamese infiltrations into Vietnam were 40 percent less in 1968 .
 Gallup poll shows 42 percent favor a faster withdrawal of U.S. troops than that ordered by President Nixon . Gallup poll: 16 percent favor slower rate, 29 percent favor total withdrawal, 61 percent are opposed, and 10 percent are undecided .
 Senator George McGovern met with the chief North Vietnamese and National Liberation Front negotiators in Paris on May 22 . McGovern reveals that he met privately with the chiefs of the N.N. Vietnamese and North Vietnamese Liberation Front .
 McGovern says he is convinced that fruitful negotiations cannot begin unless the United States agrees to “unconditional withdrawal” from Vietnam and discontinues its ‘unqualified embrace” of the Thieu-Ky government . McGovern: U.S. should withdraw from Vietnam
 A convoy of South Vietnamese armored personnel carriers reaches Ben Het over a road from Dak To that has been blocked for a week by North Vietnamese troops . North Vietnam troops have been blocking the road in the past week . The road is blocked by the North Vietnamese army .
 Allied commanders report that the siege of Ben Het has been broken . Combat activity in the last 24 hours has declined to its lowest level in a month .
 Three North Vietnamese regiments have withdrawn across the DMZ during the past three weeks . The U.S. military command in Saigon reports that three regiments of North Vietnamese have withdrawn .
 The first U.S. troops to depart from South Vietnam depart Saigon . The first United States troops to leave Saigon were withdrawn from Vietnam .
 Eight hundred men of the 3rd Battalion, 60th Infantry, 9th Infantry Division, leave for home . The men were part of the Third Battalion of the 60th . Infantry .
 David Dellinger announces that a team of U.S. pacifists will fly to Hanoi to bring home three prisoners-of-war . The team will bring home the three American prisoners of war .
 President Thieu makes a “comprehensive offer” for a political settlement that challenges the National Liberation Front to participate in free elections . The offer is offered in a televised speech for a joint electoral commission supervised by an international body .
 Foreign Minister Tran Chanh Thanh clarifies the proposal, saying that the Communists can never participate in elections in South Vietnam “as communists” nor have any role in organizing elections . Only the South Vietnamese government can organize elections .
 The United States First Circuit Court of Appeals in Boston reverses the 1968 conviction of Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter's conviction was overturned by a federal court .
 Benjamin Spock on charges of conspiracy to counsel evasion of the draff. Benjamin Spock . Benjamin Spock was charged with conspiracy to . counsel evasion .
 Communist gunners shell a United States 9th Division center processing troops to be returned home from the war . The U.S. troops were returning home from World War II in 1944 .
 George Wallace criticizes President Nixon for his handling of the war . Wallace says he favors an all-out military victory if the Paris talks fail to produce peace soon . Wallace: "I want to see a real-time war in the U.S.
 The 4th Battalion, 47th Infantry, 9th Infantry Division, departs from South Vietnam . The unit was part of the 9th Division of the Army in Vietnam .
 The 1st Battalion, 9th Marines, 3rd Marine Division, departs from South Vietnam . The 9th Marine Division was deployed to Vietnam in March 1968 .
 U.S. proposal for holding secret negotiations to hold secret talks to North Vietnamese representative to Paris talks, for transmittal to Hanoi . At the same time Jean Sainteny, a retired French diplomat, after conferring with Nixon and Henry Kissinger, relays a
 Laird, however, admits that the present military strategy is under review . Laird: "Present military strategy under review" Laird says the current military strategy will be reviewed .
 U.S. federal appeals judge overrules a lower court judge, allowing antiwar activist Rennie Davis to fly to Hanoi . Davis was under indictment on charges of having conspired to incite disorder during 1968 Democratic convention .
 Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky says President Thieu’s offer of July 11 to participate in free elections constitutes a “grave step backward” in the national policy of anti-communism . He says the offer is a ‘grave step back’ in the anti-
 Operation Idaho Canyon is a series of sweeps of the northern Quang Tri-DMZ area in I Corps . The U.S. 3rd Marine Regiment conducts the operation in the northern area .
 At the 26th plenary session of the Paris talks, the Communist delegations formally reject President Thieu’s offer of July 11 calling for free elections in South Vietnam with nonorganized Communist participation . The talks were held on July 11 in Paris .
 General Wheeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, conducts four days of conferences and inspections with U.S. commanders in South Vietnam . The meetings are an effort to assess the battlefield lull, determine the progress of the South Vietnamese armed forces, and discuss future strategy .
 Ho Chi Minh: No free elections can be held in South Vietnam while U.S. troops remain in power . U.N. troops still remain in Vietnam and the Thieu government remains in power, he says . The 1954 Geneva Accords were signed by the United States and
 A top-secret plan, commissioned by Henry Kissinger, is completed by the office of the chief of naval operations . The top secret plan was commissioned by the president's assistant .
 Code-named Duck Hook, the study proposes measures for military escalation against North Vietnam . The study was code-named "Duck Hook" and proposes military escalation .
 The military options include a massive bombing of Hanoi, Haiphong, and other key areas of North Vietnam . Ground invasion, ground invasion and mining of harbors and rivers are also possible options .
 29 major targets in North Vietnam are pinpointed for destruction in a series of air attacks planned to last four days and to be renewed until Hanoi capitulates . Altogether 29 targets are targeted in the series of attacks .
 A VC force of unknown size attacks the United States 9th Infantry Division headquarters at Dong Tam in the Mekong Delta, IV Corps . The VC force attacked the U.S. 9th Division headquarters .
 Troops from the United States 1st Infantry Division and 8th ARVN Regiment conduct Operation Strangle in Binh Duong Province, III Corps . The operation is part of the U.S. Army's 3rd Army-Vietnam mission .
 The objective of the operation is to neutralize enemy forces in the “Iron Triangle” and “Trapezoid” areas . The operation is aimed at neutralizing enemy forces near the Iron Triangle .
 President Nixon meets with Secretary of Defense Laird and General Earle Wheeler . Wheeler had just returned from South Vietnam . Nixon begins a trip to Asia .
 Wheeler reports that the situation in Vietnam is "good" and that the program to improve the South Vietnamese armed forces is on schedule . Wheeler: The situation there is “good” and the program is "on schedule"
 United States troops of the 1st Brigade, 9th Infantry Division, turn over a fire support base at Cai Lay in the Mekong Delta to the ARVN 7th Division . U.S. troops are leaving for the United States .
 President Nixon discusses future role of U.S. in Asia and the Pacific after the Vietnam War . Nixon discusses the future role the United States should play in Asia after the war's end .
 The president’s remarks are quickly labeled as the “Nixon Doctrine” and are interpreted to mean that the U.S. will have primary responsibility for the defense of allies against nuclear attack . The noncommunist Asian nations must bear the responsibility for their own defense against
 This is the lowest weekly total since January 1 and the fourth lowest in two years . This week's total was the lowest total since the beginning of the new year .
 More than 1,000 U.S. troops surround enemy stronghold known as ‘the Citadel’ in Hau Nghia Province . The Citadel is located about 25 miles north of Saigon .
 53 enemy KIA are reported . Americans struggle through hedgerows and bunkers before overwhelming a Viet Cong force .
 In III Corps, elements of the 2nd Brigade, 25th Infantry Division, reinforce a Special Forces CIDG camp under fire near the Plain of Reeds .
 Nixon also visits United States troops of the 1st Infantry Division at Di An, 12 miles south of Saigon . Nixon also visited the Di An at the time .
 President Nixon visits India and discusses the Vietnam war with Prime Minister Indira Gandhi . Nixon was in India to discuss the Vietnam War with Indira . Nixon visited India in 1968 .
 Nixon says he visited South Vietnam to demonstrate his solidarity with President Thieu . Nixon praises Thieu as one of the four or five best leaders in the world . Nixon says Thieu was one or five world leaders .
 27 aircraft lost in the previous week bring total losses for the conflict to 5,690 . Total losses for conflict to date to date are 5,700 . 27 aircraft were lost in previous week .
 Radio Hanoi announces the release of three U.S. prisoners of war . The release of the three prisoners is the first time since World War II ended in 1945 .
 The POWs (Captain Wesley Rumble, Lieutenant Robert Frishman, and Seaman Douglas Hegdahl) are to be turned over to the custody of a pacifist group led by Rennie Davis . They are the first United States prisoners freed by the North Vietnamese since August 2
 First secret session takes place between Henry Kissinger and North Vietnamese representative Xuan Thuy at the apartment of Jean Sainteny in Paris . Kissinger and Thuy met for the first time in a secret meeting in Paris in the 1970s .
 The negotiations end with only the agreement to keep open the new, secret channel of communications . The deal ends with only an agreement to open the secret channel .
 President Richard Nixon made a brief visit to Vietnam in July 1969 . Nixon visited the country for the first time since Vietnam in 1969 .
 Robert Rheault and seven other Green Berets have been charged with premeditated murder and conspiracy to commit murder of South Vietnamese national .
 The officers are confined in Long Binh military prison, 12 miles northeast of Saigon . They are confined to a military prison 12 miles from the capital .
 A VC raid on the United States hospital at Cam Ranh Bay leaves two U.S. personnel dead and 99 injured . 99 injured, of whom 53 are patients, are patients .
 In a separate incident, several explosions rip through the South Vietnamese air force school in Saigon, killing eight and injuring 62 . Four Americans, including four Americans, were killed in the blast .
 14 Americans and 17 South Vietnamese are killed in military actions ranging from the DMZ to the Saigon area . Fourteen Americans and three South Vietnamese died in military action .
 U.S. and South Vietnamese forces clash with the North Vietnamese in a series of battles in northern Binh Long Province, III Corps . United States and South Vietnam forces clashed with North Vietnamese forces in the area .
 In one fierce battle near Loc Ninh, elements of the United States 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment and ARVN Rangers kill 77 enemy soldiers . The U.S. 11th, 11th Cavalry Cavalry Unit and 7th Ranger Regiment killed 77 soldiers .
 17 marines were killed and 83 wounded in the attack . 17 marines died and 83 were wounded .
 17 enemy bodies found inside perimeter of one marine camp . Seventeen enemy bodies were found inside the perimeter of the camp .
 The heaviest attacks are aimed at the area adjacent to the Cambodian border northwest of Saigon . An estimated 2,000 Communists attack Tay Ninh, Quan Loi, Loc Ninh and An Loc .
 North Vietnamese commandos fight their way into the United States 1st Marine Division headquarters compound in Danang, but are eventually driven out by the marines who kill 40 Communist soldiers . Five Communist soldiers were killed and 23 wounded in the process .
 United States Marines and NVA regulars fight an intense battle in the “Arizona Territory,” in Quang Nam Province . The battle was fought in the 'Arizona Territory'
 MACV headquarters reports 1,450 enemy killed during the previous 24 hours in the heaviest fighting in three months . MACV HQs report 1, 450 enemy killed in the last 24 hours .
 The Department of Defense concedes that the number of U.S. troops in Vietnam has actually increased since Nixon took office . The increase is attributed to troop arrivals scheduled during the Johnson administration .
 Communist forces unsuccessfully attempt to storm United States camps in Hau Nghia, Tay Ninh, and Binh Long Provinces in III Corps . United States troops kill 96 enemy soldiers when Communist forces try to storm U.S. camps .
 The U.S. troop strength in Vietnam currently stands at 534,200 . Troops in Vietnam are currently at a total of 533,000 troops .
 The battalion executive officer talks to the troops, they move out of the helicopter only to find all eight men aboard dead . After the troops move out, they find the men aboard the helicopter dead . The men were killed by the helicopter .
 Neither the soldiers nor their lieutenant are disciplined, but the officer is transferred to another assignment in the division . The officer was transferred to an assignment in another division .
 President Nixon and South Korean president Park Chung Hee meet in San Francisco . Nixon and Chung-Hee visited the U.S. in the 1970s .
 In his welcoming address, Nixon notes that South Korea has “more fighting men in South Vietnam than any other nation” except the U.S. and South Vietnam . Nixon: "More fighting men" in Vietnam than other nations except the United States and Vietnam .
 The United States will spend $250 million in 1969 to maintain South Korea’s 50,000-man contingent in South Vietnam . The U.S. will spend that money to maintain the South Korean contingent in Vietnam .
 The United States and Thailand agree to begin negotiations on the reduction of the 49,000-man American presence in Thailand . The U.S. and Thailand agreed to reduce the number of American personnel in Thailand to a minimum of 50,000 .
 These forces are primarily involved in conducting air operations against Communist troops in Laos and South Vietnam . These forces were involved in the bombing of Communist forces in the country .
 President Thieu chooses Deputy Premier and Interior Minister Tran Thien Khiem, a close and powerful friend, to replace Tran Van Huong as premier . Tran Huong is a close friend of Thieu's .
 A new cabinet is to be presented to the South Vietnamese people on September 1 .
 United States troops battle Communist soldiers for more than seven hours 28 miles north of Saigon . U.S. troops battled Communist soldiers 28 miles from Saigon for over seven hours . The battle was fought 28 miles south of the city .
 Another 30 Communist soldiers are reported killed in three other clashes near the city . The clashes are also reported to have killed another 30 Communist troops .
 Communist forces again shell the United States hospital at Camn Ranh Bay . U.S. hospital was attacked by Communist forces in Camnranh Bay, Vietnam .
 ARVN 4th Regiment conducts Operation Lien Ket-414 in Quang Ngai Province, I Corps. The ARVn 4 Regiment conducted the operation . The operation is part of the I Corps' I Corps .
 MACV announces that the departure of troops in the next two days will complete the 25,000-man withdrawal announced by President Nixon at Midway on June 8 . MACV announced that the withdrawal of troops is complete .
 ARVN 5th Regiment launches Operation Lien Ket-531 in Quang Tin Province, I Corps . ARVn 5 Regiment launches operation in Quan Tin Province . Operation is part of I Corps' first major operation in the country .
 The 1st and 2nd Brigades of the U.S. 9th Infantry Division depart Vietnam . The division was part of the United States 9th Division .
 The 3rd Brigade remains in-country and is reassigned to the 25th Infantry Division . The 25th Division remains in the country .
 The Department of Defense reports that 93,653 Communist soldiers were killed during the first half of the year, January 1-June 30 . The department of Defense says 93,652 Communist soldiers died during that period .
 This number is down from 119,000 Communist troops reported killed during the same period the previous year . This number was reported killed by the Communist Party in 2012 .
 Ho Chi Minh's reply to President Nixon’s letter of July 15 is received in Paris . President Nixon's letter was sent to Ho Minh in July . Vietnam's response to the letter received in France .
 Ho demands that the United States “cease the war of aggression,” withdraw its troops from Vietnam, and allow self-determination for the Vietnamese people . Ho demands U.S. withdraws its troops, withdraws troops, and allows self-determined Vietnam . Ho
 President Nixon will not reveal this communication until his speech to the nation on November 3 . Nixon will reveal this information until he gives a speech to nation .
 President Thieu and Premier Tran Thien Khiem name a new 31member cabinet . Cabinet is strong in technicians and soldiers but lacking political leaders . Thieu's cabinet is full of technicians, soldiers and soldiers .
 Khiem, in a ceremony at the presidential palace, says that there will be no radical changes in policy . The president says there will not be any radical changes to the policy .
 The cabinet does not include any representatives of the noncommunist opposition, leaders of religious groups, or any leaders of the pro-government National Social Democratic Front . The cabinet includes no representatives of noncommunists, religious groups or pro-pro-government factions .
 Radio Hanoi announces the death of Ho Chi Minh and says that the NLF will halt military operations for three days, September 8-11, in mourning .
 Chinese leaders assure the North Vietnamese of their continued support in the war against the U.S. The Chinese leaders promise to continue their support for the North Vietnam War against the United.
 In a Communist attack on a bridge south of Danang, three U.S. Marines are killed and 30 wounded . In the attack, three United States Marines die and 30 are wounded .
 A Viet Cong rocket attack sets fire to tons of food at a U.S. Navy storage area east of the city . The attack is believed to have taken place at a United States Navy storage site .
 Three battles rage in the jungles north of Saigon as Communist gunners shell 40 targets during the night . The battle is one of the biggest ever seen in the country's history .
 91 Communist soldiers, 35 Americans, and 68 South Vietnamese are reported killed in the fighting . In the fighting, 91 Communist and 35 Americans were reported killed .
 250,000 mourners attended funeral services for Ho Chi Minh in Hanoi’s Ba Dinh Square . Funeral services were attended by 250,00 mourners .
 Among those in attendance are Soviet premier Aleksey Kosygin and Chinese vice-premier Li Hsien-nien . Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia is also in attendance .
 A South Vietnamese military spokesman says government troops have increased their offensive operations during the Viet Cong-proclaimed ceasefire . A spokesman says the government has increased its offensive operations since the ceasefire began .
 Norodom Sihanouk expresses support for the “just stand” of the North Vietnamese . Calls on the U.S. to withdraw from South Vietnam .
 U.S. forces resume military operations at the same level as before before the cease-fire . Communist forces shell more than 30 Allied military installations . The United States has resumed military operations as before .
 U.S. 1st Infantry Division and the 3rd Brigade, 82nd Airborne Division, conduct Operation Yorktown Victor in Binh Duong Province, III Corps . The U.N. troops are based in the region . The operation is part of the III Corps.
 This is the last operation for the 3rd Brigade, 82nd Airborne, which will subsequently redeploy from South Vietnam . The operation will be the last to take place in South Vietnam before redeploying .
 Vice President Ky warns that any coalition with the NLF will provoke a coup within 10 days . President Thieu proposes elections to include NLF, including elections to be held by the NFP .
 White House announces resumption of B-52 raids following 36-hour suspension . Raids resumed in response to increasing Communist attacks . White House says it is a response to rising Chinese threat .
 North Vietnamese troops are reported to be in the Mekong Delta for the first time in the war . North Vietnam troops are said to have been in the region for more than a decade .
 This movement is reported to have taken place in the four weeks since United States troops departed the region as part of President Nixon’s withdrawal plan .
 A regular North Vietnamese unit, 2,000 men from the 18th Regiment, attacks a government training center six miles north of Tri Ton in the Mekong Delta, but the attack fails, with a reported loss of 83 enemy troops killed .
 President Nixon announces a plan to withdraw an additional 35,000 troops . President Nixon also announces plans to withdraw more troops from the U.S.
 U.S. helicopter gunships mistakenly open fire on a group of civilians in the Mekong Delta, killing seven and wounding 17 . Seven people were killed and 17 were wounded in the incident .
 25 U.S. Marines killed and 63 wounded in fighting with North Vietnamese forces in I Corps . 25 Marines killed in battle south of the DMZ; 63 wounded wounded in battle with North Vietnam .
 NVA troops assault two U.S. Marine outposts just below the DMZ, killing 23 Americans and wounding 24 from the 3rd Regiment, 3rd Marine Division . 23 Americans were killed and 24 wounded .
 A total of 23 North Vietnamese soldiers are reported killed during the fighting . 23 soldiers were reported killed in the battle .
 Two Marine Corps regiments stationed along DMZ and an army airborne brigade assigned to guard Saigon . 19,500 men will make up the combat contingent of the next increment of the United States troop withdrawal program, announced by President Nixon .
 Antiwar protesters will be organizing a 36hour “March Against Death” to take place in Washington in November . At the same time, there will be another rally in San Francisco in November.
 Benjamin Spock and 10 other representatives of the New Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam . Benjamin Spock was one of the 10 representatives .
 President Nixon announces the cancellation of the draff calls for November and December, previously scheduled for 32,000 and 18,000 respectively . The calls were canceled .
 Thirty-five B-52s drop more than 1,000 tons of ordnance on an NVA troop concentration north of the Rockpile, a United States Marine base near the DMZ, following attacks there September 17 .
 The trial of eight antiwar activists, who become known as the Chicago 8, opens in Chicago . 1,000 young people demonstrate outside the courthouse .
 The enemy suffers 35 killed after U.S. fighterbombers are called in to support the ARVN troops . The enemy suffered 35 killed .
 Air Vietnam DC-4 collides with U.S. jet at Danang airport . All 62 South Vietnamese aboard the plane and two people on the ground are killed .
 VC commandos throw a grenade into a meeting place, killing four civilians and one policeman; 26 civilians are wounded . 26 civilians were wounded .
 A bus strikes a mine 95 miles southeast of Danang killing 14 civilians . A mine strike kills 14 civilians, killing 14 people .
 Senator Charles Goodell proposes withdrawal of U.S. troops from Vietnam by the end of 1970 . Goodell proposes legislation that would require withdrawal of United States troops . Goodell: Vietnam withdrawal would be complete by 1970 .
 Twenty-four liberal Democratic congressmen endorse the nationwide protest scheduled for October 15 . They will press in Congress for resolutions calling for an end to the war and withdrawal of United States troops .
 MACV discloses that a U.S. helicopter mistakenly attacked a group of civilians near Tan Ky, killing 14 . 14 people were killed in the attack . MACV says a United States helicopter mistakenly killed 14 people .
 North Vietnam and China sign a new agreement of military and economic aid for an undisclosed sum for 1970 . In Beijing, the two nations sign an undisclosed deal . North Vietnam, China sign an agreement for military, economic and economic assistance .
 President Thieu says his government entertains no “ambition or pretense” to take over all fighting by the end of 1970 . Given proper support South Vietnamese troops can replace the “bulk” of United States troops in 1970, he says .
 ARVN 32nd Regiment begins Operation Quyet Thang-21/38 in An Xuyen Province, IV Corps . The ARVn 32nd . Regiment is part of the Army's Fourth Army, which is based in the province .
 The United States and Thai governments announce a planned withdrawal of 6,000 Americans, mostly airmen, from Thailand, to be completed by luly 10,1970 . U.S. and Thailand governments announce the withdrawal .
 Colonel Robert Rheault and seven other Green Berets accused of killing a Vietnamese national . Army concedes it is helpless to enlist the cooperation of the CIA to gather evidence in the case .
 Air Force magazine cover story ignites national concern for prisoners of war and missing in action . “The Forgotten Americans of the Vietnam War’s Vietnam War,” is a cover story .
 This article stirs the conscience of the nation and rallies millions to the cause of the POWs and MIAs . It stirs millions of people's conscience to support POWs, MIAs and POWs .
 MACV announces that the U.S. military effort is being shifted from battlefield support to military and technical training in the ongoing campaign to turn the responsibility for the war over to the South Vietnamese armed forces .
 General Wheeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, visits Vietnam to check on the progress of Vietnamization . Wheeler: Vietnamization is a key component of the U.S. strategy .
 Nixon gives assurances that U.S. will insist on withdrawal of North Vietnamese forces from Laos and Cambodia as part of any settlement of Vietnam War . Nixon: "The United States will insist that the withdrawal of N. Vietnamese forces is part of a settlement of the Vietnam War"
 Students for a Democratic Society clash with Chicago police during a demonstration outside the site of the “Chicago 8” trial . 40 demonstrators are arrested . 40 people were arrested .
 U.S. commanders in Vietnam have been given new orders aimed at placing the “highest priority” on shifting the burden of the fighting to the ARVN forces . Secretary of Defense Laird: “The highest priority’s” priority is shifting the �
 Laird describes the new tactics as “protective reaction,” but says that the new orders do not forbid U.S. commanders from seeking out and attacking enemy troops that pose threats .
 64 Americans were killed in the week of September 28-October 4, the lowest weekly total since the end of 1966 . Only 64 Americans killed in that week, according to government sources .
 The National Guard is called in as demonstrations continue in Chicago outside the trial of the Chicago 8 . Demonstrators are protesting outside trial of Chicago 8.
 The United States Navy transfers 80 river patrol boats to the South Vietnamese navy in the largest single transfer of naval equipment since the war began . The U.S. Navy transferred 80 river patrols boats to South Vietnam in the biggest single transfer in the war .
 South Vietnamese armed forces assume responsibility for the defense of Saigon . The last U.S. combat contingent in the city is moved to an area 20 miles away .
 57 percent of Americans say they would like to see Congress pass legislation that calls for withdrawal of all U.S. troops by the end of 1970 . A Gallup poll says 57 percent say they want to see the withdrawal of troops by 1970 .
 The demonstrations range from rallies to prayer vigils and involve a broad spectrum of the population . Demonstrations are held in cities across the country .
 The protest, as a nationally coordinated antiwar demonstration, is considered unprecedented . The protest was held in Washington, D.C.
 Secretary of Defense Laird announces U.S. plans to keep a ‘residual force’ of some 6,000 to 7,000 troops in South Vietnam after hostilities end . Secretary of defense Laird: "Residual Force" will be kept at least 6
 In another battle 85 miles northeast of Saigon, United States troops kill a reported 14 enemy troops while suffering five dead . U.S. troops kill 14 enemy soldiers in another battle .
 Seven Americans were killed and 20 wounded in six short but sharp battles north and west of Saigon . Seven Americans died and 20 were wounded in the battle .
 Two more Americans are killed when their spotter plane is downed by enemy ground fire . The Americans were killed in the attack on the U.S. mission in Afghanistan .
 Field commanders say there has been no basic change in their orders on military strategy and tactics . U.S. field commanders contend that there has not been a change in tactics since September .
 The officers admit that there are restrictions, such as no ground assaults against fortified areas . The officers do admit, however, that there is no ground assault against fortresses .
 The commanders deny that they have been ordered to keep casualties down . They say that the battlefield situation does not even remotely resemble a cease-fire .
 The United States Army Blackhorse base near Xuan Loc, 38 miles northeast of Saigon, is turned over to ARVN’s 18th Division to be used as an infantry regiment base and training center . The U.S. Army's 11th Armored Cavalry headquarters of
 Units of the U.S. 25th Infantry Division fight one of the biggest battles in some time 28 miles north of Saigon . The battle took place 28 miles south of the city of Vietnam .
 Chicago 8 defendant Bobby Seale is gagged and chained to his chair at his trial for conspiracy to incite riot . Seale's trial is expected to last for more than two years .
 The judge’s order comes after Seale repeatedly shouts accusations and insults at the judge and prosecution . Seale is accused of shouting accusations and insulting the judge, prosecution .
 Seale’s conduct will force the judge to try him separately, and the remaining defendants will become known as the Chicago Seven . In November, Seale will be tried separately .
 U.S. B-52s bomb the Central Highlands to protect Special Forces camps at Due Lap and Bu Prang . North Vietnamese forces were reported to be concentrating near the Cambodian border for a future attack .
 ARVN 23rd Division conducts Operation Dan Tien-33D in Quang Due Province, II Corps. The ARVn 23rd division conducted the operation . The operation is part of the II Corps' ongoing operations in Vietnam .
 To blunt the strength of the antiwar movement, he appeals to the “silent majority” that favors gradual American withdrawal from Vietnam . To gather support for his policies, he hopes to blunt the anti-war movement .
 As he spoke, dispatches from South Vietnam revealed that a force of 5,000 North Vietnamese troops was increasing the pressure in the Central Highlands . North Vietnamese forces were increasing pressure in South Vietnam .
 A Gallup poll survey conducted in the wake of the president’s Vietnam speech indicates that 77 percent of those asked are in support of Nixon's policy in Vietnam .
 Congressional reaction to the president’s speech is overwhelmingly favorable . Congressional reaction is also overwhelmingly favorable.
 A bipartisan group of 50 Democrats and 50 Republicans in the House of Representatives introduces legislation supporting the president . The bill is expected to be introduced in the next week .
 South Vietnamese infantry units, supported by U.S. planes and artillery, clash with North Vietnamese troops for 10 hours at Due Lop near the Cambodian border . The battle was the biggest battle in four months, with 10 hours of fighting .
 United States troops are withheld from the developing battle at Due Lop to gauge how well ARVN forces can cope with their own forces . United States forces are being kept out of the battle to assess how well they can cope .
 Allied spokesmen report North Vietnamese troops have assaulted a South Vietnamese navy-marine task force headquarters in the Mekong Delta for the second time in three days . North Vietnamese forces have assaulted the task force in the area for the past three days, according to Allied sources .
 South Vietnamese troops report killing 80 Communist soldiers in a day-long battle 15 miles from the base . South Vietnam troops say they killed 80 communist soldiers in the battle . The battle took place near the base of the base in Hanoi Province .
 North Vietnamese forces maintain pressure on Due Lop and three other Allied outposts along the Cambodian border, setting off a day-long fight . North Vietnam forces keep pressure on the Allied outpost along the Cambodiaian border .
 The United States military command still offers no infantry support to the South Vietnamese, giving only air and artillery support . The U.S. military command offers only air, artillery and air and air support .
 Sweden will begin a three-year, $45 million program of economic aid to North Vietnam on July 1,1970 . Sweden's Foreign Minister Torsten Nilsson announced the aid on June 1, 1970 . The aid was part of Sweden's $45million economic aid program .
 This reverses a previous decision to provide only humanitarian assistance while the war is in progress . The decision reverses previous decision that only humanitarian aid will be provided during the war .
 Hersh reveals the extent of the United States Army’s charges against Lieutenant William Calley . Hersh filed a cable filed through Dispatch News Service and picked up by more than 30 newspapers .
 The troops are being made available at the request of the Justice Department . They will augment 1,200 National Guardsmen and a 3,700-man police force .
 ARVN 23rd Division launches Operation Dan Tien-40 in Quang Due Province, II Corps. The ARVn 23rd division launched the operation in Quan Due Province . The operation is part of the Second World War II .
 President Nixon visits the House and Senate to express his appreciation to those who support his Vietnam policy . Nixon asks for understanding and criticism from those who oppose him . Nixon visits Congress to express support for Vietnam policy and ask for understanding .
 Vice President Spiro Agnew criticizes the news media, particularly television, for its coverage of the president’s Vietnam policies . Agnew: The news media is responsible for the president's Vietnam policies and protests aimed at them .
 The second moratorium opens as organizers concentrate on mass demonstrations in Washington, D.C., and San Francisco . The moratorium is lifted as organizers focus on mass protests in Washington and San Diego .
 The march is headed by relatives of servicemen killed in Vietnam . 46,000 marchers are expected to take part in the Vietnam War march .
 Washington D.C. police resort to tear gas to break up a demonstration . 2,000 protesters attempt to march on the South Vietnamese embassy . Police tear tear gas breaks up the demonstration .
 At least 20 demonstrators are arrested and seven policemen are injured . Seven policemen were injured in clashes between protesters and police .
 In fighting between Communist and South Vietnamese troops in the Central Highlands, 20 ARVN troops are killed and 53 wounded . Vietnamese air force planes strike both enemy and enemy soldiers, killing 20 ARVs and wounding 53 .
 Major protests are held in a number of European cities, including Frankfurt, Stuttgart, West Berlin, and London, designed to coincide with the moratorium demonstrations in Washington and San Francisco .
 The largest overseas demonstration occurs in Paris, where 2,651 persons are arrested . There are similar demonstrations in 42 other cities in France, including 42 others .
 Allied bombers and artillery attack North Vietnamese positions inside Cambodia that have shelled Allied camps at Bu Prang and Due Lop . North Vietnamese forces attacked the Allied camps in Cambodia in the early 1960s .
 South Vietnamese troops lose 60 men killed or wounded in clash with North Vietnamese forces in Mekong Delta . First major action in the northern delta since U.S. 9th Division was withdrawn from the region .
 Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge and his assistant, Lawrence E Walsh, resign as the chief U.S. delegates to the Paris peace talks effective December 8 . Lodge and Walsh resign as chief United States delegates to peace talks .
 The Cleveland Plain Dealer publishes photographer Ron Haeberle’s explicit photos of the My Lai massacre . The massacre took place in the early 1970s .
 Seymour Hersh files a second My Lai story based on interviews with Michael Terry and Michael Bernhardt, who served under Lieutenant William Calley . Hersh: "My Lai" is a war of revenge against the U.S. government .
 3rd Recon Battalion of the 3rd Marine Division departs from South Vietnam . The 3rd Reconnaissance Battalion was part of the Marine Corps' 3rd Battalion .
 The 35,000-man troop withdrawal announced September 15 is reached three weeks prior to the December 15 deadline . The withdrawal deadline is December 15 .
 Army Secretary Stanley Resor and Army Chief of Staff William C Westmoreland announce appointment of Lieutenant General William R Peers to “explore the nature and scope” of the original investigation of the My Lai slayings in April 1968 .
 Initial probe concluded that no massacre had occurred and that no further action was needed . Initial probe was conducted by members of the 11th Infantry Brigade, the unit involved in the affair, .
 Communist forces step up attacks against United States troops shielding Allied installations near the Cambodian border . U.S. troops have been protecting Allied installations in the region from communist attacks .
 North Vietnamese troops destroy more than a dozen tanks and tons of ammunition at a U.S. base near the Cambodian border . The tanks and ammunition were destroyed at a United States base .
 A counterattack in the same area, 72 miles southwest of Saigon, results in 45 Communist soldiers reported killed . The counterattack is reported to have taken place 72 miles from Saigon .
 The United States 3rd Marine Division officially departs South Vietnam . The U.S. Marine Division was deployed to Vietnam in 1968 .
 Four helicopters are shot down by North Vietnamese gunners about 10 miles from Song Be near the Cambodian border . Five U.S. personnel die and four are injured in the attack .
 The first draft lottery since 1942 was held at Selective Service System headquarters . First draft lottery for the first time since 1942 has been held since 1942 . Draft lottery is the first since 1942, and the first lottery was held in 1942 .
 Those 19-year-olds whose birthdate is September 14 and whose last name begins with a “J” will be the first to be called . Those with last names beginning with a "J" will also be called.
 Communist troops attack the town of Tuyen Binh in the Mekong Delta . They are repelled by defenders and U.S. air support .
 A Louis Harris survey reports 46 percent of those polled indicate sympathy with the goals of the November Moratorium demonstrations . 45 percent disagree. 46 percent indicate sympathy for the goals .
 Allied soldiers report killing 88 North Vietnamese troops in two clashes near Tay Ninh . Allied soldiers say 88 N. Vietnamese troops were killed in the two clashes . North Vietnamese soldiers were killed by Allied troops in the clashes .
 Operation Randolph Glen is a search and clear mission in support of pacification efforts in the populated lowlands of Thua Thien Province, I Corps . The U.S. 101st Airborne Division conducted the mission in coordination with the ARVN 1st Infantry Division .
 Nixon: Vietnam War is coming to a “conclusion as a result of the plan that we have instituted,” which calls for replacing U.S. troops with South Vietnamese forces . Nixon: Plan calls for replacement of United States troops with S. Vietnamese forces.
 A Viet Cong force attacks a national police field force training center in Dalat, killing 13 police and wounding 25 . 13 police killed and 25 wounded in the attack .
 The headquarters and three subordinate infantry battalions of the United States 3rd Brigade, 82nd Airborne Division, are withdrawn from Vietnam . The headquarters of the U.S. 3rd and three battalions are withdrawn .
 North Vietnamese chief negotiator Xuan Thuy boycotts the Paris talks in protest against what the North Vietnamese delegation insists is the “sabotage” and “downgrading” of the talks . The U.S. failure to name a replacement for Henry Cabot Lodge
 The Philippine army’s 1,350 noncombatant Civic Action Group, which has been in-country since September 1966, withdraws from South Vietnam . The group has been there since September 16, 1966 .
 Americal Division reports killing 53 enemy soldiers in battle two miles southeast of My Lai . Americal division says 53 enemy troops were killed in battle . The battle took place two miles south of the city .
 United States troops of the 3rd Brigade, 1st Cavalry Division, report a total of 1,177 enemy soldiers killed in the fighting near the Cambodian border since September 24 . The U.S. troops are in the area near the Cambodia border .
 President Nixon announces the beginning of the third phase of the troop reductions in Southeast Asia . An additional 50,000 American troops will be withdrawn from South Vietnam by April 15, 1970 .
 Operation Danger Forward II begins with elements of the 1st Infantry Division and 5th ARVN Division conducting offensive operations to neutralize enemy forces in the area northwest of Saigon . The area includes the “Trapezoid” and the Michelin rubber plantation .
 Secretary of Defense Laird reports draft calls will be reduced by about 25,000 men next year . Plans to withdraw 50,000 troops from Vietnam are a direct result of plans to withdraw .
 South Vietnamese troops are airlifted into the Mekong Delta to confront a Communist troop concentration . South Vietnam troops airlift troops to confront Communist troops in Mekong .
 Congress passes legislation to prohibit the use of current Department of Defense appropriations to introduce ground troops into Laos or Thailand . Congress also passes legislation banning the introduction of ground troops .
 Bangkok announces plans to withdraw its 12,000man contingent from South Vietnam . The government in Bangkok announced plans to pull out of the country . The withdrawal is the latest in a series of steps taken in recent months .
 Allied military forces suspend combat activity for 24 hours beginning at 1800 hours . Allied forces suspended combat activity beginning at around 1800 hours on Monday .
 U.S. forces report killing more than 70 NVA soldiers in a day-long battle nine miles northwest of Loc Ninh, near the Cambodian border about 80 miles north of Saigon .
 Explosive charges thrown into 25th Infantry Division base camp near Lai Khe, 25 miles northwest of Saigon . Seven Americans killed and five wounded when explosive charges are thrown into base camp .
 1,406 names of U.S. servicemen missing in action as of December 24 . Philip Habib, acting head of the United States delegation to peace talks, hands over list to Communist side . The list of missing servicemen is published in Paris .
 Habib says he hopes the other side will indicate, as a “matter of humanitarian concern for their families,” which men are prisoners and which are known dead . Habib: "It's a matter of concern for the families"
 Allied military forces suspend combat activity for 24 hours starting at 1800 GMT . Allied forces suspend all combat activity in the wake of the attack .
 Staff Sergeant David Mitchell will be court-martialed on charges of assault with intent to murder 30 South Vietnamese civilians at My Lai . Staff Sergeant Mitchell is accused of assaulting 30 civilians at the site of the massacre in Vietnam .
 U.S. troop strength in South Vietnam declines to 475,200; so far, some 60,000 American troops have returned home .
 110,176 South Vietnamese military personnel have been killed in action to date . During this year, South Vietnamese armed forces strength has increased to 897,000 . 110,000 South Vietnamese soldiers have died in action .
 Estimated NVA/VC losses for the year exceed 45,000, bringing total estimated enemy losses since 1965 to over 400,000 . Estimated enemy losses from 1965 to 2004 have risen to over 300,000 since .
 The United States command reports 65 Americans killed in action during the past week . The U.S. command reports that 65 Americans have been killed in service .
 North Vietnamese troops attack a United States camp near Due Pho, south of Quang Ngai, killing seven Americans and wounding 11 . Seven Americans were killed and 11 wounded in the attack .
 Three North Vietnamese sapper teams attack and penetrate a United States 7th Marine Regiment base in the Que Son Valley, killing 13 Americans and wounding 63 . 13 Americans were killed and 63 were wounded .
 President Thieu states that it will be ‘impossible and impractical’ to withdraw all U.S. combat troops in 1970 . Thieu: It will be 'impossible' to withdraw troops from Vietnam in 1970.
 Thieu says further U.S. withdrawals will depend on the “critical question” of whether the United States supplies South Vietnam with adequate equipment and funds to modernize its armed forces . Thieu: The question is whether the U .S. supplies adequate equipment, funds to
 Thieu says he has been assured by the Nixon administration of the necessary assistance . He contends that United States troop withdrawals will have to be phased over a number of years . Thieu: U.S. troop withdrawals must be phased out over years .
 Private Gerald Smith and Sergeant Charles Hutto are charged with murder and sexual offenses in connection with the killing of civilians at My Lai . 11 more members of the Americal Division will be charged with complicity in the killings .
 A Viet Cong force moves into a refugee camp in the village of Chau Thuan on the Batangan Peninsula, hurling dynamite charges into houses and killing 16 civilians . 16 civilians and 21 were wounded in the attack .
 Mines planted by the Viet Cong explode at the Thu Due Officers Training School, 12 miles northeast of Saigon, killing 18 persons, including 16 South Vietnamese officer cadets and their instructor, and wounding 33 .
 Troops from the United States 1st Brigade, 5th Infantry Division (Mechanized), and 1st ARVN Division conduct Operation Greene River in Ouang Tri Province, I Corps, to support provincial pacification programs . Troops are from the U.S. 1st
 A combined force of North Vietnamese and VC attack a South Vietnamese marine brigade command post in the Mekong Delta, killing 15 and wounding 41 . 15 killed and 41 wounded in the attack .
 At an artillery base, 55 miles north of Saigon, 13 U.S. soldiers are killed and three wounded in an ammunition explosion .
 MACV reports increased combat activity in all four corps regions as Communist forces shell 29 targets . MACV also reports increased fighting activity in the area .
 The Communists report 75 killed in various actions; nine Americans killed and five wounded . 9 Americans were killed and 5 wounded in the Communist-held actions .
 Lieutenant Everett Alvarez Jr. spends his 2,000th day in captivity in Southeast Asia . Lieutenant Alvarez, Jr., Jr. spent 2,500 days in captivity .
 First taken prisoner when his plane was shot down on August 5, 1964, he is the longest-held POW in North Vietnam .
 U.S. fighter-bombers attack an antiaircraft missile site 90 miles inside North Vietnam . The site was 90 miles from the United States' base in North Vietnam and was attacked by U.N. forces .
 Rescue helicopter sent to search for the jet’s two missing pilots is shot down by a MiG-21 near the North Vietnamese-Laotian border . Rescue helicopter was shot down near the border with North Vietnam .
 These reconnaissance missions have been conducted daily since the November 1968 bombing halt . The missions have taken place daily since November 1968 .
 A Gallup poll shows 65 percent of those interviewed approve of President Nixon’s handling of the war, his highest approval rate to date . The poll is the highest level of approval for Nixon's handling of war .
 President Nixon: ‘The policy of Vietnamization is irreversible,” even without any progress at the Paris peace talks . Nixon: Vietnamization "is irreversible" even without progress at peace talks.
 The White House denies the incident signals any change in U.S. policy . In announcing the combat action over North Vietnam involving the attack on an antiaircraft missile base and the downing of a United States jet .
 The North Vietnamese delegation charges that U.S. planes bombed and strafed several populated areas . The North Vietnam delegation says the United States bombed them . The U.N. claims that the North Vietnamese government bombed them in Vietnam .
 Operation Good Luck is initiated by the U.S. Air Force to strike North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces in the Plain of Jars . The operation is initiated to strike and destroy North Vietnamese forces . The United States Air Force was involved in the operation .
 The plaintiffs are trying to force the company to disclose all government contracts . They want to prove that the company is still making napalm . The plaintiffs say they are suing the company for refusing to disclose contracts .
 United States fighter-bombers attack North Vietnamese missile and antiaircraft gun positions for the second time in a week . Unarmed reconnaissance jet comes under intense ant-fire fire from North Vietnamese forces .
 The Senate Foreign Relations Committee reopens hearings on the Vietnam War . The committee is investigating the war's role in Vietnam .
 Senators Harold Hughes, Thomas Eagleton and Alan Cranston speak in support of a Senate resolution calling for the termination of the American commitment to South Vietnam . The Saigon government takes steps to broaden its cabinet, reduce press censorship, and release political prisoners .
 United States helicopter gunships respond by killing 23 enemy soldiers . U.S. forces kill 23 enemy troops in Afghanistan .
 Another 52 Communist soldiers are reported killed by U.S. forces in two battles north of Saigon . Another 52 communist soldiers were reportedly killed by United States forces .
 Defense Secretary Laird says he is satisfied with the current pace of Vietnamization . Laird: "I'm happy with the progress in Vietnamization. Vietnamization is a good thing"
 He says ways to improve it and push it forward are being examined . However, he also says that ways are still being examined to improve the system .
 Souvanna Phouma states that he will take no action against Communist supply activity along the Ho Chi Minh Trail if North Vietnam withdraws combat troops from Laos . Souvanno says no action will be taken against communist supply activity in Laos .
 Secretary of Defense Laird says U.S. warplanes will continue to take whatever steps necessary to protect themselves during reconnaissance flights over North Vietnam . Laird: "We will take whatever necessary steps necessary"
 A U.S. Marine unit is ambushed by elements of the 31st NVA Regiment near FSB Ross, about 10 miles west of Hiep Due in Quang Nam Province, I Corps .
 A battalion from the Americal Division has been sent to reinforce the Marines . The Americal division has been deployed to the U.S.
 A Gallup poll shows 55 percent of those polled continue to oppose an immediate withdrawal of U.S. troops from Vietnam . The number of those who favor such a withdrawal has risen from 21 percent in a November poll to 35 percent since November 1968 .
 Julius Hoffman charges four defendants with contempt of court after numerous violent outbursts in the courtroom . Also this day, during the trial of the Chicago Seven (formerly the Chicago Eight) conspiracy trial, Julius Hoffman is being tried separately .
 8 U.S. servicemen killed and 30 wounded in ambush by North Vietnamese soldiers near Cambodian border . 31 Communist soldiers reported killed in the fighting .
 The jury continues to deliberate in the trial of the Chicago Seven . Defense attorneys William Kunstler and Leonard Weinglass and three more defendants are sentenced to prison for contempt of court .
 B-52 raids in South Vietnam halted for 36 hours while bombers attacked North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces threatening the Plain of Jars in northern Laos .
 The expansion of the B-52 bombing missions to northern Laos is carried on United States military records as routine missions over South Vietnam or southern Laos, where bombing along the Ho Chi Minh Trail has been conducted .
 The raids over northern Laos are made public, provoking a new wave of congressional criticism regarding the policies of the Nixon administration in Indochina . Nixon administration was criticized for the actions of the Vietnam War .
 The unit commander tries to cover up the tragedy but fails, and the five members of the patrol will be charged with premeditated murder . Two will be eventually convicted; two will be convicted .
 The Chicago Seven are acquitted of conspiracy charges, but five will receive the heaviest possible sentences . Five will receive five years imprisonment and $5,000 fines plus court costs . Chicago Seven will be sentenced to five years in prison for inciting to riot .
 Fourteen U.S. soldiers die and 29 are injured when an armored unit of the United States 196th Light Infantry Brigade, Americal Division, is ambushed by North Vietnamese forces south of Danang in the Que Son Valley, I Corps .
 Henry Kissinger begins secret talks with Le Due Tho, the fifth-ranking member of the Hanoi Politburo, at a villa outside Paris . Kissinger talks with the fifth ranking member of Vietnam's Hanoanese Politi Party . Kissinger: "We are going to
 Tho states that the North Vietnamese position continues to be an unconditional United States withdrawal on a fixed date and abandonment of the Thieu government as a precondition for further progress in the stalled negotiations . Tho says the North Vietnam position is that the U.S. withdrawal is unconditional
 Kissinger’s proposals for withdrawal of military forces, neutralization of Cambodia and a mixed electoral commission to supervise elections in South Vietnam . The North Vietnamese reject Kissinger's proposals for a mutual withdrawal of troops and neutralization .
 The other two meetings, in which there will be a similar lack of progress, will be held on March 16 and April 4 .
 Laird: U.S. air operations there are confined to cutting off North Vietnamese supply lines through Laos into South Vietnam . Defense Secretary Laird responds to strident criticism over United States military activity in Laos .
 Ten South Vietnamese civilians die and 15 are wounded when a bus strikes a mine near Danang . 15 people are injured when a mine hits a mine in the city .
 Eleven other civilians are wounded by grenades thrown at a truck in the same area . 11 other civilians were wounded in the attack .
 26th Marine Regiment of the 5th Marine Division conducts its last patrol, stands down, and departs Vietnam . The 26th Marines were on patrol in Vietnam for the first time .
 In the first month of operation using the new methods, the number of hamlets reported to be relatively pacified is reduced from 92. percent to 89. percent . The new methods have been used in the past month .
 The United States Marines turn over control of the I Corps area to the United States Army . Lieutenant General Melvin Zais assumes command of the 150,000 troops in the five northernmost provinces of South Vietnam .
 The United States Army accuses Captain Ernest Medina, Lieutenant William Calley’s company commander, and four other soldiers of committing crimes at My Lai in March 1968 . The U.S. Army accuses them of premeditated murder, rape and the “maiming�
 An estimated 20,000 demonstrators, protesting the presence of Communist forces in Cambodia, assault the embassies of the Provisional Revolutionary Government and North Vietnam in Phnom Penh, causing heavy damage .
 Cambodia cancels trade agreement with North Vietnam that allows them to use the port of Sihanoukville as a source of supply for their military forces in Cambodia and South Vietnam . North Vietnam uses the port to supply military supplies to their forces in the region .
 Premier Lon Nol apologizes for the attacks on the Vietnamese embassies, but also issues an ultimatum that their troops must leave Cambodia in 72 hours . Nol also issues a 72-hour deadline for their troops to leave Cambodia .
 Cambodian demonstrators continue to rampage in the streets of Phnom Penh, attacking Vietnamese shops and homes . Cambodian protesters have attacked Vietnamese shops, homes and homes in recent days .
 North Vietnamese, NLF, and Cambodian officials meet in Phnom Penh to discuss the presence of Communist military forces in Cambodia . North Vietnamese and NLF officials meet to discuss presence of communist military forces .
 The U.S. Army accuses 14 officers of suppressing information relating to the incident at My Lai in March 1968 . The investigation was conducted by a panel headed by Lieutenant General William Peers .
 The charges include dereliction of duty, failure to obey lawful regulations, and false swearing .
 Report: U.S. soldiers committed acts of murder, rape, sodomy, maiming, and assault that took the lives of a large number of civilians . Report concludes that “a tragedy of major proportions” occurred at My Lai .
 The Peers report says each successive level of command received a more watered-down account of what actually happened at My Lai . The higher the report went, the lower was its estimate of civilians allegedly killed by Americans .
 Americal Division headquarters received information that only 20 to 28 civilians had been killed . Americal . Division headquarters, where accounts of the incident stopped, received . reports of casualties from the incident .
 The National Assembly grants “full power” to Premier Lon Nol, declares a state of emergency . State of emergency suspends four articles of the constitution, permitting arbitrary arrest and banning public assembly .
 Pham Van Dong, prime minister of North Vietnam, flies secretly to Beijing and meets with Chinese premier Zhou Enlai and deposed Cambodian head of state Norodom Sihanouk . Dong also meets with deposed Cambodiaian head-of-state Norodum S
 At Hoc Man, seven miles northwest of Saigon, the VC explode a bomb at a Buddhist meeting, killing 14 women and children and wounding 20 others . The bombing killed 14 women, children and wounded 20 others in Vietnam . VC explode bomb at Buddhist meeting killing 14 people and wounding
 North Vietnam, the NLF, and the Pathet Lao immediately pledge their support to the new organization . North Vietnam and the NVA have pledged their support for the new group .
 South Vietnamese troops supported by advance artillery and air strikes launch their first major military operation into Cambodia . The operation follows several days of consultations with the Cambodian government .
 Two teams of U.S. helicopter gunships take part in the action . Helicopter gunships are used to carry out the rescue mission .
 U.S. and South Vietnamese officials disavow any knowledge of the operation . United States and South Vietnam have disavowed any knowledge .
 The White House announces for the first time that U.S. troops are permitted to cross the Cambodian border in response to enemy threats . The decision will be made by field commanders .
 U.S. officials say this does not mean a widening of the war . They say it merely represents a restatement of the rules promulgated by the Pentagon and already in force .
 North Vietnamese troops attack an American base near the Cambodian border, killing 13 and wounding 30 . 13 were killed and 30 were wounded in the attack .
 United States Air Force launches Operation Patio to strike targets in Cambodia in support of U.S. ground operations . United States air force launches operation Patio, which includes strikes in Cambodia, Cambodia .
 The United States Army formally charges Captain Medina of being ‘responsible’ for the murder of Vietnamese civilians killed by members of his infantry company at My Lai . The U.S. Army charges Medina with being “responsible”
 U.S. Navy F-4 Phantom shot down a North Vietnamese MiG-21 while flying reconnaissance escort on March 28 near Thanh Hoa, about 85 miles south of Hanoi . First such action reported since November 1968 .
 Headquarters, United States Marine Corps, announces that it will no longer accept draftees and reinstitutes voluntary enlistments to fill its ranks . The U.S. Marine Corps will reinstate voluntary enlistment to fill ranks .
 Operation Texas Star is a follow-on to Operation Randolph Glen in Quang Tri and Thua Thien Provinces . In I Corps, the United States 101st Airborne Division conducts the operation . The U.S. 101st will conduct the operation in Vietnam .
 One brigade of the division retains responsibility for pacification and development support . The other two brigades conduct offensive operations in the western portions of Quang Tri and Thua Thien Province . One brigade remains in charge of pacification, development support and support in the province .
 Massachusetts governor Francis Sargent signs a bill challenging the legality of the Vietnam War . The bill was signed by the Massachusetts governor in 1966 .
 Communist forces shell 60 targets as heavy attacks continue to continue for the third consecutive day . Communist forces shells 60 targets in three days of heavy attacks .
 10 Americans and 62 Communist soldiers are reported killed during the action . 10 Americans were killed in the action, 10 Communist soldiers were also killed .
 Two South Vietnamese battalions push 10 miles into Cambodia . New clashes also occur farther to the south .
 Communist forces attack Cambodian troops at Chiphu, near the eastern end of Svay Rieng Province .
 Nine infantry battalions from the 1st United States Infantry Division depart South Vietnam . Nine battalions of the U.S. Infantry Division leave South Vietnam in 1968 .
 Cambodia withdraws all of its military forces from Svay Rieng Province, also known as the “Parrot’s Beak,” abandoning it to the Vietnamese Communists . Cambodia withdrawes all of the military forces .
 One-half of the province’s population, about 30,000 civilians, also withdraws westward . The withdrawal is part of a larger withdrawal of troops from the province .
 Cambodian troops massacre hundreds of ethnic Vietnamese in the village of Prasot in Svay Rieng Province . Cambodia has been accused of atrocities against ethnic Vietnamese for years .
 Two battalions from the United States 4th Infantry Division depart from South Vietnam . The U.S. 4th Division leaves South Vietnam in 1968 .
 A Gallup poll shows 48 percent of those polled approve of President Nixon’s policy in Vietnam, while 41 percent disapprove of it . Gallup poll: 48 percent approve of Nixon's Vietnam policy .
 This figure reflects a decline from the president’s 65 percent approval rating in January . The president's approval rating is now at 65 percent .
 Two thousand South Vietnamese troops, operating with a token Cambodian force, attack a North Vietnamese base camp one mile inside Cambodia . The incident occurred in Cambodia, one mile from Cambodia .
 The 1st Infantry Division officially departs from Vietnam, bound for duty in Germany and Fort Riley, Kansas . The division is headed to Germany and the U.S.
 A force of 12,900 United States Marines departs South Vietnam to complete the third phase of U.S. troop withdrawals announced by President Nixon . President Nixon announced the withdrawal in 1973 .
 MACV reports 25 Americans killed and 54 wounded yesterday in one of the year’s highest one-day casualty tolls . MACV says 25 Americans died and 54 were wounded in the attack .
 Tactical air support called in during a firefight between a company from the 1st Marines, 5th Marines, and North Vietnamese forces accidentally kills 30 civilians . The incident occurred nine miles northwest of An Hoa in I Corps .
 Rampaging Cambodian troops kill at least 1,000 ethnic Vietnamese civilians at Takeo . Takeo is 50 miles south of Phnom Penh .
 The Vietnam Moratorium Committee announces that it is disbanding because its sources of funding have run dry . President Nixon’s withdrawal policy has undermined the nonradical opposition to the war .
 South Vietnamese troops move into Cambodia in their third major cross-border offensive in the past week . The offensive is the latest in a series of major offensive launched by the South Vietnamese government .
 Communist forces have more than doubled their area of control, including Svay Rieng Province . Premier Lon Nol sends a personal appeal to President Nixon asking for military aid .
 AC-130 gunship is shot down over Saravan, Laos, resulting in the loss of 10 airmen from the 16th Special Operations Squadron . The plane was shot down by the U.S. Air Force in Laos .
 China sponsors a conference near Canton attended by Norodom Sihanouk; Prince Souphonouvong, leader of the Pathet Lao; Nguyen Huu Tho, president of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of South Vietnam; and North Vietnamese prime minister Pham
 The leaders of the four Communist movements pledge joint action to expel the U.S. and other forces that oppose them in Indochina . The U.N. should expel the United States, other forces opposing them, the leaders say .
 Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai attends final session of the conference and gives it his endorsement . Chinese premier Zhou Enrai attends the final session to give it an endorsement .
 President Nixon gives his formal authorization to commit United States combat troops, in cooperation with South Vietnamese units, against Communist troop sanctuaries and base areas in Cambodia .
 Three National Security Council staff members resign in protest over planned invasion of Cambodia . Henry Kissinger's aides resign over plans to invade Cambodia . Kissinger was Kissinger's presidential assistant .
 Two U.S. Marine Skyhawk jets accidentally bomb a South Vietnamese outpost during a battle in Quang Ngai province . 10 South Vietnamese soldiers and 20 others were killed in the attack .
 13 major ground operations have been launched to clear North Vietnamese sanctuaries in Cambodia . In what becomes known as the Cambodian incursion, 13 ground operations are launched . Cambodia is known for its anti-Vietnamese incursions into Cambodia .
 6,000 ARVN soldiers commence an attack into the Parrot’s Beak area of Cambodia, supported by United States warplanes and artillery . The United States announces that it will provide combat advisers, tactical air support, medical evacuation teams, and supplies to the South Vietnamese
 President Nixon announces he is sending U.S. combat troops into Cambodia to destroy Communist sanctuaries and supply bases . Nixon: In a nationally televised speech, he announces he will send combat troops .
 Nixon says the objective of the U.S. forces is the Fishhook area . President Nixon conducts a press conference to explain the Cambodian incursion, April 1970 .
 United States Air Force launches Operation Freedom Deal to strike targets in Cambodia in support of Cambodian army . U.S. Air Force strikes targets in the country's capital, Phnomotchong .
 The operation into the Fishhook area of Cambodia is launched by a combined force of 8,000 United States and 2,000 South Vietnamese soldiers . U.S. and South Vietnamese forces are involved in the operation .
 The purpose of the operation is to eliminate enemy forces and locate and eliminate COSVN, the command headquarters for Communist activities in South Vietnam . The operation was launched in April 1968 .
 Heavy bombing raids are carried out against supply depots and other targets in North Vietnam . The bombing raids were carried out in the early 1950s .
 Beecher will report on the intensive bombing raids against North Vietnam on the next day . He will report the bombing raids on North Vietnam .
 Senators George McGovern, Mark Hatfield (ROreg.), and Charles Goodell announce they will offer an amendment to a pending military procurement authorization bill . Amendment would cut off funds for all U.S. military action in Southeast Asia . Senators McGovern and Hatfield will offer amendment to the
 Fighting continues for the third day in the northernmost zone of South Vietnam . North Vietnamese troops have firm control of three hamlets in Hiep Due .
 Student strikes spread to a number of campuses to protest the expansion of the war into Cambodia . Student strikes were held on campuses across the world to protest expansion of war .
 More than 2,000 well-armed Cambodian mercenaries, serving in units in South Vietnam operated by the U.S. Special Forces, are flown into Cambodia .
 A United States military spokesman acknowledges the resumed bombing of North Vietnam . A U.S. military spokesman says the bombing has resumed in Vietnam .
 The National Student Association and former Vietnam Moratorium Committee leaders call for a national university strike of indefinite duration . The strike, beginning immediately, would protest the war .
 The presidents of 37 universities sign a letter urging President Nixon to clearly show his determination to end the war . President Nixon signed the letter urging him to clear up his determination .
 North Vietnamese and Viet Cong units cut the Phnom Penh-Saigon highway at a point 29 miles from the Cambodian capital . Communist forces launch heavy attacks in the area around PhnomPenh .
 Aleksey Kosygin personally criticizes President Nixon for sending U.S. troops into Cambodia . In a rare public news conference, he criticizes Nixon's actions .
 U.S. troops will be withdrawn from Cambodia in three to seven weeks, Nixon says . Nixon meets with congressional committees at the White House to discuss troop withdrawal .
 Nixon pledges to not order U.S. troops to penetrate deeper than 21 miles into Cambodia without first seeking congressional approval . Nixon also pledges that he will not order United States troops to enter Cambodia without prior congressional approval.
 Governor Ronald Reagan closes down the entire California university system until May 11 . More than 280,000 students on 28 campuses are affected . The system includes more than 28 campuses in California .
 One U.S. spearhead, by troops of the 25th Infantry Division, moved across the border from Tay Ninh Province, to the Fishhook and Parrot’s Beak areas . The 25th Division is deployed in the area .
 The 1st Cavalry Division is airlifted into the jungle 23 miles west of Phuoc Binh, South Vietnam, northeast of the “Fishhook’s area .
 President Thieu says he and Premier Lon Nol of Cambodia have worked out “agreements in principle” for South Vietnamese troops to conduct continuing military operations in eastern Cambodia . Cambodia's premier says the two sides have reached an agreement in principle on the matter .
 Thieu makes it clear that South Vietnamese troops will not be bound by the restrictions President Nixon has placed on the use of U.S. forces in Cambodia . Thieu says that there is no deadline or limits to the South Vietnamese operations in Cambodia.
 Nixon: Operation will drive the enemy back, providing additional time for the training of South Vietnamese forces . Nixon says it will provide additional time to train and thus shortening the war for Americans .
 Nixon reaffirms his promise to withdraw 150,000 U.S. soldiers by next spring . Nixon also reaffirms promise to pull troops from Vietnam . Nixon: "It's time to get out of Vietnam"
 College students across the nation intensify their antiwar protests with marches, rallies, and scattered incidents of violence . College students march against the war .
 Between 75,000 and 100,000 young people demonstrate peaceably in Washington, D.C., at the rear of a barricaded White House . They oppose the Cambodian invasion and demand the withdrawal of U.S. military forces from Vietnam and other Southeast Asian nations .
 Afterward, a few hundred militants spread through surrounding streets, causing some damage . The militants spread out through the streets of surrounding streets .
 The United States vessels move no farther north than Neak Luong, in compliance with the U.S. policy of limiting United States penetration of Cambodia to 21 miles . The U.N. ships move no further north of the border .
 The blockade extends from Kompong Som, formerly Sihanoukville, to the South Vietnamese border . The blockade has been put in place since 2003 .
 Defense Secretary Laird says Vietnamization program is going so well that U.S. will have no ground fighting troops in Vietnam after June 30,1971 . Laird testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee .
 Police kill two African-American students and wound 12 others during student protests at Jackson State College in Mississippi . 12 people were wounded in the protests, including two black students, police say .
 This is the second highest weekly death toll of the war for the South Vietnamese . The South Vietnamese were killed in the first two weeks of the conflict .
 Congress is buried under an avalanche of mail, telegrams, and petitions opposed to the use of U.S. troops in Cambodia . Congress is virtually buried under a avalanche of letters and petitions .
 Communist forces shell more than 60 Allied positions to commemorate the 80th anniversary of Ho Chi Minh’s birth . Communist forces celebrate the 80 years anniversary of the Vietnamese leader .
 U.S. prepared to continue air cover, if needed, for South Vietnamese forces that are considered almost certain to remain in Cambodia after United States troops are withdrawn . The White House announces that the United States is prepared to provide air cover if needed .
 South Vietnam announces halt in repatriation of Vietnamese refugees in Cambodia . South Vietnam announced a halt in the repatriation .
 About 50,000 to 80,000 refugees have already been moved to South Vietnam since the start of evacuation efforts on May 10 . The refugees are expected to live in South Vietnam .
 Security measures are being instituted by the Cambodian government . Pham Huy Ty, head of South Vietnam’s permanent liaison mission in Phnom Penh, says the halt is due to greater security measures .
 The increasing presence of South Vietnamese troops in Cambodia has inflamed animosities between the two countries . South Vietnamese forces in Cambodia have inflamed the traditional animusities between them .
 A large South Vietnamese force led by Khmer Krom, ethnic Cambodian mercenaries assigned to the Cambodian army, attacks Cambodia’s largest rubber plantation in Chup, about 50 miles northeast of Phnom Penh . The plantation accounts for 50 percent of Cambodia's rubber production .
 An NVA regiment is reported to have retreated into the 70-square-mile plantation . NVA regiments are reported to be part of the NVA .
 In the subsequent fighting, 12 Khmer Rouge soldiers are reported killed and 15 captured . 15 civilian workers are killed and 80 others wounded .
 Norodom Sihanouk arrives in Hanoi and is greeted at the airport by Premier Pham Van Dong, Defense Minister Vo Nguyen Giap, and Foreign Minister Nguyen Duy Trinh .
 Sihanouk urges the people of Indochina to unite in their fight against foreign intervention . He urges the country's people to unite against foreign interference .
 South Vietnamese and Cambodian representatives sign agreements reestablishing diplomatic relations . Agreement provides for economic and military cooperation and dealing with the treatment of Vietnamese residents in Cambodia .
 In earlier fighting, 47 Communist soldiers are reported killed . South Vietnamese losses are 16 killed and two wounded . 47 Communist troops are reported dead; 16 are killed and 2 wounded .
 North Vietnamese sappers overrun part of a South Vietnamese fire base, but are beaten back after inflicting heavy losses . In heavy fighting 21 miles south of the DMZ, the sappers are seen overruning a fire base .
 President Nixon claims the Allied drive into Cambodia is the “most successful operation of this long and difficult war” and that he is now able to resume the withdrawal of United States troops from South Vietnam . Nixon: The Allied drive is now the most successful operation in the war .
 After June 30, says Nixon, “all American air support” for Allied troops fighting in Cambodia will end . Only remaining American activity will be attacks on enemy troop movements and supplies threatening U.S. forces in South Vietnam .
 Communist forces attack Cambodian troops at Kompong Thom, 87 miles north of Phnom Penh, and at Siem Reap, 80 miles to the northwest of the capital, Cambodia .
 Communist troops capture Kompong Thom and the nearby town of Am Leang on June 7, but are driven out on June 8 . Communist forces capture the town, but were driven out of the town .
 Vice President Ky says South Vietnam has no territorial ambitions in Cambodia . He says it will send military forces to help Cambodia wherever and whenever Phnom Penh asks .
 U.S. troops battle Communist forces within 11-mile radius of Memot in the Fishhook region of Cambodia . Memot is located 11 miles from Memot .
 4,000 ARVN and 2,000 Cambodian soldiers battle 1,400 Communist troops for provincial capital of Kompong Speu, 30 miles southwest of Phnom Penh . South Vietnamese forces make deepest penetration into Cambodia yet .
 The town was captured by the Communists on June 13, but retaken by Allied forces on June 16 . Allied forces captured the town on June 14 .
 The principal fighting rages in and around Kompong Thom, about 90 miles north of the capital, north of Bangkok .
 On June 18, Communist forces sever Highway 1, linking Phnom Penh with Saigon, 30 miles southeast of the capital . Highway 4, leading southwest to the port of Kompong Som, was also severed . Highway 1 was linking the capital to Saigon .
 The Nixon administration denies it relies on the Tonkin resolution as the basis for its war-making authority in Southeast Asia . Nixon administration takes neutral stance on the vote .
 All of the $7.7 million in military aid promised for the current fiscal year either has arrived or will arrive shortly . United States embassy in Phnom Penh discloses that the U.S. has stepped up the shipment of arms .
 Secretary of State Laird affirms the U.S. plans to continue bombing raids inside Cambodia after June 30 . Laird: The U.N. will continue to bomb inside Cambodia .
 Laird makes clear the “primary emphasis” of the raids will be the denial of routes for enemy troops and supplies . Laird refuses to rule out air support for Allied ground combat troops .
 All Cambodian troops are reported to have withdrawn from Ratanakiri Province . The northeastern part of the country is now under the virtual control of the Khmer Rouge .
 The final withdrawal of U.S. ground combat troops from Cambodia is completed . The withdrawal ends two months of operations in Cambodia . The United States has been in Cambodia for two months .
 President Nixon, in a written report on the U.S. operation in Cambodia, pronounces it a “successful” operation . President Nixon in written report: "Successful" operation .
 Nixon says Cambodia’s defense will be left largely to Cambodia and its allies . Ruling out the use of U.S. troops there in the future, Nixon says .
 Nixon notes that more than a year’s supply of weapons and ammunition was captured and that 11,349 enemy soldiers were killed by Allied forces . Nixon says more than one year's supply of ammunition and weapons was captured .
 The amendment bars funds to retain U.S. troops in Cambodia after July 1 or to supply military advisers or mercenaries . It also bars the use of “any combat activity in the air above Cambodia in direct support of Cambodian forces” without congressional approval .
 The amendment represents the first limitation ever voted on the president’s powers as commander-in-chief during a war situation . The amendment was passed by the House of Representatives on Tuesday .
 The House of Representatives rejects the amendment July 9 and it is eventually dropped from the Foreign Military Sales Act . The amendment was eventually dropped by the House .
 In costliest single battle of the year, 101st Airborne Division withstand heavy rocket, mortar, and ground attacks by the 803rd NVA Regiment . The battle took place on Fire Base Ripcord 25 miles west of Hue .
 President Thieu incorporates both the Regional Forces and the Popular Forces into the South Vietnamese Army . He redesignates the corps tactical zones as Military Regions . The South Vietnam Army is based in Vietnam .
 Major General George W Casey, commander of the 1st Cavalry Division, and six other army personnel are killed in a helicopter crash . He was flying from Tay Ninh to Cam Ranh to visit troops in the hospital when he was killed .
 Operation Clinch Valley was an airmobile assault into the border area near Khe Sanh to exploit enemy sightings from July 8 . The U.S. 5th Infantry Division, the 101st Airborne Division, and the 3rd ARVN Regiment were involved in the operation .
 President Thieu vows to “beat to death” those of his countrymen who call for peace with Communists . He vows to beat to death those of those calling for an ‘immediate peace” with the Communists . Thieu: South Vietnamese troops who participated in the
 U.S. troops abandon Fire Base Ripcord north of the A Shau Valley after heaving bombing strikes and artillery barrages fail to stop a North Vietnamese build-up around base .
 2,500 South Vietnamese troops move into Cambodia from Dan Phuc, in South Vietnam’s western Mekong Delta . The move raises the number of South Vietnamese soldiers in Cambodia to 20,000 .
 President Thieu declares South Vietnam’s conditions for peace are unchanged . He once again rules out any coalition government with the Communists . Thieu also rules out a government that might result from internationally supervised elections .
 Thieu puts the Communist side and those urging a more flexible negotiating position on notice that U.S. negotiators have no new proposals approved by the South Vietnamese government . Thieu says the United States negotiators have .
 In a battle in the Mekong Delta, South Vietnamese forces kill 44 Communist soldiers . South Vietnamese troops kill 44 Communists in the battle .
 Secretary of Defense Laird says recent bombings are part of a general interdiction campaign to protect United States forces in South Vietnam . U.S. warplanes are flying combat support missions for Cambodian ground troops .
 Nixon administration's definition of interdiction encompasses virtually all of Cambodia . Nixon administration’s definition of Interdiction is that it includes virtually all Cambodia .
 U.S. chief negotiator David Bruce attends first session of the Paris talks . United States chief negotiator begins talks in Paris .
 The Communist negotiators declare that the positions of both sides appear as intractable as ever . They declare that both sides seem to be intracting .
 U.S. air raids in Cambodia are for interdiction purposes, to protect the remaining United States troops in South Vietnam, and to aid the process of Vietnamization . Confidential orders are issued to all United States unit commanders .
 As part of the Vietnamization effort, South Vietnamese troops relieve U.S. units of their responsibility for guarding the Cambodian and Laotian borders along almost all of the South Vietnamese frontier .
 This is one of the biggest victories of the war for the regional forces in the war. This is a major victory for regional forces, says President Obama .
 Cambodia and the U.S. sign a $40 million military aid agreement . The agreement will provide training funds and a wide array of military equipment and weapons . The aid deal includes small arms, ammunition, communications equipment and spare parts .
 The aid package will be provided for the fiscal year ending June 30,1971 . It will provide for the next fiscal year, ending June 31, 1971 .
 Defense Secretary Laird announces the “Total Force” policy . It will lead to much greater reliance by the services on Guard and Reserve units .
 Viet Cong mortars shell the Mekong Delta village of Bu Chuc in Chau Due Province, killing 11 persons and wounding 42 . 11 people were killed and 42 were wounded in the attack .
 The bomb was intended to destroy the Army Math Research Center housed on the second through fourth floors of Sterling Flail . The bomb causes massive destruction to other parts of the building as well .
 Robert Fassnacht, a physics researcher, was killed in the attack . Four others were injured, none of whom are affiliated with the Math Center .
 Thirty-four U.S. servicemen are killed when two helicopters are shot down in separate incidents . Two helicopters were shot down, killing 34 servicemen .
 A total of 3,998 helicopters have been lost by this time in the war, 1,777 of them to enemy ground fire . The majority of the helicopters were shot down by enemy fire .
 Vice President Spiro Agnew meets with South Vietnamese president Thieu in Saigon . Vice President Agnew met Thieu at the end of his visit to Vietnam .
 Thailand announces it plans to withdraw its 11,000-man force from South Vietnam . No timetable is given for the withdrawal, but no timetable has been given .
 Communist forces attack a Buddhist orphanage and temple south of Danang, killing 15 and wounding 45 . 15 people were killed and 45 wounded in the attack, including 15 children .
 An estimated 6 million South Vietnamese cast ballots for 30 seats at stake in the senate elections . An estimated six million cast ballots in the elections .
 Communist forces attack at least 14 district towns, a provincial capital, and several polling places . Communist forces attacked at least four districts towns, the provincial capital and several polls places .
 Anti-government Buddhist candidates win 10 of 30 senate seats contested in the previous day’s election . Anti-gast Buddhist candidates also win 10 out of 30 seats in the senate .
 The senate as a whole remains in the firm control of conservative, pro-government supporters . However, the senate is still in the grip of conservative supporters .
 Catholics still hold 50 percent of the senate seats, even though they constitute only 10 percent of South Vietnam's population . Catholics are still in the majority of Vietnam's senate seats . Catholics still have 50 per cent of the seats in the senate .
 Operation Imperial Lake is an attempt to clear North Vietnamese forces from the Que Son Mountains south of Danang, I Corps. Troops from the Americal Division join U.S. Marines for the conduct of the operation . The operation is part of I Corps.'s I Corps .
 The operation begins with 10 marine artillery batteries pounding the mountains in one of the largest preparatory artillery strikes of the war . Shells rain down on 53 separate targets for six hours .
 The artillery strikes were followed by two hours of tactical air strikes . The air strikes were the first of two hours to take place .
 Senators George McGovern and Mark Hatfield (DOreg.) make an unsuccessful attempt to obtain a Senate resolution setting a deadline for all U.S. troops to be out of Vietnam .
 The amendment would have set a deadline of December 31, 1971, for complete withdrawal of American troops from South Vietnam . The amendment was passed by the House of Representatives on Tuesday .
 Also on this day, a bipartisan group of 14 senators sign a letter to President Nixon asking him to propose a standstill cease-fire for South Vietnam at the Paris peace talks .
 North Vietnamese chief negotiator, Xuan Thuy, who walked out of the talks in December 1969 returns to the negotiations, declaring that the position of North Vietnam remains unchanged . The position of the North Vietnam government remains unchanged, says Thuy .
 Thuy demands that the United States must agree to withdraw unconditionally and “renounce” the Saigon government . Thuy says the U.S. must also withdraw and "renounce" Saigon's government in Vietnam .
 In a strike directed against South Vietnam’s pacification program, VC guerrillas attack a civil defense training center in Binh Dinh Province . 14 South Vietnamese are killed and 26 wounded .
 The 101st Airborne Division, in coordination with the ARVN 1st Infantry Division, conducts Operation Jefferson Glen, a search and clear mission to prevent a North Vietnamese buildup and to support pacification operations in Thua Thien Province .
 This will be the last major military operation in which U.S. ground forces take part . The operation is expected to be the first major operation in the United States to take part in .
 A major attack by Cambodian loyalist forces commences, but makes little progress . Cambodia's capital, Cambodia, was attacked by loyalists, but was overrun .
 Henry Kissinger holds clandestine meetings with North Vietnamese representatives in Paris . Henry Kissinger met with North Vietnam representatives in France in the early 1950s .
 Le Due Tho does not attend either meeting; North Vietnam is represented by Xuan Thuy . North Vietnam also attends the meeting; Le Due tho is not at the meeting .
 A 2,000-man South Vietnamese force completes its military operations in the Parrot’s Beak area of Cambodia .
 South Vietnamese forces report killing 73 enemy soldiers . Farther to the south in the Mekong Delta, South Vietnamese troops kill 73 enemies .
 Nguyen Thi Binh, foreign minister of the Provisional Revolutionary Government, attending peace talks for the first time in three months, outlines an eight-point program . It is similar to another program first presented in May 1969 .
 In exchange for withdrawal of all United States and Allied forces by June 30, 1971, Communist forces will refrain from attacking the departing troops and offer to begin negotiations on the release of POWs, once the withdrawal is agreed to .
 MACV reports Communist forces have downed and destroyed nine U.S. helicopters in the last six days and have damaged eight others . Four Americans were killed and six were wounded in the attack .
 United States troops report killing 54 enemy soldiers in four actions near Danang . U.S. troops kill 54 enemy troops in four operations near the city .
 The revised “Hamlet Evaluation System” used by U.S. officials to measure progress in the pacification effort indicates that 92 percent of the population of South Vietnam is pacified and under control of the government .
 55 percent of the population of the U.S. favor the recently defeated McGovern-Hatfield amendment . 36 percent are opposed . The amendment would pull out of Vietnam by the end of 1971 .
 Twelve U.S. soldiers were killed and five wounded in accidents involving helicopter collisions and the accidental triggering of mines . 12 soldiers died and five were wounded in the accidents .
 More than 20,000 people gather at the Washington Monument for a Vietnam victory rally . Vice President Ky who was originally to have attended the event was not present at the event .
 The speaker pleads for continued assistance by Americans and other peoples of the world for South Vietnam in its struggle .
 President Nixon confers privately in Dublin, Ireland, with the United States negotiators to the Paris talks, David Bruce and Philip Habib . Nixon was in Ireland at the time .
 Nixon says European leaders on his recent tour showed a more sophisticated understanding of U.S. aims in Vietnam than they did when he toured Europe early in 1969 . Nixon says that European leaders showed a better understanding of United States aims in the Vietnam .
 15 South Vietnamese killed and seven wounded in two terrorist incidents north of Saigon . Communist forces shell 19 targets, killing 15 and wounding seven .
 Intensified Communist shellings continue for a third consecutive day . Most of them in the coastal provinces of the central and northern parts of South Vietnam .
 Seven refugees are killed and 52 wounded in an attack on a resettlement center near Phu My on the central coast of Vietnam . Seven refugees die and 52 are wounded in the attack, killing seven and wounding 52 others .
 President Nixon announces live-point proposal to end the war, based on a ‘standstill’ cease-fire in place in South Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia . In a televised speech, Nixon announces a proposal for ending the war in Vietnam .
 He proposes eventual withdrawal of U.S. forces, unconditional release of prisoners of war prisoners . He proposes political solutions reflecting the will of the South Vietnamese people .
 Nixon's proposals are well received at home, but will be rejected by the Communists . Nixon’s proposals will be well received by home-countryers, but rejected .
 The United States publicly urges the Soviet Union to use its “considerable influence” with the Communists to persuade them to accept President Nixon’s new proposals . The U.S. urges the Soviets to use their influence to persuade .
 The Communist delegation in Paris rejects President Nixon’s October 7 proposal as “a maneuver to deceive world opinion” The delegation continues to demand an unconditional and total withdrawal of United States forces from Indochina .
 The 199th Light Infantry Brigade and its four subordinate battalions depart South Vietnam for Fort Benning, Georgia, where the units will be deactivated . The units are deactivated and will be relocated to Georgia .
 Nixon announces that the U.S. will withdraw a further 40,000 troops before Christmas . Nixon also announces that he will withdraw more troops . The withdrawal is the largest withdrawal in the history of American troops .
 British counterinsurgency expert Sir Robert Thompson explains that smashing the VC is a prerequisite for solving the political troubles of South Vietnam . In a report prepared at the request of President Nixon, Thompson explains why smashing VC is necessary .
 U.S. and Allied intelligence and police efforts have failed to destroy the Communists’ subversive apparatus in South Vietnam, Thompson reports . The mission was a fiveweek secret mission in September and early October .
 The report concludes that success in other areas of pacification cannot solve the basic political problems of South Vietnam after the withdrawal of the bulk of U.S. forces .
 In two days of fighting in Quang Ngai Province, 10 Americans are killed and 24 wounded . 10 Americans were killed, 24 wounded in the fighting in two days .
 Hanoi releases a statement officially rejecting President Nixon’s peace proposal of October 7; he calls on the United States to reply to the “concrete proposals” advanced by the Provisional Revolutionary Government on September 17 . Hanois releases statement .
 Nine U.S. soldiers and 15 South Vietnamese soldiers are killed . Five Americans are wounded by a VC booby trap, 66 miles southeast of Danang . The incident occurred in the early hours of Saturday morning in the southern Vietnamese city .
 President Nixon announces that a further 40,000 American troops will be withdrawn from South Vietnam by the end of the year . President Nixon also announces that the withdrawal will be made from Vietnam .
 The Communists reject the proposal on troop withdrawals because they say Nixon refuses to set a date for the withdrawal of U.S. forces . Nixon continues to insist on mutual withdrawal of United States forces, they say .
 Many Communist soldiers were killed by close air support, helicopter gunships, and artillery . Many of the Communist soldiers are killed .
 The Americal Division has violated an April order prohibiting the use of defoliating agents, sources say . Sources say the Americal division violated the April order .
 Fourteen Americans are reported killed in mine and booby trap explosions in Quang Tin and Quang Nan Provinces . Fourteen U.S. citizens are reported to have been killed .
 Allied forces report killing 37 Communist soldiers without suffering any casualties . In other action, as part of the South Vietnamese offensive in Quang Tin Province, they kill 37 communist soldiers .
 In various actions, 41 VC are reported killed; elsewhere four South Vietnamese are killed and nine are wounded in VC shellings of two Mekong Delta towns .
 Fighting in five northernmost provinces comes to a virtual halt as the worst monsoon rains in six years strike the region . Fighting in the five northernest provinces has come to an end in the region's five northern provinces . Fighting has been on the rise in recent months as the monsoon
 President Thieu delivers a speech on the state of the nation before a joint session of the National Assembly . He asserts that pacification has now reached 99. percent of the population .
 Thieu says he will never accept a coalition government with the Communists . He cites ‘countless past experiences” that show it would not bring peace . Thieu: "Countless past . experiences" that show that such a coalition would not work .
 Communist forces fire four rockets into Saigon, killing seven civilians and wounding 25 . In their first attack on the capital since July 20, Communist forces attack Saigon . Seven civilians killed and 25 wounded .
 The United States hands over an air base in the Mekong Delta to the Vietnamese air force as part of the Vietnamization program . The U.S. hands over the base to Vietnamization efforts .
 Secretary of the Air Force Robert Seamans and General Abrams attend the ceremony . General Abrams also attends the ceremony in Washington, D.C.
 The air base will become the home of two South Vietnamese helicopter squadrons . The United States provides 62 aircraft, 31 of which are turned over with the air base .
 U.S. troops report killing seven NVA in battle 17 miles southeast of Danang . Fighting continues in the northern provinces of Vietnam .
 In another firefight, United States Marines report killing 20 NVA while losing one of their own killed . U.S. Marines say they killed one of the NVA members in firefight .
 The United States 2nd Brigade, 25th Infantry Division, becomes a separate command . The bulk of the division is preparing to depart South Vietnam . The division is the U.S. 2nd brigade of the 25th Division .
 The Supreme Court refuses to hear a challenge by the state of Massachusetts regarding the constitutionality of the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court .
 Massachusetts citizens claim protection under a state law that allows them to refuse military service in an undeclared war . By a six to three vote, the justices reject the effort of the state to bring a suit in federal court in defense of Massachusetts citizens .
 For first time in five years, there are no U.S. combat fatalities in Indochina . For the first time five years there have been no United States combat fatalities .
 The 6,000-man taskforce pulls out of Cambodia after failing to find new Communist troop sanctuaries . South Vietnamese taskforce pulled out of the country after failed to find a new Communist sanctuary in Cambodia .
 North Vietnamese gunners shoot down a manned but unarmed U.S. reconnaissance aircraft 42 miles south ofVinh in North Vietnam .
 It is the 13th U.S. plane shot down over North Vietnam since the November 1,1968, bombing halt . The plane was shot down by North Vietnamese forces .
 Defense Secretary Laird denounces the shooting down of the unarmed plane as a violation of “certain understandings” between the U.S. and North Vietnam . Laird: The shooting down is an example of a growing tension between the two countries .
 The United States is “ready to take appropriate action in response” to such attacks, Obama says . He hints at escalation in retaliation, saying the U.S. is ready to take "appropriate action"
 Also on this day, Vice President Spiro Agnew accuses network TV news of bias and distortion . Vice President Agnew: "I don't believe in the media. It's the media"
 The North Vietnamese continue to insist that they are bound by no agreement relating to the cessation of bombing on November 1, 1968 . They deny once again that they had accepted any conditions for the bombing halt .
 Nguyen Thanh Lee, a spokesman for the North Vietnamese delegation at the Paris talks, insists that “there is absolutely no tacit accord” between the U.S. and North Vietnam . Lee refers to “acts of provocation” by the Nixon administration designed as a pretext
 North Vietnamese troops attack two U.S. units in the northern jungles, killing four Americans and wounding 25 others . Four Americans were killed and 25 others were wounded in the attack .
 U.S. casualties in northern sector to eight killed and 49 wounded in the previous 24 hours . U.N. casualties now at 8 killed, 49 wounded, U.K. says .
 Ky describes the Cambodian operation of last May as the “turning point” of the war . As a result the enemy was forced to revert to low-level guerrilla warfare .
 Ky reports that his government is concerned that the Nixon administration might be yielding to the “pressure of the anti-war groups” and pulling out the remaining U.S. troops too quickly . Ky says he fears that Nixon might be pulling out troops too soon .
 Lieutenant William L Calley, charged with killing civilians at My Lai, begins at Fort Benning . The army court-martial of Lieutenant Calley will last until March 1971 .
 Communist forces shell Bien Hoa air base, killing three Americans and two South Vietnamese . Three Americans were killed and two were injured in the attack .
 Thailand will withdraw all of its 12,000 troops from South Vietnam by 1972 . Premier Thanom Kittikachorn says his country will withdraw 12,500 troops from Vietnam .
 President Nixon asks Congress for supplemental funds for the Cambodian government of Premier Lon Nol . President Nixon asked Congress for funds for Cambodia's government .
 Nixon asks for $155 million in new funds, including $85 million for military assistance . $100 million to restore funds taken from other foreign appropriations during the year .
 In Vietnam, a U.S. marine helicopter returning from a rescue mission crashes into the Que Son Mountains . 15 marines, including members of the patrol that were rescued, are killed .
 Nine civilians are killed and 43 are wounded when a Vietcong grenade is thrown into an open-air movie at Cong Thanh, 20 miles northeast of Saigon . The grenade was thrown into a movie at a movie theater 20 miles north of the city .
 Sergeant David Mitchell is acquitted in Fort Hood, Texas, of intent to murder 30 South Vietnamese civilians at My Lai in March 1968 . Mitchell was found guilty in a federal court in Texas on charges that he intended to kill 30 people .
 United States warplanes provide escort and attack North Vietnamese troop installations and ant-aircraft sites within two miles of the camp . U.S. warplanes provided escort and attacked North Vietnamese troops .
 The team finds no POWs and has to fight its way out of the camp . They kill 25 guards in a 40-minute fight at the camp while sustaining no casualties . However, the team finds out that the camp is not POWs .
 Hanoi Radio reports that “wave after wave” of U.S. bombers attacked targets in North Vietnam . The planes struck at targets ranging from Haiphong to Hoa Binh Province, southeast of Hanoa .
 North Vietnamese forces attack the headquarters of a South Vietnamese task force operating just inside the Cambodian border near Krek . North Vietnam forces attacked the HQ of the South Vietnam task force .
 Secretary of Defense Laird discloses the November 21 raid on the North Vietnamese prison camp at Son Tay . Laird emphasizes that it was the only operation that took place north of the 19th parallel .
 Communist delegations to the Paris talks say they will not attend the next session of the talks . They will protest the recent U.S. bombing raids against North Vietnam . The United States bombed North Vietnam in recent weeks .
 Xuan Thuy says the U.S. has invented the "understanding" allowing reconnaissance missions over North Vietnam . He says it's an excuse for “acts of war’s war” as an excuse .
 Secretary of Defense Laird says he will recommend resumption of full-scale air attacks on North Vietnam if Hanoi engages in major violations of the tacit understanding with the U.S. regarding the halt in the bombing of North Vietnam . Laird testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
 In Vietnam, a helicopter carrying South Vietnamese soldiers collides with a U.S. light plane in the Mekong Delta . 13 South Vietnamese and four Americans are killed .
 North Vietnam claims 49 civilians were killed and 40 wounded in the recent U.S. bombing raids . Nguyen Thanh Le, spokesman for the North Vietnamese delegation to the Paris talks, says 49 civilians died and 40 were wounded .
 Of this total, 28 are reported to have died in the bombing of a restaurant in Ha Tinh, just below the 19th parallel . The bombing is believed to have killed 28 people in total .
 A U.S. Air Force C-123 transport plane is reported missing with six Americans and 73 South Vietnamese aboard . Six Americans and three South Vietnamese were aboard the plane when it was reported missing .
 On December 7, the wreckage will be found in the Central Highlands, but there are no survivors . The wreckage is expected to be found on December 7 in Central Highlands .
 A South Vietnamese task force, operating in southeastern Cambodia, comes under North Vietnamese attack near the town of Krek . The attack comes under fire from the North Vietnamese army in the area .
 The South Vietnamese command reports repelling the assault and killing 48 enemy soldiers . The assault was repelled and killed 48 enemy troops .
 The South Vietnamese command also reports killing 33 Viet Cong in the Rung Sat Special Zone, 23 miles southeast of Saigon . The South Vietnam command also reported killing 33 of the Viet Cong .
 U.S. aircraft struck military targets near Hanoi during the attempted prisoner-of-war rescue mission at Son Tay . The Pentagon acknowledges the U.N. strikes during the rescue mission .
 U.S. Air Force C-123 transport plane crashes into mountain near Cam Ranh Bay . Plane carrying 32 Americans and 12 South Vietnamese . Only two American airmen survive the crash .
 MACV announces that a U.S. fighter-bomber has attacked a North Vietnamese antiaircraft position, five and a half miles north of the DMZ, near the Laotian border .
 Provisional Revolutionary Government announces that its forces in South Vietnam will observe three truces, from midnight December 24 to midnight December 27; for New Year, from . midnight December 31 to January 3, 1971; and for Tet, . from midnight January 26 to midnight January 30, 1971 .
 Allied commands announce there is an increase in fighting throughout South Vietnam . Allied commands report increased fighting in the area .
 Near the city of Dalat, in the Central Highlands, South Vietnamese report killing enemy soldiers in several clashes, while losing seven KIA and 22 wounded . Seven KIA, 22 wounded and seven killed in clashes .
 A 7,000-man force launches a major drive against a suspected Communist force of 3,000 soldiers in the U Minh Forest in the southern part of the Mekong Delta . South Vietnamese forces launch major offensive against suspected Communist forces in the forest .
 Communist forces fire rocket barrages against 22 towns and military bases throughout South Vietnam . Communist forces launch rocket attacks on 22 towns, military bases across the country .
 South Vietnamese forces push deeper into the U Minh Forest and report killing 59 Viet Cong in the first three days of the operation . The operation has been underway for three days .
 South Vietnamese troops report killing 35 Viet Cong in three small engagements . Troops kill 35 in small engagements against the Viet Cong . South Vietnam troops say they killed 35 in three engagements .
 North Vietnamese army newspaper declares that the country will not be intimidated by United States bombing threats . U.S. reconnaissance planes will be downed, antiaircraft installations will be set up anywhere, and troops will be massed in any sector, the newspaper says .
 The 4th Infantry Division and 1st Logistical Command depart South Vietnam . The 4,000-strong division and 1,500-strong brigade depart Vietnam . It was the first time the division had left Vietnam .
 South Vietnamese and Communist forces clash in the Fishhook area of Cambodia . Elsewhere, South Vietnamese forces clash with Communist forces in Cambodia .
 South Vietnamese government announces that it will observe only one-day truces for Christmas and New Year’s . South Vietnam government announces only one day truces will be held .
 If the North Vietnamese were not fighting 40,000 NVA soldiers inside Cambodia, they would “be over killing Americans” in South Vietnam, he says . He notes that if the army of Premier Lon Nol were not not fighting the NVA, the U.S.
 The defense opens its case in the murder trial of Lieutenant William Calley . Lt. Calley was shot and killed in 2009 . Calley is on trial for the murder of his wife and four other men .
 Defense attorney cites “superiors’ orders” as one of several reasons why noncombatants were killed . Defense attorney George Lattimer cites ‘superiors' orders’ as a reason for the deaths .
 Other reasons included the poor training of the platoon, the rage of the men who had seen buddies killed, and the expectation of fierce resistance . Other reasons include the expectation that fierce resistance would be fierce .
 Lattimer contends that Captain Ernest Medina, company commander, told the men that at long last they were going to fight the enemy . Medina ordered “every living thing” killed, he says, and ordered ‘every living creature' killed .
 Lattimer also charges that the whole episode was observed by higher commanders, including Lieutenant Colonel Frank Barker, task force commander, and General Samuel W Koster, commanding officer of the Americal Division .
 The United States 1st Marines and 51st ARVN Regiment conduct Operation Hoan Dieu-101 in Quang Nam Province, I Corps. The U.S. 1,000 Marines and ARVNs conducted the operation . The operation is part of I Corps .
 South Vietnamese forces report killing 26 Communist soldiers in the U Minh Forest . 39 Communist soldiers were killed in two other engagements in the Mekong Delta .
 Communist forces observe the 10th anniversary of the founding of the National Liberation Front . Communist forces bomb four Allied positions, down four U.S. planes, and ambush a United States convoy .
 Allied command reports killing 99 Communist soldiers in weekend actions . Allies kill 99 communist soldiers in actions ranging from the DMZ to the U Minh Forest .
 Defense Minister Vo Nguyen Giap affirms that U.S. unarmed reconnaissance flights over North Vietnam will be shot down . Giap says that the United States has no right to make such flights . U.N. defense minister says that such flights will not be allowed to take place .
 Congress adopts legislation that denies funds for the introduction of ground troops into Cambodia and Laos, but does not include a proposed ban on further operations elsewhere in Southeast Asia . Congress also denies funds to introduce ground troops to Cambodia, Laos and Laos .
 President Nixon is going beyond the 1968 understanding in threatening to renew the bombing of North Vietnam if it steps up the level of fighting in South Vietnam . Secretary of State Rogers acknowledges that President Nixon .
 Rogers, however, contends that this is because the situation has been changed by United States troop withdrawals . Rogers says the situation is changed by the withdrawal of U.S. troops from Afghanistan .
 South Vietnamese troops report killing 38 more enemy soldiers in the U Minh Forest in the Mekong Delta . South Vietnam troops say they have killed 38 enemy soldiers .
 Nixon’s proposal for a standstill cease-fire is not the “key” to a settlement, the newspaper says . Nixon's proposal is not ‘key’ to settlement, The Times says .
 Congress adopts legislation that denies funds for the introduction of ground combat troops into Laos or Thailand . But it does not ban further operations elsewhere in Southeast Asia . Congress also denies funds to introduce ground combat forces into Laos, Thailand .
 This brings the total number of vessels turned over to the South Vietnamese to 650 . This is a total of 650 vessels that have been turned over by the Vietnamese .
 About 17,000 Americans will remain with the South Vietnamese navy as advisers in shore positions and aboard South Vietnamese vessels . The U.S. will remain as advisers to the South Vietnam navy .
 U.S. military strength in South Vietnam has declined to 334,600; nearly 200,000 troops have returned home so far . United States military strength has declined since Vietnam began in 1968 .
 American losses for the year include 4,204 killed, bringing the total number of U.S. military personnel killed in action since 1959 to 44,228 .
 Free World Military Forces personnel in Vietnam have declined to 67,700 . South Vietnamese armed forces strength has increased to 986,000 . Free World military personnel have declined in Vietnam .
 Total South Vietnamese military personnel killed in 1970 is now 20,914, bringing the total number killed since 1965 to 133,522 . Total number killed in Vietnam since 1965 has now reached 133,500 .
 In Paris, peace talks are stalled, as all parties make demands that the others will not accept . None of the parties will make concessions, and none will make any concessions .
 Congress passes legislation forbidding use of U.S. ground troops in Cambodia and Laos . But not the use of United States airpower in those countries . Congress also bans use of ground troops, but not airpower .
 Cambodian and South Vietnamese forces continue a drive to clear the Communist blockade of the strategic Route 4 between Phnom Penh and Kompong Som . Route 4 is the nation’s sole port facility, Cambodia's sole port .
 MACV announces a program to combat widespread drug use by U.S. soldiers . MACV announced the program on Monday .
 A Defense Department report cites drug use as a cause for breakdown in military discipline and order . This action is taken after a Defense Dept. report cites use of drugs as a factor in breakdown in order .
 The army drops charges of a cover-up in the My Lai massacre against four officers . It makes a total of 11 people who have been cleared of responsibility during the trials . It is the first time the army has cleared 11 people of responsibility for the massacre .
 Admiral Thomas Moorer, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, arrives in South Vietnam to assess the military situation and check on the progress of the ‘Vietnamization’ effort . Accompanied by Adm. Moorer was chairman of Joint Chiefs .
 United States jets hit two North Vietnamese missile bases north of the DMZ in “protective reaction” strikes . U.S. jets hit the bases in "protective response" strikes . North Vietnam missile bases were hit north of DMZ .
 The Reverend Philip F Berrigan, serving a six-year prison term on charges of destroying draft records, and six others are indicted by a grand jury . They are accused of conspiring to kidnap Henry Kissinger and of plotting to blow up the heating tunnels of federal buildings in Washington .
 The ‘Harrisburg Seven’ deny the charges and denounce them as a government effort to destroy the peace movement . The “Harrisburg 7’s” as they come to be known, denounce the charges as an attempt to destroy them .
 B-52 bombers escorted by United States fighter-bombers strike Communist missile sites in North Vietnam along the Vietnam-Laotian border . U.S. bombers escorted along with U.K. fighter bombers strike Communist missiles sites .
 They find the camp empty but capture 30 enemy soldiers and sustain no casualties . They capture 30 soldiers and kill no casualties in the raid on the camp .
 A Hanoi communique accuses the United States of almost daily bombing raids on North Vietnam, to include defoliation missions . The U.S. has bombed North Vietnam several times in recent years .
 The Defense Department denies the charges, citing the use of “protective reaction’s strikes only . The U.S. Defense Department says the strikes are only ‘protective strikes only’
 The Democrats also introduce a resolution to end at once “all offensive action by the United States in Southeast Asia” and the removal of all United States troops by June . The resolution would also end all offensive U.S. action by Southeast Asia .
 The third straight session of the Paris peace talks continues, but there is still a stalemate . The Paris talks are still at a standstill, but the talks are expected to continue .
 This session marks the 100th meeting since the talks began on January 25, 1969 . This is the first session of the talks since the first meeting began in 1969 .
 Communist gunners shell central Phnom Penh for the first time and simultaneously penetrate the nation’s major airport, destroying much of Cambodia's military fleet . Cambodia's major airport was also penetrated by communist gunners .
 United States air operations are greatly stepped up in Phnom Penh . U.S. forces will clash with Communist forces in several battles outside the capital, Cambodia .
 Saigon reports withdrawal of 5,300 troops from Cambodia . Troops had been fighting alongside Cambodian soldiers to open Route 4 between Phnom Penh and Kompong Som .
 The two sides declare separate truces in observance of Tet, the Vietnamese lunar new year . Tet is the Vietnamese national holiday .
 At least 53 reported violations during the truce . Allied commands term it the quietest in recent years . Despite at least 53 violations, the truce has been quietest ever .
 The Communists interrupt their own cease-fire with a grenade explosion in a Binh Dinh theater that kills 10 South Vietnamese and a marketplace bomb blast that kills nine others . The Communist Party Party of Vietnam declares its own ceasefire with South Vietnam .
 The action starts with an armored/engineer task force from Fire Support Base Vandegrift clearing Route 9 to Khe Sanh . The action is part of an effort to clear Route 9 from the base .
 The objective of the operation is to secure a launch site for the initial phase of Lam Son-719, the South Vietnamese invasion of Laos that will commence on February 8 . The operation is aimed at securing the launch site .
 A force of 1,500 ARVN troops crosses the frontier into Cambodia’s Kompong Cham Province, already occupied by some 7,500 troops . In what is proclaimed a new campaign to eradicate Communist border sanctuaries, a force of around 1,000 ARV
 The drive is assisted by United States air support and 7,500 Cambodian troops . The U.S. air support is also involved in the Cambodian drive .
 The 9th NVA Division headquarters at Chup is the primary objective of the operation . The operation is being carried out in Chup, Chup .
 In a related development, the first gasoline convoy in over two months reaches Phnom Penh from Kompong Som . The convoy was the first to arrive in over 2 months .
 Premier Lon Nol suffers a paralyzing stroke and turns his duties over to Deputy Premier Sisowath Sirik Matak . Deputy Premier turns over his duties to deputy Premier Sirik Sirik Nol .
 Still debilitated by the stroke, he will resign on April 20, but a week later he will withdraw his resignation . Deputy Premier Sisowath Sirik Matak continues to run the government pending his recovery . He will stay on in a figurehead role in the figurehead
 Hueys from the Americal Division prepare for operations at their base in Chu Lai, January 1971 . Hueys were the first Hueys to arrive in the U.S. in Vietnam .
 ARVN forces begin Operation Lam Son-719, when 12,000 troops advance from Khe Sanh along Route 9 into Laos to interdict the Ho Chi Minh Trail and attack North Vietnamese base areas . South Vietnamese troops advance along the route into Laos .
 The objective is to seize Tchepone and destroy North Vietnamese supply dumps in the area . North Vietnam supply dumps are also being targeted in the region .
 United States ground forces are prohibited from entering Laos in accordance with a U.S. congressional ban . They provide logistical support, with some 2,600 helicopters to airlift Saigon troops and supplies . United States fire bases located along the border in South Vietnam .
 The drive on Hanoi’s supply routes and depots is described as the ‘bloodiest fighting’ of the Indochina war by some observers . Some observers say the drive is the “bloodiest fight” of the war . The drive is described
 Tchepone is a major enemy supply center on Route 9 . The South Vietnamese force thrusts its way across the border . The spearhead of the force is thrusting its way through the border toward TchePone .
 The push bogs down during the last week in February, some 16 miles from the border, after bloody fighting in which Communist troops overrun two ARVN battalions . However, resistance stiffens in the second week of the push .
 Four journalists, including Larry Burrows of Life magazine, Kent Potter of UPI, Henri Huett of AP, and Keisaburo Shimamoto of Newsweek are killed in a helicopter accident in Laos .
 Cambodian brigadier general Neak Sam is killed during a battle with the Communists . He was killed in a battle against the Communists in Cambodia .
 President Nixon refuses to set limits on the use of U.S. airpower, barring only tactical nuclear weapons . In his first major news conference since the beginning of the Laotian operation, Nixon refuses limits . Nixon: Use of airpower is limited to only tactical weapons .
 Americans will remain in South Vietnam as long as U.S. POWs remain in the hands of the North Vietnamese . President Obama says Americans will stay in Vietnam if POWs are held in hands of North Vietnamese forces .
 United States aircraft bomb antiaircraft artillery and missile sites near the border with Laos in renewed “protective reaction” strikes . U.S. aircraft bomb anti-missile sites near Laos border in renewed 'protective' strikes .
 MACV says action is taken after Soviet-built surface-to-air missile firings directed at U.S. aircraft bombing Ho Chi Minh Trail supply lines . MACV: This action is . taken after . Soviet-made missile fireings are directed at United States aircraft bombing
 In a Gallup poll taken following the Laotian offensive, President Nixon’s approval rating falls to the lowest point thus far in his term of office . Nixon's approval rating is the lowest ever in his presidency .
 The South Vietnamese advance into Laos comes to a standstill 16 miles over the frontier . The Vietnamese advance is 16 miles from the Laos border .
 Lieutenant General Do Cao Tri, commander of South Vietnamese forces in Cambodia, dies in a helicopter crash . Francois Sully, a Newsweek correspondent, also dies in the crash .
 Tri’s death stalls the offensive in Cambodia for several weeks, as his replacement, General Nguyen Van Minh, reformulates military strategy for the operation . Tri's death stall the offensive, with his replacement taking over from Tri .
 Phuong Hoang team conducts operations in Tay Ninh Province, 1969 . Legislation was initiated to forbid U.S. military support of any South Vietnamese invasion of North Vietnam without . Without . any . South Vietnamese . invasion of . North Vietnam . without Phuongs Hoang .
 The Foreign Relations Committee chairman declares the Laotian invasion illegal under the terms of the repeal of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which allowed the president only the mandate to end the war .
 Also on this day, President Nixon, in his State of the World address, emphasizes the “grave risk” of U.S. underinvolvement if the burden of the war is shifted too swiftly to the South Vietnamese .
 Operation Phoenix expanded to include the jailing and selective assassination of Viet Cong suspects and sympathizers . Operation Phoenix is expanded into a jailing, selective assassination program .
 The North Vietnamese delegation in Paris condemns the decision to permit the rescue of United States airmen from Laos by U.S. ground forces . North Vietnam delegation condemns the rescue .
 A bomb explodes in the Capitol Building in Washington, D.C., causing an estimated $300,000 in damages . No one was hurt in the explosion .
 A group calling itself the Weather Underground claims credit for the bombing as a protest of the U.S. supported Laos invasion . The group says the bombing was a protest against the invasion of Laos . The bombing took place during the Laos invasion of Vietnam .
 North Vietnamese gunners shell Kompong Som’s oil refinery, destroying 80 percent of its fuel storage facility . Oil refinery is one of the nation's main fuel storage facilities in the country .
 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment, less its 2nd Squadron, departs South Vietnam . The 11th armored cavalry unit is based in Vietnam .
 Zhou Enlai vows all-out Chinese support for the North Vietnamese struggle against the U.S. He visited Hanoi on March 10 and pledged support for North Vietnam against the United States .
 Operation Lam Son-719 continues as reinforced South Vietnamese forces push into Tchepone, the main North Vietnamese supply deport on the Ho Chi Minh Trail . South Vietnamese troops push into the main N.V. supply depot on the H. Chi-Minh trail .
 They find the base deserted and almost completely destroyed as a result of U.S. bombing raids . The base was destroyed by American bombing raids on the base during the war .
 Fighting near the Vietnam border intensifies in the second week of March Saigon . More than 6,000 of 21,000 ARVN soldiers are withdrawn as casualties soar on both sides .
 Allied officials declare that the offensive is still going according to plan, but fierce Communist counterattacks are seen as the reason for the Allied pullback . Allied officials say the offensive continues according to the plan but Communist counterattacks are believed to be behind the pullback.
 On March 15, the operation’s support base at Khe Sanh comes under fire from Communist mortar and rocket fire . The operation's support base was attacked by Communist forces on March 15 .
 John Gorton is ousted as the nation’s prime minister, following a crisis in which Defense Minister Malcolm Fraser resigns, and after a dispute with the army over Vietnam policy . The prime minister was ousted as a result of a dispute between him and the army .
 Operation Dewey Canyon II’s rear support base at Khe Sanh comes under relentless Communist mortar and rocket fire . The base is under constant fire from the Communist Party of Vietnam .
 53 men of the 1st Cavalry, Americal Division, disobey orders and refuse to retrieve a disabled helicopter and an armored vehicle from a battle zone . In Operation Lam Son-719, near the Laotian border, they refuse orders and retrieve a damaged helicopter and armored
 The soldiers are reassigned, with no disciplinary action taken, and their commanding officer is relieved of his position . The soldiers were reassigned and the officer was relieved from his post .
 North of the DMZ, United States jets attack North Vietnamese missile emplacements, destroying three . U.S. jets destroy North Vietnamese missiles, destroy three of the emplacement . North Vietnam has been known to be aggressive in recent years .
 A North Vietnamese missile downs a United States Air Force F-4 jet 35 miles inside North Vietnam . In a related incident, for the first time in two years, a U.S. Air Force jet was downed by a missile . The incident is the first of two years since the
 Some 3,000 North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao troops attack government positions near Luang Prabang . Two-day shelling of the Laotian capital’s airport followed two days of intense shelling .
 Operation Lam Son-719 does not officially end until April 6 . The operation is effectively over as the last South Vietnamese units pull out under heavy Communist pressure . Operation is under heavy pressure from the South Vietnamese .
 South Vietnamese forces also lose massive amounts of equipment, including tanks, artillery, and helicopters, during the fighting . However, the loss of equipment is not the worst of the conflict .
 Traffic on the Ho Chi Minhh Trail is soon back to its previous levels . Only the annual monsoons will slow it down .
 The U.S. State Department warns of retaliatory air strikes against North Vietnam . North Vietnam has massed antiaircraft and artillery emplacements in the DMZ’s neutral zone .
 The 5th Battalion, 7th Cavalry, 1st Battalion, 8th Cavalries, of the 1st Cavalry Division, depart from South Vietnam . The 2nd and 3rd Battalions of the 7th and 8th Battalions depart from Vietnam .
 The South Vietnamese district capital of Due Due is overrun by two North Vietnamese regiments . The South Vietnam district capital was overrun by the North Vietnamese .
 33 Americans killed and 76 wounded in one-hour battle in Quang Tin Province . Communist forces partly overrun a U.S. artillery base in northern Vietnam .
 They were driven off by artillery and air strikes, leaving behind 12 enemy dead . 12 enemy soldiers were killed in the attack .
 Lieutenant William L Calley was found guilty of premeditated murder at My Lai in a court-martial at Fort Benning, Georgia . Lt Calley is found guilty in the shooting death of a soldier in Vietnam in 2004 .
 Communists seize control of a 10-mile stretch of Route 4, near Phnom Penh . North Vietnamese and Viet Cong troops push back a Cambodian convoy of several battalions .
 With U.S. air support, South Vietnamese commandos raid North Vietnamese positions inside Laos . With United States air help, South Vietnam commandos attack North Vietnamese forces .
 Fire Base 6 is a South Vietnamese stronghold in the Central Highlands . Communist troops press a continuous assault against the garrison of 5,000-6,000 men . U.S. bombers pound the heavy Hanoi troop concentrations around the base .
 United States C-130 cargo transports begin dropping 1,500-pound bombs on April 12 . U.S. cargo transports drop bombs in an effort to break the siege of the city .
 Vice President Agnew calls the war critics “home-front sniper” Agnew says the majority of citizens believe the U.S. soldiers in Vietnam have acted patriotically . He says the antiwar activists have garnered all the publicity, and thus have made veterans feel guilty for
 President Nixon orders Lieutenant William Calley, Jr. removed from the Fort Benning stockade . President Nixon promises to personally review Calley’s court martial for the murders at My Lai . Calley's court martial will be reviewed by President Nixon .
 President Nixon announces that 100,000 American troops will leave South Vietnam by the end of the year . Nixon: "100,000 U.S. troops left Vietnam by end of year"
 9 of the 1st Infantry Division’s normally assigned infantry battalions depart . Nine of the division's normally assigned battalions leave the U.S.
 The 1st Marine Division and III Marine Amphibious Force depart South Vietnam . The 3rd Marine Division leaves South Vietnam at the end of the year .
 Operation Lam Son-720 is a follow-up to Operation LamSon-719 . Some 5,000 South Vietnamese begin a push into the Communist-held A Shau Valley along the Laotian border, but make no major contact along the route .
 Saigon newspapers describe the A Shau operation as only a ‘training exercise’ for the replacement of those troops lost in Lam Son-719 . The operation is only a "training exercise"
 Brigadier General Vu Van Giai, commander of Lam Son-720, announces that the operation will extend until October . The operation will continue until October, he says .
 During the week that follows, South Vietnamese forces will launch a counteroffensive to clear the surrounding area of NVA troops . NVA forces will then launch a week-long counteroffensive in the area .
 Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky says Operation Lam Son Son-719 was no victory . Vice President says the operation was no success in Vietnam's anti-ISIS campaign .
 U.S. jets carry out the 30th raid since January 1 against missile sites and aintiaircraft positions inside North Vietnam . The heaviest six-day period of raids since November 1968 bombing halt since November .
 The generally peaceful protest, called Dewey Canyon III, ends on April 23 with some 1,000 veterans throwing their combat ribbons, helmets, uniforms, and toy weapons on the Capitol steps .
 Earlier they had lobbied with their congressmen, laid wreaths in Arlington National Cemetery, and staged mock ‘search and destroy’ missions .
 Some 5,000 Washington police, backed by 12,000 troops, outmaneuver them . But some 5,500 Washington police officers, backed up 12,500 troops, make the difference .
 The Pentagon releases figures confirming that fragging incidents are on the rise . The figures are based on figures from the Pentagon .
 Veterans Against the War testimony before various congressional panels reveals that G Company 7th Battalion, 9th Marine Regiment, participated in Operation Lam Son-719 inside Laos, contrary to the congressional ban . They also charge that officially reported U.S. battle death tolls are lower than actual
 New Zealand, Australia, South Korea, and the United States will keep some forces in South Vietnam when the bulk of their combat troops are withdrawn . A meeting of Allied ministers reaches an agreement to keep some troops in Vietnam .
 Hostilities resume as NVA troops hit Allied installations throughout South Vietnam . NVA forces begin to attack Allied installations in South Vietnam.
 In the most devastating attack, the ammunition depot at Qui Nhon is blown up . The ammunition depot was blown up by an attack on the city .
 MACV announces that the U.S. force level in Vietnam is at its lowest since July 1966 . The force level has dropped to 281,400 men, the lowest since 1966 . MACV: The United States force level is now 281,000 men .
 The 45 dead bring total U.S. losses for the Vietnam War since 1961 to 45,019 . Indochina losses fourth only to Americans killed in the Civil War, World War II, and World War I .
 This serves to allay somewhat the controversy over whether disadvantaged social groups have borne an unfairly heavy combat burden . The decision is likely to ease some of the controversy about whether disadvantaged groups have been unfairly burdened .
 The 1st Cavalry Division, less 3rd Brigade, departs South Vietnam for Fort Hood, Texas . The division departs from South Vietnam to Fort Hood .
 The remaining brigade becomes a separate command with four infantry battalions and associated support units . The other brigade will be separate from the remaining brigade .
 Captain Eugene Kotouc found not guilty in the court martial relating to the My Lai massacre of March 1968 . Kotouce was the first captain to be found guilty of the massacre in 1968 . He was found to have been involved in the massacre .
 I Field Force Vietnam is disestablished and the 2nd Brigade, 25th Infantry Division, departs South Vietnam for Hawaii . The division departs for Hawaii.
 The militant antiwar demonstrations in Washington end as police, assisted by United States Marines from Quantico and Camp Lejeune, arrest 12,614 protesters . A record high for arrests in a civil disturbance in the nation's history .
 Due to inadequate detention facilities, most of those arrested are held 24 hours and then released, with the charges against them subsequently dropped . Most of those held are held for 24 hours before being released, then released .
 Reverend Carl Mclntire leads some 15,000 demonstrators carrying U.S. flags and Bibles in support of a military victory in Vietnam . In Washington, D.C., the Reverend Mlntire led the demonstration .
 Allied forces accuse the North Vietnamese of 66 violations of the cease-fire . The North Vietnamese are accused of violating the truce marking Buddha’s birth . Allied forces say 66 violations were made during the ceasefire .
 A force of some 5,000 soldiers with U.S. air support sweeps from Kandol Chrum south to Kandol Trach in an attempt to clear out Communist headquarters and training sites used for attacks inside South Vietnam .
 The Pathet Lao Patriotic Front announces its preconditions for peace, which include the end of U.S. intervention and bombing in Laos . U.N. intervention in Laos would end, including bombing, would be an end to the bombing .
 Laotian premier Souvanna Phouma is receptive to immediate peace talks, but does not comment on the Communist demand for a U.S. bombing halt . The Communist Party has demanded a United States bombing halt in Laos .
 Earlier, the South Vietnamese reportedly destroyed a North Vietnamese base camp and arms production facility in the A Shau Valley . The South Vietnamese are believed to have destroyed the base camp .
 On May 19, thousands of South Vietnamese troops engage the Communists in a six-hour battle . Three Allied helicopters and a reconnaissance plane are downed in the battle .
 Ground fighting, air strikes, and artillery fire continue in the A Shau Valley . South Vietnamese claim capture of more Communist bunker networks and destruction of supplies and ammunition .
 MACV acknowledges heroin addiction among the troops in South Vietnam has reached epidemic proportions . MACV acknowledged that heroin addiction is an epidemic .
 North Vietnamese forces obtain control of the Boloven Plateau in southern Laos by taking government strongpoints of Pak Song and Ban Houei Sai . After bitter fighting, North Vietnam forces take over the government strong points .
 North Vietnamese forces destroy 75 percent of Dong Elene, the Laotian military headquarters . North Vietnam forces destroy 25 percent of Laotan military headquarters in Vietnam .
 The army disciplines two generals for failing to conduct an adequate investigation of My Lai . Major General Samuel W Koster was demoted from two-star to one-star rank .
 North Vietnamese forces put pressure on United States positions along DMZ with heavy rocket and mortar attacks . U.S. forces were attacked by North Vietnam forces along the DMZ in the early 1980s . The U.N. Embassy in North Vietnam is located in South Korea .
 The assault on Fire Base Charlie 2 results in a direct hit on a bunker, killing some 30 soldiers . Some 30 soldiers were killed in the attack .
 North Vietnamese demolition experts infiltrate the major U.S. air base at Cam Ranh Bay . They blow up six aviation fuel tanks, for a loss of some 1. million gallons .
 At Fort Bragg, North Carolina, a newspaper advertisement signed by 29 U.S. soldiers supporting the Concerned Officers Movement results in controversy . The ad was signed by soldiers supporting a group of Concerned officers Movement .
 Some 1,000 North Vietnamese capture the strategic rubber plantation town of Snoul, driving out some 2,000 South Vietnamese . United States air strikes support the Allied forces .
 On May 31, Cambodia calls for peace talks, but demands that all North Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces withdraw . Cambodia is seeking peace talks but demands withdrawal of all forces from the country .
 Foreign Minister Torsten Nilsson reveals increased Swedish assistance to the Viet Cong, including some $550,000 worth of medical supplies . Swedish foreign minister reveals increased aid to the Vietnamese, including medical supplies.
 Similar aid is to go to Cambodian and Laotian civilians affected by the Indochinese fighting .
 The North Vietnamese conduct a series of 48 attacks during a 24hour period . The attacks include attacks against five Allied bases along the DMZ and the United States air base at Danang . The North Vietnam conducts 48 attacks in 24 hours .
 2,500 South Vietnamese begin a drive south of the zone to clear Communist infiltration routes . North Vietnamese attacks along the DMZ continue for a 17th day .
 In Saigon, a bomb blast levels a government building, leaving three civilians dead and 12 wounded . Three civilians were killed and 12 injured in the blast .
 Brigadier General John Donaldson has been charged with killing six Vietnamese and assaulting two others . The former brigade commander in South Vietnam has been accused of killing six people .
 The 43-year-old West Point graduate is the highest ranking officer to be accused of killing civilians in the war . He is the first general to be charged with a war crime since the Philippine insurrection 70 years ago .
 He is charged in connection with an incident in Quang Ngai Province in March 1969 . The incident took place in the same province in 1969 . He was charged with a crime in 1969, but has since been acquitted .
 Lieutenant Colonel William McCloskey, his operations officer in Vietnam, is accused of murdering two Vietnamese in a separate incident . He is also alleged to have killed two other Vietnamese in separate incident in Vietnam .
 A 2,000-man South Vietnamese force begins a drive to block Communist infiltration into the western part of the Mekong Delta region . The force has been deployed in the region since 2003 .
 A fierce battle develops around South Vietnam’s Fire Base Charlie, 12 miles southeast of Khe Sanh . The battle is part of the increased North Vietnamese DMZ attacks .
 Several senators, including Stuart Symington, J William Fulbright and Edward Kennedy, attacked Nixon administration policies in that country’s ongoing war in Laos .
 $350 million in annual military aid and the employment of 4,800 CIA-financed Thai troops . Chief among their concerns are $350m in annual aid and 4,000 CIA-funded troops .
 State Department defends use of ‘volunteer’ Thai soldiers in Laos as predating 1970 congressional ban on the use of mercenaries . State Department says use predated 1970 congressional law banning mercenaries in Laos .
 Communist troops wage an intensive battle to gain control of the strategic Vi Hear Suor marshes marshes .
 On June 9, the North Vietnamese capture Srang, 25 miles southeast of Phnom Penh, killing many government troops in the 10-hour assault . Many government troops were killed in the assault, which lasted 10 hours .
 An army first lieutenant en route to Vietnam goes absent without leave and becomes the first U.S. officer to request asylum in Sweden . The officer is the first United States officer who requests asylum in the country .
 Operation Lam Son-720 continues in the A Shau Valley . 6,000 South Vietnamese troops move north to unite with two Saigon marine brigades just south of the DMZ to block enemy infiltration .
 State Department officer Daniel Ellsberg will publish portions of the 47-volume analysis of how the United States commitment in Indochina grew over a period of three decades . Over the next three days, the newspaper will publish the findings .
 The publication of the documents precipitates a crucial legal battle over “the people’s right to know” and leads to an extraordinary session of the U.S. Supreme Court to settle the issue .
 Two votes in the Senate to set a Vietnam troop withdrawal deadline fail to pass . The next day, a similar measure in the House also fails .
 Communist commandos attack three naval guard posts inside Phnom Penh, leaving four sailors dead . Four Cambodian sailors killed .
 U.S. secretary of state Rogers and Japanese foreign minister Kiichi Aichi sign a treaty on Okinawa . The treaty was signed after 21 months of hard negotiations . Okinawa was scene of one of the bloodiest World War II campaigns in the Pacific .
 Under terms of the treaty, nuclear weapons are banned from Okinawa . It is due to remain the most powerful base in the western Pacific . Under terms, the use of the base for wars in Asia is to be limited .
 Antiwar forces in Congress make a surprising comeback after setbacks earlier in the month . Senate passes a measure favoring a complete pullout by the spring of 1972, in 57 to 42 vote .
 The legislation is conditional on a U.S.-Hanoi accord on the release of American POWs . The legislation would be conditional on an agreement on POWs being released by the U.N.
 Despite U.S. B-52 raids on June 21 and a 1,000-man South Vietnamese reinforcement on June 24, the South Vietnamese have to abandon the base when the North Vietnamese bombardment destroys 80 percent of their bunkers .
 As announced by the North Vietnamese delegation, the Pathet Lao renew their peace proposal which includes an immediate end to U.S. military involvement and bombing raids in Laos . North Vietnam delegation .
 Laotian premier Souvanna Phouma rejects the plan, calling for Vientiane as the site of any proposed peace talks . She also demands the prior withdrawal of North Vietnamese troops from Laos .
 3rd Amphibious Brigade departs from Danang, ending six years and three months of U.S. Marine combat operations in Vietnam . Last United States Marine combat unit to depart from Vietnam .
 The Supreme Court rules that articles based on classified Pentagon material may be published by newspapers . The decision was made by the Supreme Court .
 The 26th Amendment to the Constitution, granting 18-year-olds the vote, is ratified and becomes law . The amendment was ratified by Congress in 2008 .
 Antiwar activists have pointed to the injustice of asking those who have no voice in the political decision to sacrifice themselves in battle . The Vietnam War, fought mostly by United States soldiers too young to vote, is the major cause for reform .
 6,100 U.S. soldiers depart the Central Highlands, beginning the wind-down of the United States combat role in that region . In the single largest troop pullout since the phased withdrawal began in 1969 .
 The majority of the some 236,000 U.S. troops remaining in Vietnam are in the bitterly contested northernmost provinces of South Vietnam . Most of the U.N. troops remain in the country's most contested provinces .
 By the end of the month, all United States Marine units will have departed, with only marine advisers and embassy guards remaining . The U.S. Marine Corps is closing its base in Haiti .
 The Viet Cong present a new seven-point peace plan at the Paris talks, offering release of all U.S. and Allied prisoners of war in North and South Vietnam in return for a United States troop pullout by the end of 1971 .
 The plan also calls for the end of all U.S. political and military intervention in both Vietnams . The plan would end Vietnamization and end all United States intervention in Vietnam .
 The initial U.S. and South Vietnamese reaction to the plan is noncommittal . The United States says it "cannot possibly accept” the proposal as it stands . However, the ambassador concedes that the plan has some new elements, he will ask for a “fresh
 United States helicopters airlift some 1,500 South Vietnamese into the Parrot’s Beak sector to begin a new drive to block Communist infiltration into the Saigon region .
 Two-thirds of the South Vietnamese withdraw after no contact is made with the enemy . The drive is halted on July 15 and two-thirds withdraw . The South Vietnamese pull out of the battle after contact with enemy is made .
 Later in the month, ARVN forces launch four separate drives inside Cambodia . ARN forces will launch separate drives in Cambodia .
 MACV turns over complete responsibility for the defense of the area just below the DMZ to South Vietnamese troops . MACV has been in charge of the defense forces for more than a decade .
 Two separate contingents of 50 United States artillerymen remain at each base to monitor radar equipment and to man artillery pieces .
 Two U.S. fighter-bombers destroy an emplacement of antiaircraft guns near the Mu Gia Pass . In the 46th protective reaction strike inside North Vietnam since the beginning of the year .
 Laotian tribesmen, reportedly led by CIA advisers, take control of Plain of Jars . Seven-day drive met little resistance, meeting little resistance .
 Defense Department denies any involvement by U.S. advisers . Defense Department subsequently denies any participation by United States advisers .
 U.S. Air Force Captain Thomas Culver found guilty of participating in British antiwar demonstration . Culver was in civilian clothes when he took part in the anti-war demonstration in London .
 The North Vietnamese, Viet Cong, and the Soviet Union react negatively to the Chinese proposal . The proposal was rejected by the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong .
 President Nixon stuns the world by disclosing that he will visit China before May 1972 . Nixon made the announcement in a surprise announcement in Beijing and the U.S.
 Two thousand Saigon troops sweep southeastern Cambodian area to block North Vietnamese infiltration into Mekong Delta . Two thousand Vietnamese troops sweep the southeastern Cambodiaian area . North Vietnam infiltration into the Mekong River .
 On July 21, some 10,000 South Vietnamese already inside Cambodia, aided by an armored brigade and United States artillery and helicopter gunships, sweep a more northeasterly region, engaging the Communists on July 22 between Krek and Minot . On July 22, some South Vietnamese
 On July 26, about 1,000 Saigon troops cross into Cambodia some 90 miles north of Saigon . The border crossing occurred 90 miles from Saigon, 90 miles south of the capital .
 On July 28, 3,500 Saigon forces with 80 armored vehicles will begin a drive north of Kampong Trabek near Route 1, the main highway linking Phnom Penh to Saigon . The move will begin on July 28 with 3,000 Saigon troops .
 Four relatives of Vietnam POWs accuse Vietnam Veterans Against the War leader John F Kerry of using POW issue to further his own political goals . Four relatives say Kerry is using issue of POWs to further political goals in Vietnam .
 The North Vietnamese see the forthcoming Nixon visit to China as a divisive attempt by the U.S. to insert a wedge between Hanoi and Beijing . Nixon's visit to Beijing is a 'divisive attempt' by the United States .
 U.S. helicopters insert a battalion of 1,600 Saigon troops into the A Shau Valley . The mission marks the fourth phase of Operation Lam Son-720 . The operation is part of a U.N. effort to insert troops in the A-Shau Valley in
 Chief U.S. delegate to Paris peace talks, David Bruce, resigning as of July 31 for reasons of health . Bruce: "I'm not going to go to the United States. I'm going to the U.N. for health reasons"
 William J Porter, U.S. ambassador to South Korea, named to succeed Bruce in Paris . Porter will succeed Bruce as ambassador to the U.K.
 The head of the Viet Cong delegation, Nguyen Thi Binh, proposes to identify all U.S. POWs as soon as the United States designates a deadline for the complete withdrawal of all its troops . In an interview on the following day, he said he would identify all
 She also criticizes Porter for brutal policies in the South Vietnamese pacification program . Porter was deputy U.S. ambassador in Saigon when he was in charge of the program .
 The Nixon administration acknowledges that the CIA is maintaining a 30,000-man force of “irregulars” fighting throughout Laos . The CIA maintains a force of "irregular" forces in Laos .
 The report notes increased Chinese road-building activity in northern Laos and the placement of new long-range, radar-directed antiaircraft guns along the road from Muong Sai .
 ARVN forces supported by South Vietnamese fighter-bombers and helicopters level two Cambodian villages held by Communist troops in the Parrot’s Beak region, killing many of the enemy soldiers .
 South Vietnamese forces have been operating inside Cambodia since early spring . The South Vietnamese government has been operating in Cambodia since spring .
 Last remaining troops of the 4th Battalion, 503rd Infantry, 173rd Airborne Brigade are pulled out of the field and begin preparations to leave Vietnam . The unit was the first U.S. combat unit to go into action in 1965 .
 Cambodian government forces overrun strategic town of Prey Kry . 11-day operation to block an essential Communist infiltration and supply route north of Phnom Penh .
 The North Vietnamese conduct three separate assaults against South Vietnamese ground positions . The attacks were conducted in three separate attacks on South Vietnamese forces .
 Cambodia demands that South Vietnamese troops be pulled out of the country due to alleged atrocities committed by them against Cambodian civilians . Cambodia demands the withdrawal of the troops .
 Australia and New Zealand declare that they will withdraw their respective troop contingents from South Vietnam by the end of the year . New Zealand and Australia declare they will pull out of South Vietnam .
 The Australians have 6,000 men in South Vietnam and the New Zealanders number 264 . The New Zealander has 264 men in the country .
 Australian prime minister William McMahon proclaims that the South Vietnamese forces are now able to assume Australia’s role in Phuoc Tuy Province, southeast of Saigon . Australia will give South Vietnam $28 million over the next three years for civilian projects .
 Lieutenant William Calley’s life sentence for the My Lai massacre is reduced to 20 years . Lt. Calley was sentenced to life in prison for the massacre . Lieutenant Calley's life sentence reduced to life sentence of 20 years in prison .
 General Duong Van Minh and Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky accuse incumbent President Nguyen Van Thieu of rigging the election and withdraw from the race . The candidates accuse President Thieu and incumbent President Duong van Minh of rigging their election .
 Communists launch a new offensive to disrupt the upcoming General Assembly elections in South Vietnam . Communists launch new offensive against the upcoming elections in the country .
 United States bases also come under attack at Lai Khe, Cam Ranh Bay, where sappers blow up part of the ammunition dump . The U.S. bases are also attacked by sappers .
 The 1 st Brigade, 5th Infantry Division, departs South Vietnam, having operated along the western edge of the DMZ since January 1971 . The 1st Brigade has operated in the area since 1971 .
 Some 13,500 ARVN troops with United States air support begin Operation Lam Son-810 . Operation is aimed at seeking out and destroying NVA bases near DMZ adjacent to the Laotian border . There are reportedly about 15,000 NVA in the area of operation .
 VC and North Vietnamese representatives in Paris turn down new chief delegate William L Porter’s request for secret negotiations to break the deadlock .
 Defense Minister Yoo Jae Heung announces pull-out of 48,000-man force from South Vietnam . Pull-out will be completed by mid-1972 .
 South Vietnamese troops launch an operation to destroy a Communist stronghold in the U Minh Forest of the Mekong River Delta . The operation was part of an offensive to destroy the Communist stronghold .
 NVA gunners down 11 U.S. helicopters supporting the ARVN operation . During the fighting, 11 helicopters were shot down by the NVA .
 Government forces retake Paksong on the Boloven Plateau in a bitter battle . Government forces take control of the area in a fierce battle .
 Fourteen South Vietnamese and one American die when a Saigon nightclub is bombed by a VC terrorist . Fourteen of the dead include one American and one South Vietnamese .
 15 South Vietnamese soldiers and three U.S. advisers killed in ambush on Michelin rubber plantation . 15 Vietnamese soldiers, three United States advisers dead in ambush .
 The mission is meant to lessen the chance of a large-scale North Vietnamese campaign to disrupt South Vietnam’s October presidential elections . South Vietnam's October presidential election will be held in October .
 The Senate defeats a liberal-led filibuster against the Selective Service bill in a 61 to 30 vote . The vote was the result of a vote of 61-30 .
 The House had passed the compromise version of the two-year draft extension bill in August . It enabled the president to resume military inductions, halted since the expiration of the previous draff law in June .
 The bill also contains a record $2.2 billion military pay raise . It also includes authorization for the president to drop undergraduate student deferments . The bill includes a $2 billion pay raise and a $1.5 billion national defense budget .
 Captain Ernest L Medina found not guilty on all charges in his court-martial relating to the My Lai massacre of March 1968 . Captain Medina was convicted of all charges against him .
 The North Vietnamese delegation boycotts the Paris peace talks in opposition to the U.S. raids conducted on September 21 . The North Vietnam delegation is boycotting the peace talks . North Vietnam is protesting the raids carried out by the United States .
 Hanoi protests that many civilians were killed or wounded in the air attacks of September 21, describing them as an intensification of the war . Hanois calls the attacks a "intimensionification" of the conflict . The attacks were carried out on September 21 .
 U.S. and South Vietnamese forces stave off Communist assaults along the Cambodian border . United States and South Vietnam forces battled off Communist forces in Vietnam . U.N. forces were able to repel Communist attacks on the border .
 The Allies begin a counteroffensive on September 29 to reopen Route 22 between Tay Ninh, South Vietnam, and Krek, Cambodia . Route 22 is located between South Vietnam and South Cambodia .
 MACV moves 1,500 troops and armored vehicles to the front just inside South Vietnam . The 20,000 South Vietnamese in Cambodia are reinforced by 4,000 more men . MACV says it has increased the number of Vietnamese troops in Cambodia .
 United States B-52 bombers batter North Vietnamese positions inside Cambodia . U.S. bombers hit North Vietnam positions in Cambodia . North Vietnam was caught up in Cambodia during the war .
 During the offensive, Saigon forces were able to lift two Communist sieges of South Vietnamese bases, at Fire Base Tran Hung Dao and Fire Base Alpha inside Cambodia on October 9 .
 China and North Vietnam sign an aid treaty in Hanoi, Vietnam . The treaty is expected to raise Chinese economic assistance over the $200-250 million it currently grants annually to North Vietnam . China currently grants $200 to 250 million annually to Vietnam .
 The Senate approves a tough Vietnam pull-out amendment sponsored by Mike Mansfield for the second time . The amendment is sponsored by Mansfield, who is a Vietnam veteran . Mansfield's amendment is the second attempt to pull out of Vietnam .
 Republicans join Democrats for the 57 to 38 vote, backing a rider calling for withdrawal of U.S. troops from Southeast Asia within six months . The rider to the $21 billion military procurement authorization bill calls for withdrawal .
 Hostilities in the Mekong Delta flare up near Kien Thien, leaving 16 North Vietnamese and 18 South Vietnamese dead . 16 North and South Vietnamese killed in clashes .
 87 percent of the nation’s eligible voters turn out, according to official accounts . President Obama receives 94. percent of votes cast .
 The election is marked by protests from students, veterans, and Buddhist groups . Students and veterans protest the election . The election has been marked by students and veterans .
 Communist gunners fire three rockets into Saigon, killing three civilians . Campaign was designed to disrupt the balloting in Vietnam's first election .
 U.S. B-52s drop nearly 1,000 tons of bombs on enemy targets near Krek in Cambodia and around the South Vietnamese city of Tay Ninh . The most intensive air strike on NVA bunkers and artillery sites in over a year .
 Allies report 2,026 enemy casualties during the operation . It is the last major operation in which U.S. ground forces participate .
 Staff Sergeant John V Sexton Jr. becomes the 22nd American prisoner to be freed by the VC in 10 years . Staff Sergeant Sexton, Jr., is the 22th American prisoner freed by VC in ten years .
 As a “reciprocal gesture,” the United States releases a North Vietnamese officer in Cambodia . The U.S. hopes the move will spur the liberation of other United States POWs . The move is a "recipartisan gesture"
 Two-thirds of the 1,618 U.S. servicemen reported missing are assumed dead . The previous day, a United States spokesman announced that two-thirds had been reported missing .
 Washington proposes free elections in South Vietnam to be organized by an independent body representing all political forces in the South . Thieu resigns one month before elections to be held in South .
 Several U.S. soldiers at Fire Support Base Pace near the Cambodian border refuse to go out on a night patrol .
 The command is cancelled when it becomes known that a South Vietnamese unit is already performing the mission . The command was cancelled after it became known that the South Vietnamese had already performed the mission in Vietnam .
 Senator Edward Kennedy demands that the Pentagon investigate the issues arising from a petition submitted by 65 U.S. soldiers stationed at Fire Support Base Pace . They say they had been ordered to carry out border combat missions contrary to stated United States policy .
 General Lon Nol suspends the Cambodian National Assembly and announces that he will rule by executive decree . He announces that the National Assembly will be replaced by an executive decree.
 He says that he is doing so because the “sterile game of democracy” is hampering the war-torn country in its fight against the Communists . He says he wants to stop the ‘sterile’ game .
 On October 22, Lon Nol abolishes constitutional rule after declaring a state of emergency . On October 24, he abolished constitutional rule with the help of state-of-emergency forces .
 The United States government declares its continuing support for the Phnom Penh government . Despite these moves, the U.S. government declares support for Cambodia .
 More than 2,500 South Vietnamese troops begin a drive against an estimated 1,600-2,000 Communists north of Krek in Cambodia . An estimated 2,600 Communists are believed to be at least 2,000 .
 On October 28, Saigon will report that the enemy has withdrawn before the ARVN troops and armored units could engage them . Saigon is expected to announce the withdrawal on October 28 . The withdrawal will be reported by Saigon on October 31 .
 Fighting intensifies as Cambodian government forces battle with VC and NVA troops northeast of Phnom Penh . Most significant engagements occur around provincial capitals Kompong Thom and Rumlong .
 The Communists begin a siege of these garrisons after their demolition frogmen destroy a crucial Route 6 bridge, thus severing supply lines for the 20,000 Cambodians on the northeast front . The siege begins after the demolition of a crucial bridge .
 The total number of U.S. troops remaining in Vietnam drops to 196,700 . That's the lowest level since January 1966 . The total remains at a low level of 196,600 .
 Nguyen Van Thieu sworn in for his second four-year term amid massive security precautions . Nguyen Van thieu is sworn in as president of Vietnam for second time .
 A thousand South Vietnamese troops begin a drive against Communist infiltration routes, southwest of Kompong Traket, that lead toward Saigon . A thousand of the troops are on the move to counter Communist infiltration .
 Ten government troops die in a Communist attack on Bam Nal, 70 miles northwest of Phnom Penh . The attack is the first of its kind in the country's history .
 Communist forces bombard Phnom Penh airport, killing 25 persons and wounding 30 . 25 persons killed and 30 wounded in the attack, including 30 people .
 At the same time, another North Vietnamese unit attacks a radio transmission facility nine miles to the northwest, leaving 19 Cambodians dead . At the time of the attack, 19 Cambodian were killed in the attack on a radio facility .
 President Nixon states that an additional 45,000 American troops will leave South Vietnam during December and January . United States ground forces are now in a defensive role and all offensive action is being undertaken entirely by South Vietnamese forces .
 Saigon military spokesmen report a massive Communist buildup of supplies near the Ben Karai and Mu Gia passes in North Vietnam . Predicting a major drive down the Ho Chi Minh Trail into Laos and Cambodia .
 Intelligence photographs also reveal extensive road repair activity and new antiaircraft emplacements . Road repair activity also revealed new ant-aircraft emplacement .
 U.S. B-52s step up air raids against Communist strongholds in Cambodia, Laos, and South Vietnam . In response to the threat, United States stepped up air strikes .
 Government forces incur heavy losses as the siege of Rum Long turns into a rout . Government forces suffer heavy losses during the siege .
 As fighting gets closer to Phnom Penh, the U.S. steps up its air activities in support of the Cambodian government . The United States has stepped up air support for the government .
 United States helicopter gunships strike at North Vietnamese emplacements at Tuol Leap, 10 miles north of Phnom Penh . U.S. helicopter gunship gunships attack North Vietnamese .
 Prime Minister Kittikachorn of Thailand seizes complete power, suspending constitutional rule and imposing martial law . Citing “the increasing threat to national security,” PM Kittikchorn cites “an increasing threat of national security’s”
 Kittikachorn pledges to continue Thailand’s proUnited States and antiCommunist policy . Backed by military and civilian leaders described as a “revolutionary council,” Kittikchorn pledges .
 Cambodians appeal to Saigon for help as Communists get closer to Phnom Penh . Saigon was occupied by the Vietnamese government in the 1960s .
 Eight-person Cambodian delegation flew to the South Vietnamese capital to officially request South Vietnamese artillery and engineer support for beleaguered government troops .
 U.S. National Conference of Catholic Bishops issues its most forceful resolution to date opposing the Vietnam War . The resolution was issued in Washington, D.C., by the Catholic bishops .
 Large-scale South Vietnamese offensive begins against a reported 5,000 Communists in the Mekong Delta between the U Minh Forest and the Ca Mau Peninsula, but they encounter only light resistance . The offensive begins in the early 1950s .
 About 25,000 South Vietnamese troops, aided by 2,500 Cambodians, begin a major offensive against the North Vietnamese around Phnom Penh . The Khmer Rouge close in on the capital, as the South Vietnamese advance .
 The drive is aimed at an area near Chup, reportedly the headquarters for three NVA divisions and several supply depots . The drive encounters only light resistance through November 30 .
 U.S. B-52 bombers, helicopter gunships, and other aircraft intensify their strikes on Communist targets in support of major South Vietnamese offensive in Cambodia .
 Despite a prohibition against any U.S. ground presence in Cambodia, United States advisory personnel are sighted in Krek and Phnom Penh . Despite a ban against any United States ground presence, the U.N. has a presence in the country .
 Some 15,000 South Vietnamese begin a new drive in the Central Highlands aimed at Communist bases there . Some of the country's communist bases are located in the central Highlands .
 The United States provides artillery and air support, losing three helicopters to enemy fire . The U.S. has lost three helicopters in the last two years .
 The Americal Division, including the 11th Infantry and 198th Infantry Brigades, is deactivated . The 11th, 198th and 11th infantry and 2nd infantry brigades are deactivated.
 Communists renew their attacks on government positions, forcing the retreat of Cambodian forces from Ba Ray, six miles northeast of Phnom Penh and from nearby Kampong Thmar .
 As resistance deteriorates, the Cambodian government issues a plea for intensified U.S. and South Vietnamese air support . Cambodia's government has appealed to the United States and South Vietnam for intensified support .
 On December 2, the North Vietnamese overrun Cambodian forces trying to reopen Route 6 . The North Vietnamese overtook Cambodian troops trying to re-open the route .
 Nearly half of the 20,000-man government contingent flees, as hundreds die . Hundreds die, including hundreds of thousands of people, in the chaos .
 The Communists regain control of a 30-mile stretch of Route 6, cutting off thousands of refugees . Thousands of refugees and some 10,000 government troops are cut off in Kampong Thmar area .
 On December 6, the Cambodian forces abandon the village of Bat Do Cung, 16 miles north of Phnom Penh, leaving some 50 dead . Some 50 people were killed in the village .
 Hanoi Radio reports that the Cambodians have lost some 12,000 fighting men in the past week’s action . On the same day, Hanois Radio reports the Cambodian have lost 12,00 fighting men .
 Communist gunners renew their shelling of Phnom Penh on December 7 . They fire three rockets into the capital and eight rockets into international airport . The capital and international airport are the targets .
 The next day the battle continues nine miles from Phnom Penh . 1,000 government troops try to hold back the North Vietnamese near the hamlet of Sre Ngei .
 Cambodian forces are successful in recapturing Kleah Sanday, 10 miles south of Phnom Penh, but two days later they are forced to abandon the Pnom Baset garrison . The base is located eight miles outside of the city, eight miles from the city .
 Two North Vietnamese battalions capture the strategic town of Saravane and its air strip at Ban Khot north of the Boloven Plateau . Two North Vietnam battalions take the strategic city and its strategic air strip .
 Both sides fail to set another meeting date after 138th session of peace talks . For the first time since the Paris peace talks began, both sides have not set another date .
 The standoff is spurred by the Communist refusal to accept a proposal by chief U.S. delegate William Porter that calls for a week’s break in the talks . The Communist Party has refused to accept Porter's proposal .
 Both sides announce on December 28 that they will not attend the next scheduled meeting . Both sides say they won't attend a meeting .
 The cancellation makes it the third meeting to be called off in a month . It is the third cancellation of a meeting in less than two months .
 Earlier, Porter had angered the opposite side by postponing the next session of the conference until December 30 . Porter said he wanted to give Hanoi and the Viet Cong an opportunity to develop a "more constructive approach" at the talks .
 Refugees from outlying settlements pour into Phnom Penh as the Communists push closer and closer to the capital . The Communists are pushing to take control of the country's capital .
 On December 17, the South Vietnamese abandon Chup, other former Communist bases in the area, and the leveled town of Suong in order to consolidate their position . The South Vietnamese abandoned Chup and other former communist bases .
 8,053 U.S. aircraft have now been lost in the conflict . 8,000 aircraft have been lost during the conflict in Afghanistan .
 Government positions in Prak Ham, 40 miles north of Phnom Penh, and their 4,000-man Taing Kauk base are the targets of continuing heavy bombardment by encircling Communist forces .
 Communists continue to encircle Phnom Penh in the face of weakened Cambodian resistance . Lon Nol regime continues to consolidate control of the country's capital . Demonstrations inside the capital break out against the regime .
 The government reacts by banning all such protests, as well as political meetings, and by authorizing police searches of private houses . The government also bans political meetings and political protests, but also allows police searches .
 Colonel Oran K Henderson, the highest ranking officer to be tried over the My Lai massacre, is acquitted of cover-up charges . Henderson is the highest-ranking officer to have been tried over massacre and subsequent cover up . Henderson acquitted of covering up the massacre .
 Three U.S. F-4 Phantom jets are lost over northern Laos and North Vietnam . Heavy loss is heaviest single-day loss since December 1967 .
 15,000 NVA soldiers capture strategic Plain of Jars, overrunning 6,000-7,000 Laotian defenders . Thai irregulars assisted by Thai irregular forces . NVA forces capture the strategic Plain Of Jars .
 Communists begin a drive against the government base of Long Thieng, defended by CIA-recruited Meo tribesmen . The government base is defended by the Meo tribe .
 On December 28, after a 12-hour mortar and ground attack, the North Vietnamese and their Pathet Lao allies seize the town of Pak Song . They gain control of the complete Boloven Plateau, thus gaining control .
 Laotian government forces move back into Pak Song . But they leave the next day, and Laotan government forces return to the area . Laotans leave the area, but they leave in the morning .
 The Soviet Union accuses China of backing U.S. policies in Vietnam . It says China backs the United States' policies in the country . The rift highlights the rift between the two super powers .
 American entertainer Bob Hope tries to negotiate with North Vietnamese authorities for the release of U.S. POWs . Hope was captured in Vientiane, Laos, in 1968 . Hope and Hope were captured by North Vietnamese forces in Laos, Laos .
 His proposal suggests the payment of $10 million to a North Vietnamese children’s charity in exchange for the release of Communist-held POWs .
 15 antiwar Vietnam veterans barricade themselves inside the Statue of Liberty . They end their occupation early December 28, obeying a federal court order . They flew the U.S. flag upside down from the crown of the monument .
 Over 80 antiwar veterans are arrested after clashing with police on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial . In Washington on December 28, over 80 anti-war veterans were arrested .
 American planes attack airfields and other military targets in the southern part of the country . The most extensive air operations against the Communists since the November 1968 bombing halt .
 Secretary of Defense Melvin Laird justifies the attacks by saying that the Communists have failed to live up to the agreements made prior to the 1968 halt . Defense Secretary Laird says that the Communist Party has not lived up to its promises .
 The raids are part of the effort to disrupt Communist preparations for an anticipated offensive during the Tet holidays of 1972 . The raids were part of a plan to disrupt communist preparations for the Tet holiday .
 U.S. military strength has declined to 156,800; more than 177,000 American troops have returned home . United States military strength now stands at 156,000 .
 American losses for the year are 1,386 KIA, bringing the total number of U.S. personnel killed in action to date to 45,626 . American losses in 2014 have been more than 1,400 .
 South Vietnamese armed forces strength increases to 1,046,250 personnel . 21,500 South Vietnamese military personnel were KIA this year, bringing the overall total to 156,260 South Vietnamese forces personnel killed in action .
 NVA/VC losses for the year are 97,000 KIA; total NVA and VC losses since 1965 are estimated at more than 347,000 . Total NVA-VC losses in the war since 1965 have been estimated at over 350,000, including more than 100,
 These are the initial strikes that will continue throughout the rest of the month . The initial strikes will continue to be the first of the year .
 The intensification of the air war is largely an attempt to disrupt Communist preparations for an anticipated Tet offensive . The intensified war is aimed at disrupting communist preparations for the Tet Offensive .
 25,000-35,000 United States troops will remain until the release of all U.S. POWs . President Nixon announces that United States forces will continue to withdraw .
 North Vietnamese negotiators in Paris “totally rejected” any consideration of POW release before a U.S. troop pullout deadline is announced, he says . He says that North Vietnam negotiators in . Paris rejected’s consideration of release before the United States troop withdrawal .
 Some 10,000 ARVN troops pull out of southeastern Cambodia to back up Saigon defenses for the expected Tet Offensive . ARNN troops pulled out of southeast Cambodia to support Saigon's defense for Tet offensive .
 18 Americans wounded by mortar attack on Fire Support Base Fiddler’s Green, 20 miles northeast of Saigon . The heaviest shelling of U.S. forces in six months . 18 Americans are wounded .
 1,800-man force begins operation in northeastern Cambodia to disrupt Communist bases and capture supplies collected for the anticipated offensive . South Vietnamese forces begin operation in northeast Cambodia .
 India and North Vietnam expand diplomatic relations by upgrading their consulates in Hanoi and New Delhi to embassies . Diplomatic relations between the two countries have been strained for years . India and Vietnam have been expanding diplomatic relations since 2003 .
 The U.S. and South Vietnam criticize the Indian action . They challenge Indian membership in the International Control Commission . The United States and Vietnam criticize Indian action and challenge India membership .
 Hubert Humphrey criticizes President Nixon for withdrawing U.S. troops from Vietnam . Former vice president calls for an immediate end to the war . Humphrey says it is taking longer for President Nixon to withdraw troops than to defeat Hitler .
 Communists attack Binh Thuan administration office six miles from Saigon . Seven militiamen wounded in attack . Communists attack administration office .
 One U.S. soldier is killed and two wounded in the ambush of a patrol 24 miles northeast of Saigon . The ambush is the first of its kind in the country since Vietnam's war with North Korea .
 Communist attacks become more frequent than at any time since last October . 34 attacks against South Vietnamese military and civilians in the previous 24 hours .
 70,000 U.S. troops will leave South Vietnam over the next three months . 69,000 troops will be out of Vietnam by May 1 to 69,500 troops .
 Since taking office, Nixon has withdrawn more than 400,000 American troops from Vietnam . Since taking over, Nixon withdrew more than 300,000 U.S. troops .
 Nixon’s announcement comes in response to presidential challengers’ criticism that the president is pulling out troops but, by turning to airpower, is not ending U.S. involvement in Vietnam . Nixon: “I’m not ending Vietnam. I’ll pull
 Religious leaders from 46 Protestant, Catholic, and Jewish denominations meet in Kansas City to discuss Vietnam . They ask Nixon administration to withdraw all American troops from Vietnam and refuse aid to Indochinese governments .
 President Nixon warns President Thieu in a private letter that his refusal to sign any peace agreement would render it impossible for the United States to continue assistance to South Vietnam . Nixon: "It would be impossible to continue to support the South Vietnam"
 Hersh also charges that the army is covering up an incident in which 90 civilians were murdered in the hamlet of My Khe 4 on the same day as the My Lai massacre . Hersh says 90 people were killed in the same incident on the day of the massacre in My Khe
 In the air war, a U.S. Navy fighter downs the first MiG in 22 months, deep inside North Vietnam . The U.N. Navy says the MiG was the first of its kind .
 South Vietnamese troops begin sweep 45 miles northwest of Saigon to find and destroy enemy forces . In continued efforts to disrupt an anticipated Communist offensive, more than 10,000 troops begin a sweep .
 There is much speculation that the North Vietnamese will launch such an offensive around the Tet (Chinese New Year) holiday . The North Vietnamese are believed to be planning the offensive .
 U.S. soldiers at Fire Base Melanie northeast of Saigon are reportedly angry and confused over administration statements that remaining soldiers in South Vietnam are in a "defensive" posture, not in combat .
 B-52s continue bombing suspected enemy supply dumps in the Central Highlands . B-2s continue to bomb suspected enemy supplies in the area .
 President Nixon reveals that Kissinger held 12 secret peace negotiating sessions between August 4,1969, and August 16,1971, in Paris with Le Due Tho, a member of Hanoi’s Politburo, and/or Xuan Thuy . Kissinger's National Security Advisor Henry
 Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Seymour Hersh claims that members of the army’s Americal Division destroyed documents to protect their officers involved in the My Lai murders . Hersh says the documents were destroyed to protect officers involved .
 Radio Hanoi announces North Vietnam’s rejection of the latest U.S. peace proposal and presents a nine-point counterproposal . North Vietnam rejects the latest peace proposal .
 Henry Kissinger asserts that the abrupt removal of U.S. aid would guarantee the collapse of the Saigon regime . Henry Kissinger says the US aid to Saigon would ensure the regime's collapse .
 Remarks made in response to North Vietnam’s continued insistence that the United States cease all support for the Thieu government and remove all U.S. equipment and arms in the possession of the South Vietnamese army .
 United States planes strike a radar and missile site near Dong Hoi, the 19th strike inside North Vietnam since the beginning of the year . The U.S. has struck 19 times in the past year .
 Ten Americans are wounded when a resupply helicopter is badly shot up in fighting 13 miles southeast of Xuan Loc . Ten Americans were wounded when the helicopter was shot up during the fighting .
 United States planes make their 20th strike inside North Vietnam this year . U.S. planes make 20th strikes in the region this year alone .
 North Vietnam charges Nixon and Kissinger with “unilaterally” divulging the substance of the secret talks, creating the impasse at the secret meeting, and distorting the facts . North Vietnam publishes several sensitive documents, including the nine-point plan it submitted during the talks, its
 Washington wants withdrawal of all foreign forces from South Vietnam with the condition of an agreement in principle on a final solution . Hanoi insists on withdrawal of United States and Allied troops from all of Indochina without condition . Washington wants the withdrawal of U.S. and Allied forces from
 Hanoi also wants the immediate resignation of the Thieu regime with elections held by a North Vietnamese-South Vietnamese-Viet Cong replacement government . Hanois also wants elections held with a replacement government held by the North Vietnamese, South Vietnamese, and Viet Cong .
 South Vietnamese troops make three separate drives into southeastern Cambodia to counter Communist infiltration into South Vietnam . Troops also disrupt preparations for Communist attacks into the Mekong Delta .
 Zhou Enlai says China backs the seven-point VC proposal . China backs North Vietnamese and PRG until they achieve total victory in Indochina . China will support the North Vietnamese, PRG .
 The North Vietnamese formally reject President Nixon’s eight-point peace plan . The plan was submitted privately to the North Vietnamese delegation in Paris . Nixon's peace plan was rejected by North Vietnamese delegates .
 About 4,000 Laotian troops supported by U.S. airpower attempt to relieve pressure on Long Tieng . North Vietnamese forces have been occupying the Plain of Jars in northern Laos since the end of 1971 .
 After a month the North Vietnamese have the Laotians on the run, Laotian officials call the operation a success . North Vietnamese officials say the operation was a success after a month .
 Constellation joins the carriers Coral Sea and Hancock off the coast of Vietnam . The aircraft carrier Constellation is the largest carrier carrier in the world .
 Twenty-five rockets hit the United States air base at Danang and the city itself, killing three and wounding 17 . Three of the rockets hit Danang, three killed and wounded in the attack .
 At the same time, Communist guerrillas attack at three points 15 to 35 miles south of Danang . At the time of the attack, three points were attacked by the Communists .
 Formal weekly peace talks in Paris break down when the United States delegation refuses to agree on a date for the next meeting . The U.S. delegation, to protest an antiwar rally set to begin in Versailles the next day, refuses to meet .
 About 6,000 Cambodian troops launch major operation to recapture religious center of Angkor Wat . 4,000 North Vietnamese troops entrenched around the famous Buddhist temple complex, seized in June 1970 .
 Even with the addition of 4,000 more troops, the Cambodians are unsuccessful and will eventually abandon their efforts to expel the North Vietnamese . Cambodia will not be able to expel North Vietnamese troops in Vietnam .
 The heaviest U.S. air raids in two years strike Communist bases for a fifth day along the South Vietnamese/Laotian border . The heaviest United States air raids on the border are in Vietnam for the first time in more than two years .
 United States B-52s fly 19 missions in 24 hours, the largest number for a 24-hour period since records began to be kept in June 1968 . The U.S. Air Force has flown 19 missions since June 1968.
 Targets are Communist infiltration routes and bases west of Kontum, Vietnam . Targets include North Vietnamese Army Base Area 609 . North Vietnam Army Base 609.
 A Gallup poll finds that 52 percent of those interviewed approve of President Nixon’s handling of the war while 39 percent disapprove . Gallup poll: 52 percent approve of Nixon's handling of war .
 A U.S. "limited duration" air operation has begun to knock out North Vietnamese artillery positions in North Vietnam’s southernmost province . It is announced that a limited duration of the operation is underway .
 John Paul Vann, chief U.S. official in Military Region II, claims that Tet Offensive has begun in Binh Dinh Province . Vann is chief United States official in military Region II . The Tet Offensive is believed to have begun in the province .
 He estimates Communist strength in the Central Highlands at 35,000-60,000 troops . He estimates that the Communist Party has 35,00 troops in the area .
 Three U.S. planes are shot down by surface-to-air missiles during the 29hour bombing of North Vietnam . Three planes were shot down .
 A battalion of the 18 th ARVN Division is ambushed near Long Giao in Long Khanh Province . The ambush took place in the Long-Khanh Province of Vietnam . The 18th Battalion was ambushed by the insurgents .
 Hanoi allows five U.S. airmen held in the North to send televised messages to their families . The messages can be shown in the presence of journalists and diplomats in the International Club in Hanoa .
 The Mekong Delta and Danang are the targets for more than 67 Communist attacks over the weekend . More than 67 attacks were carried out in the region over the past weekend .
 Two Americans are killed and 10 wounded in attacks at Bien Hoa and Phan Rang air bases . Two Americans were killed and wounded in the attacks . The U.S. was killed in the two attacks .
 Zhou Enlai urges early peace in Vietnam, but does not endorse North Vietnam’s political demands . Zhou enlai: "Early peace is possible, but early peace is not possible"
 Talks resume in Paris, but the Communists leave after only 17 minutes to protest renewed U.S. bombing raids against the North . Talks resume after 17 minutes, but Communist Party leaders leave in protest of renewed bombing .
 Four U.S. troops clash with Communists in biggest single engagement in nearly a year . Four dead and 47 wounded in five-hour battle 42 miles east of Saigon . Almost half the United States weekly casualties .
 U.S. reiterates support of eight-point proposal advocated by itself and South Vietnam in January . China announces its support of the seven-point plan presented by the Viet Cong in February .
 The communique itself, although apparently presenting conflicting sides, is reportedly the result of intense negotiations .
 South Korea pulls 11,000 troops out of Vietnam as part of its withdrawal program . 37,000 Korean soldiers remain in South Vietnam . South Korea pulled out of South Vietnam in March .
 ARVN troops sweep the western Central Highlands to disrupt suspected Communist plans for an offensive . Four Americans are wounded in a boobytrap explosion 20 miles northeast of Saigon . Four American soldiers are wounded .
 More than 20 planes continue raids against antiaircraft installations inside North Vietnam . More than two dozen planes continue to fly over North Vietnam to carry out raids .
 One MiG is shot down in an air battle over North Vietnam involving about a dozen U.S. planes and MiGs . The battle was the first of its kind in North Vietnam in the 1960s .
 Hanoi and VC radio announce that United States bombing in the North is striking “many populated areas” United States command replies that all targets are antiaircraft defenses . U.S. command says all targets in North are targets of antia aircraft defenses .
 The total of 86 U.S. air raids over North Vietnam to date this year equals the total for all of 1971 . The total has now reached 86 air raids in Vietnam over the past year .
 Zhou Enlai (Chou En-lai) declared that he refused to act as an intermediary for the U.S. in settling the war . The United States government reports that, Chinese premier Zhou En lai on a secret visit to brief Hanoi .
 Eight U.S. soldiers are wounded by a booby-trap nine miles south of Danang . Eight United States soldiers were wounded by the booby trap .
 United States planes hit antiaircraft defenses in North Vietnam and in the DMZ for the eighth straight day . U.S. planes continue to bomb below DMZ around Danang and the Central Highlands . The United States continues to bomb North Vietnam .
 The 101st Airborne Division officially departs South Vietnam for Fort Campbell, Kentucky . The division departs Vietnam for the U.S. Army base .
 A 4,500-6,000-man North Vietnamese force threatens Long Tieng, after taking the village of Sam Thong . The village is defended by a 4,000 man Thai force, seven miles to the northwest .
 Communist artillery closes the Long Tieng airstrip the next day; the opposing forces continue to battle for strategic ground about the base . Communist artillery close the airstrip next day .
 Communist forces initiate 41 attacks in 24 hours, most against local militia units . Combined with VC shelling of Quang Ngai and a U.S. base camp, the previous day, the attacks were the first to occur in Vietnam .
 A total of 8,000 South Vietnamese troops continue their drive into eastern Cambodia . The move is part of a total of eight,000 troops currently in the region .
 Hundreds of tons of supplies are found at the site of the largest shipwreck in the world .
 South Vietnamese troop strength in Cambodia will reach 10,000 over the next few days . South Vietnamese troops in Cambodia are expected to increase by the end of the month .
 The U.S. delegation to the peace talks announces an indefinite suspension of the conference . North Vietnamese and National Liberation Front representatives enter into “serious discussions” on concrete issues determined beforehand .
 Washington calls for an end to the Communist offensive in Vietnam as a precondition to continuing the talks . North Vietnamese and Viet Cong counter with a call for end to U.S. bombing of both North Vietnam and South Vietnam .
 The firing of more than 5,000 rockets, artillery, and mortar shells on 12 South Vietnamese positions just below the DMZ precedes and accompanies ground assaults .
 AC-130 gunship is shot down over Muang Phine, Laos, resulting in the death of 14 airmen from the 16th Special Operations Squadron . The plane was shot down by the U.S. Air Force in Laos .
 A major coordinated Communist offensive begins with the biggest North Vietnamese drive since the Tet Offensive of 1968 . The biggest North Vietnam drive since Tet offensive of 1968 began in 1968 . North Vietnam has been in the grip of a growing insurgency in Vietnam .
 This action proves to be the opening phase of the Nguyen Hue Campaign or, as it will become more popularly known, the NVA Easter Offensive . This action is the first phase of Nguyen Hue campaign .
 Thirty-five South Vietnamese soldiers die and hundreds of civilians die . Hundreds of civilians and soldiers are wounded in the conflict .
 Attacks on three bases west of Saigon force the South Vietnamese to abandon six outposts . Attacks against three bases . South Vietnamese forces withdraw from outposts in Vietnam .
 U.S. planes bomb North Vietnamese troop formations in South Vietnam and north of the DMZ . Demonstrations in the United States protest the bombings . North Vietnamese troops were killed in the bombings; demonstrations were held in United States .
 12,000-15,000 soldiers of Hanoi’s 304th Division, supported by artillery and antiaircraft units equipped with SAM-2 surface-to-air missiles, sweep across the DMZ and rout the ARVN 3rd Division .
 The Communist ground objectives are apparently Quang Tri City, capital of Quang tri Province, and then to advance on Hue and Danang farther to the south . The Communist forces are apparently aiming to advance to Hue, Danang and other cities .
 With the new offensive, Hanoi hopes to impress the Communist world and its own people with its determination . The offensive could capitalize on U.S. antiwar sentiment and possibly hurt President Nixon’s chances for reelection .
 The United States Navy’s last in-country combat unit—Light Attack Squadron 4—withdraws from Vietnam . The U.S. Navy's last combat unit, Light Attack squadron 4, has withdrawn from Vietnam.
 The 304th NVA Division supported by Soviet tanks and heavy artillery takes the northern half of Quang Tri Province, leaving only Quang tri City, the combat base, and Dong Ha, all under heavy attack, in South Vietnamese hands . South Vietnamese forces capture Dong Ha and Quang
 Brigadier General Vu Van Giai, commander of the 3rd ARVN Division, moves his staff out of Quang Tri combat base to the citadel at Quang tri City . The move is part of a plan to move the ARVn Division out of the combat
 By April 3, Dong Ha is in flames; the next day South Vietnamese troops abandon Fire Base Anne, eight miles southwest of Quang Tri City, and their northern line of defense on the Cua Viet River . The next day, the South Vietnamese government forces abandon the base, and
 Some 20,000-40,000 civilians flee to the south to get away from the heavy fighting . The fighting is ongoing in the south of the country .
 President Nixon sends additional B-52s to Anderson Air Base in Guam and orders reinforcement of the Seventh Fleet . Kitty Hawk is first of four additional aircraft carriers to join the two carriers already on station off Vietnam .
 North Vietnamese troops open the second front of their offensive with a drive into Binh Long Province, 75 miles north of Saigon . The 5th VC Division attacking the district town of Loc Ninh and to the south while simultaneously cutting Highway 13 between Saigon and An Loc .
 Observers from Hanoi to Washington see the South Vietnamese response as the deciding factor in the success of North Vietnam’s offensive . The South Vietnam response is seen as a key factor in success of the offensive .
 For the most part, ARVN troops have elected to pull back rather than fight . U.S. advisers are critical of the South Vietnamese "defensive mentality" as the action takes on more and more .
 In Quang Tri Province, the South Vietnamese 56th Regiment has apparently deserted to a man . Hanoi claims that most of the militia in Quang tri Province has defected . The South Vietnamese government claims most of its militia in the province has deserted .
 ARVN bases south of Hue are attacked as Communist operations spread into Thua Thien Province . ARVn bases have been attacked by Communist forces in recent months . Communist operations have spread into the province .
 United States Air Force fighter-bombers begin reinforcing units in Thailand as part of the build-up in response to the new North Vietnamese offensive in South Vietnam .
 Clear weather for first time in three days allows U.S. planes and navy warships to begin air strikes and naval bombardments . President Nixon ordered sustained air strikes after meeting with Special Action Group on April 3-5 .
 SAM-2 missiles are a new element in North Vietnamese air defenses . Two U.S. planes were shot down over North Vietnam by two SAM missiles . Two SAM missiles were used to shoot down the planes over Vietnam .
 Admiral Thomas W Moorer announces resumption of aerial attack and naval bombardment of North Vietnam . U.S. Marine aircraft begin landing at Danang as part of the United States aerial buildup .
 The North Vietnamese offensive drive in Quang Tri Province slackens as U.S. and South Vietnamese planes take advantage of good weather to bomb Communist positions . The offensive is expected to last until the end of the offensive in Vietnam .
 In III Corps, Communist troops take Loc Ninh, and move south to surround the 6,000 troops of South Vietnam’s 5th Infantry Division in the provincial capital of An Loc which is only 65 miles from Saigon .
 U.S. planes destroyed Ben Hai bridge in the DMZ, the only road link between North and South Vietnam . Saigon reports that United States planes destroyed the bridge in April 5 . Ben Hai is the only bridge link between the two countries .
 The 2nd NVA Division striking from Laos and Cambodia opens a third front of the Easter offensive in the Central Highlands . The NVA is cutting the important highway between Kontum and Pleiku at several points .
 Three Americans dead and 15 wounded at Cam Ranh air base . Two Americans killed and four wounded at Nui Ba Den Mountain radio relay station . First attacks of the offensive against U.S. installations .
 North Vietnamese troops thrown back from major assault against ARVN positions at Fire Base Pedro, 10 miles southwest of Quang Tri City, losing over 1,000 men and 30 tanks in the operation .
 Saigon command orders the 21st ARVN Division, based in the Mekong Delta, to move north and open the road to An Loc where the 5th ARVn Division is still surrounded . Saigon commands 21st ArVN division to move to open up the road
 Fierce Communist resistance prevents the relief force from getting through . The relief force was forced to withdraw from the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 All but two of Hanoi’s combat divisions have been committed to battle in the current offensive . The offensive is currently underway in Vietnam .
 U.S. aircraft begin to bomb North Vietnam above the 19th parallel for the first time since November 1968 bombing halt .
 MACV acknowledges that B-52s are hitting the north for the first time since November 1967 . MACV acknowledged that B.52s have been flying in the U.S. since 1967 .
 Target priority is given to SAM-2 missile sites, which have made raids over North Vietnam increasingly hazardous . Target priority was given to missile sites .
 U.S. aircraft carriers Saratoga and Midway are ordered from Florida and California to join the four other carriers and warships already engaged in the bombardment of North Vietnam . The carriers will be joined by four other warships and aircraft carriers .
 Fire Base Bastogne in Thua Thien Province, 20 miles west of Hue, is besieged by Communist forces . The base is located in the province's capital, Vietnam's capital Hue .
 B-52 strikes against Communist forces attacking ARVN positions in the Central Highlands near Kontum remove any immediate threat to that city . The strikes were in response to an attack by Communist forces on ARVn positions .
 Route 547, the main artery between Hue and Phu Xuan, has been under attack for several days . Meanwhile, the 1st ARVN Division sets up new artillery positions and brings in a tank battalion and a fresh infantry regiment to secure Route 5 47 .
 U.S. fighter-bombers and B-52s pound Communist troops west of An Loc west of the city, but fail to halt their advance . Communist troops advance on An Loc .
 Communist forces from the 9th VC Division (actually a main force North Vietnamese division) launch a major attack on An Loc with 40 tanks and 9,000 men, taking half the city . The defenders, supported by B-52s, hold on to the southern half of the city
 United States Navy operations in Vietnam are at their highest since 1968 . U.S. forces in Vietnam have been involved in the country's largest naval operation since 1968.
 Communist attacks in South Vietnam—107 in 24 hours—reach highest level since 1968 Tet Offensive . Communist attacks on South Vietnam rise to highest level in 48 hours since Tet .
 Danang and Saigon and many parts of South Vietnam are hit by terrorist attacks . Many parts of the country were hit by attacks on the government .
 ARVN 1st Airborne Brigade begins to arrive in An Loc to reinforce the 5th ArVN Division . ARVVN says the brigade has arrived in the country for two years .
 Last reinforcements to reach the city for nearly two months . They are the last reinforcements to arrive in the past two months.
 North Vietnamese forces overrun Fire Base Charlie, 20 miles northwest of Kontum, as their offensive in the Central Highlands continues . North Vietnamese troops have overrun the base 20 miles west of the city .
 The United States resumes bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong after a four-year lull . The U.S. resumed bombing of the two cities after four years .
 Hundreds of antiwar demonstrators are arrested in incidents across the country as escalation of the bombing in Indochina provokes a new wave of protests . Hundreds of protesters are arrested across Vietnam in the wake of the bombings .
 Sixty fighter bombers hit petroleum storage facilities near Hanoi, with another wave of planes striking later in the afternoon .
 Washington makes clear that the U.S. will bomb military targets almost anywhere in Vietnam . 13 civilians killed in Hanoi and 47 in Haiphong; 13 civilians reported killed in Vietnam, 13 in Vietnam and 47 killed .
 U.S. missile frigate Worden is damaged in Tonkin Gulf by radiation-seeking missiles fired from United States planes . One sailor died and nine were wounded in the attack .
 One sailer killed and seven wounded after being hit by one round from a North Vietnamese shore battery . The destroyer Buchanan was hit by the attack .
 Significant protests continue across the country in reaction to increased bombing of North Vietnam . Protests continue across Vietnam in response to the increased bombing .
 Secretary of Defense Laird says he does not rule out the possibility of blockading and mining Haiphong harbor . Laird testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on the issue .
 Every area of North Vietnam is subject to bombing as long as the current invasion continues, he says . The bombing is for the protection of the 85,000 U.S. personnel still in South Vietnam .
 Eight Ivy League college presidents and the president of MIT issue a joint statement condemning the renewed bombing of North Vietnam . The statement also supports orderly antiwar demonstrations .
 Most of the regular South Vietnamese troops from the area have been sent to relieve An Loc . The fighting has intensified with another round of NVA tanks and human wave attacks . The NVA has been fighting in the area since April .
 In the Central Highlands, North Vietnamese forces overrun Hoi An, inflicting heavy casualties . North Vietnam forces overrun the city, inflicting casualties on the ground .
 Hanoi begins to challenge the United States naval presence in the Tonkin Gulf for the first time since 1964 . United States Seventh Fleet warships bombarded the North Vietnamese coast are attacked by North Vietnamese MiGs and patrol boats .
 U.S. destroyer Higbee is badly damaged in heaviest sea action of the war . The battle was the heaviest sea battle of World War II .
 North Vietnamese troops cut Route 19, which connects Pleiku and Qui Nhon on the coast, at An Khe Pass . Route 19 is one of the most important routes in Vietnam's history .
 After a week of fierce fighting, South Korean troops clear the pass, losing 51 men in the fighting . 51 men lost their lives in the battle to clear the mountain pass .
 Near the DMZ, seven U.S. soldiers are killed trying to rescue two others . Near the D.C. border, seven United States soldiers die trying to save two others from the Korean peninsula .
 Henry Kissinger arrives in Moscow to prepare for President Nixon’s coming spring visit . Kissinger was in Moscow preparing for Nixon's coming spring trip .
 President Obama repeats past U.S. offers for a settlement in Vietnam . North Vietnamese invasion troops now participating in the offensive in South Vietnam must be withdrawn .
 The Communist delegations in Paris formally propose resumption of peace talks for April 27, whether or not the U.S. halts its bombing of North Vietnam . The United States has been bombing North Vietnam since April 1968 .
 Communist forces of up to one battalion in size have taken a large part of important Chuong Thien Province . During the past two weeks Communist forces have taken part of the province .
 Tanks and soldiers of the 320th NVA Division push back South Vietnam’s 22nd Division at Tan Canh and attack Dak To in the Central Highlands . The 320nd Division is the 320nd NVA's second division .
 So far 250,000 civilians have fled from their homes, and at least six U.S. advisers and 3,000 South Vietnamese have been killed . So far six United States advisers have been deployed to Vietnam .
 Kampong Trach near the South Vietnam border falls to Communist forces after a siege by at least 1,500 troops lasting 17 days . The town is located near the border with Vietnam's South Vietnam .
 During the next three weeks 11 other Cambodian positions fall to the Communists . The Communists take over 11 other positions in Cambodia .
 320th NVA Division drives 5,000 ARVN troops into retreat and traps 2,000-3,000 others in border outpost northwest of Kontum . Appears to be on the way to cutting South Vietnam in two across the Central Highlands .
 Communist troops have by now taken control of all Cambodian territory bordering South Vietnam to the east of the Mekong River . The exception is the provincial seat Svay Rieng and a few other government strongholds .
 20,000 U.S. troops will be withdrawn from Vietnam in May and June, reducing authorized troop strength to 49,000 . President Nixon announces that 20,00 more troops will also be withdrawn in Vietnam .
 The United States Navy has doubled the number of its fighting ships off Vietnam . Sea and air support will continue; the U.S. has doubled its number of fighting ships .
 North Vietnamese troops shatter defenses north of Quang Tri and move to within 2.5 miles of the city . North Vietnamese forces shatter defenses and move within 2 miles of Quan Tri .
 Using Russian-built T-54 heavy tanks, they will take Dong Ha, seven miles north of Quang Tri, the next day . They will continue to tighten their ring around the provincial capital while shelling it heavily .
 South Vietnamese troops suffer their highest casualties for any week in the war . South Vietnamese forces suffer highest casualties of any week during the week .
 Four air force fighters, using Paveway I “smart bombs, knock down the Thanh Hoa Bridge in North Vietnam . The bridge was the first of its kind to be knocked down by the air force .
 Fire Base Bastogne, 20 miles west of Hue, falls to the Communists . Fire Base Birmingham, four miles to the east, is also under heavy attack .
 In Quang Tri, ARVN troops flee southward and North Vietnamese troops move closer to the city . ARVVN forces move southward as North Vietnamese forces move towards Quang Trang Tri city .
 North Vietnamese troops capture Quang Tri City, the first provincial capital taken during their offensive, consolidating control of the entire province . The offensive is the first province to be taken by the North Vietnamese army .
 Hanoi claims 10,000 South Vietnamese and Allied casualties in the battle . The battle was fought in Vietnam in the early 1950s .
 Three districts of Binh Dinh Province also fall, leaving about one-third of the Province under Communist control . Three districts also fall .
 The number of U.S. troops in Vietnam now stands at 66,300,2,700 fewer than President Nixon’s goal of reducing troop strength to 69,000 by this date .
 About 60,000 persons demonstrate in Stockholm to protest U.S. bombing in Vietnam . U.K. bombed Vietnam in Vietnam in 1960s and '60s in Sweden .
 10,000-man 3rd ARVN Division abandons Quang Tri Province, becoming the second South Vietnamese combat division to collapse within a week .
 The entire defense of the front north of Hue is left to a brigade of several thousand South Vietnamese marines, as the fleeing 3rd Division troops rush southward . The defense forces are left to several thousand marines, leaving the entire front to the marines .
 Kissinger, Le Due Tho, and Xuan Thuy resume secret negotiations in Paris . Kissinger and Thuy met in Paris to discuss the future of the country .
 Lieutenant General Ngo Quang Truong arrives in Danang to assume command of I Corps . Lieutenant General Truong will be the first commander of the I Corps in Vietnam . Truong has been in charge of the Vietnamese military since 2003 .
 The previous corps commander, Lieutenant General Hoang Xuan Lam, was relieved by President Thieu . The previous commander had been Lieutenant General Lam .
 North Vietnam and the Viet Cong will ask the U.S. and South Vietnam to return to the conference table on May 16 . Their proposal will be rejected, as will a June 13 Communist proposal asking the United States to withdraw from Vietnam .
 The aircraft carrier Saratoga is ordered to join the other U.S. carriers now operating off Vietnam . It will bring the total number of carriers to six for the first time in the war .
 Fifty fighter-bombers are ordered to join the nearly 1,000 U.S. combat aircraft currently in Indochina .
 Route 14, briefly reopened the previous day, is once again closed as Communist troops repulse South Vietnamese paratroopers . Route 14 reopened the day after it was briefly reopened in Kontum, briefly closed .
 In My Tho Province in the Mekong Delta, Viet Cong guerrillas put the 203rd Civil Guard out of combat . They captured seven prisoners and captured much materiel .
 Sixty presidents of midwestern private colleges issue a statement calling for immediate withdrawal of U.S. forces from Indochina .
 Letters containing this statement were sent to President Nixon and the Democratic presidential aspirants . Letters contain this statement from President Nixon .
 The survivors of South Vietnam’s 5th ARVN Division at An Loc continue to take a daily artillery battering from the Communist forces surrounding the city . The city that had previously been home to more than 20,000, lay in ruins .
 Saigon announces the evacuation of all civilians from Kontum City south to Pleiku . Saigon declares the evacuation . All civilians are evacuated from Saigon City south of the city .
 Defense Minister Vo Nguyen Giap says people of Vietnam have defeated three U.S. administrations and are about to win a complete victory over President Nixon . In a special broadcast commemorating Vietnam’s victory over the French at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 .
 Operation Linebacker includes heavy bombing of North Vietnam’s military supply network and the mining of Haiphong harbor . The bombing was part of an effort to prevent the flow of arms and materiel to the Communists .
 Foreign ships in North Vietnamese ports will have three days to leave before mines are activated . U.S. Navy will then search or seize ships in the region .
 United States aircraft will bomb rail lines from China and take whatever other measures necessary to stem the flow of materiel to the south . U.S. aircraft will take whatever else measures to stop the flow .
 Nixon adds that the mining, search, and seizure of ships and bombing of the north will stop if all American POWs are returned and an internationally supervised cease-fire begins . Nixon says the mining and search of ships will stop when all POWs return .
 President Nixon’s May 8 announcement of the mining of North Vietnamese harbors leads to violent clashes with police and 1,800 arrests on college campuses across the world .
 United States Senate Democrats pass a resolution “disapproving the escalation of the war in Vietnam,” and present a modified version of the Case-Church amendment . For the first time, Democrats voted for a cutoff of war funds . The resolution was passed by Democrats in the Senate
 Hanoi delegation calls Nixon’s order for mining and bombing a violation of the 1954 Geneva agreement and of the 1968 assurance that U.S. air strikes against the North would end . Nixon's order for bombing and mining violates Geneva agreement .
 U.S. bombing in North Vietnam reaches all-time high levels of 196768, when the air war was at its most intense . United States bombing in N. Vietnam reached the highest level in 196768 .
 President Nixon’s decision to mine North Vietnamese harbors is castigated by the Soviet Union, China, and their eastern European allies . The decision receives only lukewarm support from western Europe .
 Lieutenant Randy Cunningham and Lieutenant Willie Driscoll shoot down three MiGs in one combat mission . The two F-4J Phantom shoot down the MiGs off the Constellation .
 USAF Captain Charles B DeBellevue records his first aerial kill . He was flying with Captain Richard S Ritchie in a McDonnell-Douglas F-4D .
 Captain DeBellevue, who would go on to be the leading American ace of the Vietnam War, will record four of his victories with Captain Ritchie . Captain Debellevue was the leading U.S. ace of Vietnam War .
 F-4 Phantoms from the 8th Tactical Fighter Wing drop “smart bombs” on the Paul Doumer Bridge, damaging the mile-long highway and rail crossing at Hanoi and putting it out of use . The bridge was damaged by the bombs .
 It will not be rebuilt until air attacks on North Vietnam cease in 1973 . It will be rebuilt after air attacks against North Vietnam end .
 North Vietnamese forces from the 5th VC Division (actually a main force NVA division) launch a major attack against the besieged ARVN forces in An Loc forging two salients in the South Vietnamese perimeter . The defenders, with the help of massive United States airpower, turn back
 The Department of Defense estimates that the cost of mining North Vietnamese ports and rivers will total $1.1 billion during the next 13 months . It suggests additional appropriations for the project .
 President Thieu declares martial law in an attempt to cope with problems caused by the current Communist offensive . It is the first time it has been necessary since the 1968 Tet Offensive .
 Six U.S. advisers land 1,000 South Vietnamese marines behind North Vietnamese lines in 17 United States helicopters southeast of Quang Tri City . First South Vietnamese counterattack since beginning of the Communist offensive .
 North Vietnamese tanks and troops begin the long-awaited offensive against Kontum . North Vietnamese troops begin long-anticipated offensive against the city .
 A force of 4,000 soldiers of the 1 st ARVN Division has reportedly been engaged in a counterattack for over a week . A counterattack has reportedly taken place in the French capital since April .
 U.S. Marines make use of Bien Hoa airfield for the first time in the war . Marine Air Group 12 moves in with two A-4 Skyhawk squadrons .
 Marine planes fly in support of ARVN forces in I and IV Corps and make some sorties into Cambodia . The marine planes fly into Cambodia and support Cambodia .
 South Vietnamese troops retake Fire Base Bastogne, a matter of strategic importance, as the recapture of the fire base should prevent the Communists from moving their heavy artillery to within shelling distance of Hue .
 The U.S. is sending a seventh aircraft carrier, the Ticonderoga, and at least six other destroyer-type warships to Vietnam . The United States announces that it is sending seven aircraft carriers to Vietnam.
 The harbors of Haiphong, Cam Pha, Dong Hoi, Hon Gai, and Thanh Hoa, Vinh, and Quang Khe, are being mined . The Ared River and other rivers and canals of North Vietnam are among the harbors being
 U.S. sources call the mining “100 percent effective,” but Hanoi reports that the mines are being removed as soon as they are dropped and ships are moving without difficulty . United States sources say the mining is 100 percent effective .
 A series of air strikes over the past five days has destroyed all of North Vietnam’s pumping stations in the southern panhandle . The strikes have cut the main fuel line to the South, cutting the country's main fuel supply .
 All college and universities in South Vietnam are closed to allow for the conscription of students . All colleges and universities are closed in order to allow students to be conscripted .
 Ten Communist supply boats sunk and 20 others damaged off the mouth of the Cua Viet River . U.S. warships continue to shell North and South Vietnamese coastlines . 20 other ships damaged in attack .
 Elements of the 9th and 21st ARVN Divisions combine with South Vietnamese airborne troops to open new stretches of road near An Loc . South Vietnamese troops reach to within two miles of besieged city but heavy fighting continues .
 In II Corps, NVA troops, preceded by heavy artillery barrage, try unsuccessfully to break through the lines of the 23rd ARVN Division defending Kontum . The battle is fought in II Corps' II Corps .
 President Richard Nixon meets with Leonid Brezhnev for summit talks in Moscow . Nixon met with Soviet Union leader in 1970s and '60s . Nixon was in Moscow to meet with Soviet leader Yuri Yakutinov .
 A heavy North Vietnamese attack brings to a standstill the South Vietnamese column moving up Route 13 to relieve An Loc . A heavy N.V. attack brings a heavy South Vietnamese attack to a halt .
 Its apparent objective is Chuong Thien Province, known for its weakness in resisting Communist infiltration . The province is known for being weak in resisting communist infiltration .
 Almost all regular ARVN troops have been withdrawn from the Mekong Delta to aid in the battle for An Loc . Almost all of the ARVNs have been pulled out of the region to aid the battle .
 The heavy United States air attacks began with Nixon’s May 8 interdiction order . The heavy U.S. air attacks are widened to include more industrial and nonmilitary sites .
 The strikes concentrate on rail lines around Hanoi and Haiphong, rail lines to China, bridges, pipelines, power plants, troops, and troop training facilities . The strikes are expected to take place in the coming days .
 NVA troops supported by tanks launch a frontal attack on Kontum . Commandos who had previously slipped into the city block access to the airfield, the besieged city’s only supply .
 B-52s begin bombing North Vietnamese troop concentrations around the city . North Vietnamese troops were in the midst of a massive bombing campaign in the fall .
 In a joint communique issued by the U.S. and the Soviet Union, both countries set forth their standard positions on Vietnam . In the communique, the United States and Soviet Union issued following the conclusion of summit talks during President Nixon's visit to Moscow .
 The United States insists that the future of South Vietnam should be left to the South Vietnamese without interference . The Soviet Union insists on a withdrawal of United States and Allied forces from South Vietnam and an end to North Vietnam bombing .
 Locher has been trapped northwest of Hanoi since his Phantom jet went down May 10 . Locher's plane went down on May 10; he has been stuck in the city since then .
 One hundred protesters gather on the White House sidewalk to begin the second year of an anti-Vietnam War vigil . Anti-war vigil is held in Washington, DC .
 The vigil outside the White House is sustained by various activists . Originally begun by a Quaker group, the vigil was originally started by Quakers .
 North Vietnamese troops repeatedly attack Phou My, a district capital in Binh Dinh Province, and beaten back only after U.S. planes kill 60 soldiers . North Vietnamese soldiers repeatedly attack the district capital and are beaten back . The United States killed 60 soldiers in the attack in Ph
 Secretary of Defense Laird: Increase in U.S. military activity in Vietnam could add $3-5 billion to the 1973 fiscal budget . Laird says the increase in Vietnam activity could double the annual cost of the war .
 The United States protests Sweden’s use of the term “ecocide” in denouncing U.S. use of herbicides in Vietnam . At the UN Conference on Human Environment in Stockholm, the United States protested Sweden's use of term "ecocide"
 Munitions used in intensified bombing of North and South Vietnam account for most of the increased cost of the war . Munitions were used in the intensified bombing campaign .
 The two-month siege is not lifted . The battered units do not significantly reinforce An Loc's battered units . The siege continues .
 Observers believe that the best hope for An Loc is that the North Vietnamese will run out of shells but the defenders continue to hold . The best hope is that An Loc's defenders will be able to hold on to their ground .
 Senior U.S. adviser John Paul Vann is killed in a helicopter crash . Vann was a senior adviser to the United States in Military Region II .
 Military intelligence reports that the entire North Vietnamese 325C Division has moved into South Vietnam to join the drive against Hue . The entire division is believed to have moved into the South Vietnam .
 Under President Nixon, the number of USAF fighter-bombers in Southeast Asia has tripled and the total number of B-52s has quadrupled . The number of U.S. bombers in the region has also tripled .
 Six carriers are now in the Tonkin Gulf, where before there had been only two, and two more are en route . Six carriers now have six carriers in the Gulf, with two more en route to the Gulf of Vietnam .
 Navy planes flying two-thirds of the attack sorties against North Vietnam . Because of the air force commitment to close air support in South Vietnam, the navy planes are flying 2.3% of the attacks .
 United States Phantom jets destroy the Lang Chi hydroelectric power plant, using laser-guided 2,000-pound bombs . The plant was destroyed by the United States .
 General John D Lavelle was relieved of his post in March and later demoted after repeatedly ordering unauthorized bombing of military targets in North Vietnam . He testified before the House Armed Services Committee that he was relieved and demoted .
 Court-martial charges were brought against him by his subordinates, which also implicated his superiors, particularly General Abrams . Charges were dropped by the air force because the “interests of discipline” had already been served .
 Lavelle became the first fourstar general in modern U.S. history to be demoted on retirement . He continued to receive a full general’s retirement pay of $27,000 per year .
 Joint U.S. Public Affairs Office in Saigon is closed after four years . The office directed public affairs and psychological warfare in Vietnam . The Joint United States Public Affairs office was closed .
 Most of its duties are assumed by the United States Information Agency . The U.S. Information Agency is responsible for the mission .
 JUSPAO is declared successful in “winning the hearts and minds” of the Vietnamese people . The Vietnamese people are declared winners of the hearts of their people .
 Fresh troops from the 18th ARVN Division are flown into the An Loc area . Large numbers of fresh troops are flown in .
 North Vietnamese troops still block Route 13 and continue to shell An Loc . Most of the Communist troops have been pushed out of the northern part of the city .
 President Thieu flies in to make a surprise visit to the city and congratulate the defenders . President of Vietnam congratulates them on their victory in the World Cup .
 U.S. soldiers deliberately killed thousands of Vietnamese citizens under the guise of “pacification” during Operation Speedy Express conducted by the 9th Infantry Division in the Mekong Delta, December 1968-May 1969 . Thousands of Vietnam citizens were killed under guise of "pacification
 President Nixon appoints General Creighton W Abrams, commander of U.S. forces in Vietnam, to be United States Army chief of staff . Abrams was the commander of United States forces in the Vietnam .
 U.S. Marine unit HMA-369 begins flying armed helicopter strikes from the decks of the Constellation, off the coast of South Vietnam . The new AH-1J Sea Cobra is the latest in a long line of weapons that have been flown by the Marines in Vietnam .
 Marine A-6 Intruders of VMA-224 make most of their missions into Laos and North Vietnam . Marine Intruder missions include the USS Coral Sea .
 The 21st Division, decimated by its attempts to relieve An Loc, is replaced by the 25th ARVN Division which moves up Highway 13 to besieged city .
 Large numbers of fresh South Vietnamese troops are flown into the An Loc area . U.S. helicopters insert 18th ARVN Division troops to positions south of An Loc to replace badly battered troops .
 North Vietnamese forces still block parts of Route 13 and continue to shell An Loc . Most of the Communist troops within the city itself have been eliminated .
 United States helicopters are required to fly almost all the dangerous missions around An Loc . South Vietnamese crews have panicked under fire because of the lack of American helicopters .
 Several U.S. helicopters have been lost in the last two weeks, causing bitterness among airmen . Several helicopters and their crews have been killed in recent weeks .
 Also on this day, the Democratic National Convention Platform Committee approves a plank making the first order of business for a victorious presidential candidate the immediate withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam . This day marks the first day of the Democratic convention .
 The United States establishes a 25-mile-wide buffer zone along Vietnam’s border with China within which it will not bomb . The U.S. establishes a buffer zone between Vietnam and China . The buffer zone is set to be 25 miles wide .
 The shift is necessitated by the pending withdrawal of United States infantry troops, which provided security for the air base at Danang . The U.S. infantry troops will be withdrawn from the base .
 The 3rd Brigade of the 1st Cavalry Division (Airmobile), Task Force Garry Owen, departs South Vietnam . Task force Garry Owen was part of the First Cavalry Regiment in Vietnam .
 President Thieu granted emergency powers enabling him to rule by decree for six months . Thieu is granted emergency power to take control of the country by decree . He has been granted six months of emergency powers .
 The final Senate vote is held after Saigon’s curfew, when no opposition members are present . The Senate will later pass a nonbinding resolution asserting that Thieu has no authority to rule by decree .
 President Nixon announces that no more draftees will be sent to Vietnam unless they volunteer for such duty . President Nixon also announces that the Vietnam draft will not be sent back to Vietnam .
 A force of 10,000 troops will be withdrawn from Vietnam by September 1 . A total of 39,000 U.S. military personnel will remain in-country .
 South Vietnamese marines and paratroopers push across the My Chanh River to begin a drive to retake Quang Tri Province . Over 10,000 South Vietnamese soldiers and marines are pushing across the river .
 General Frederick C Weyand replaces General Creighton Abrams as commander of U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam . Abrams will replace Westmoreland as Army chief of staff as Army Chief of Staff . General Frederick . C. Wyand will replace Creighton .
 The 196th Infantry Brigade, the last U.S. ground combat brigade in Vietnam, departs . The last United States Army ground combat Brigade in Vietnam is the 196th .
 The last of the New Zealand troop contingent withdraws from Vietnam . New Zealand troops have been deployed to Vietnam since April 2007 .
 More South Vietnamese troops arrive in Quang Tri Province by helicopter for the third straight day . Troops arrive in the province by helicopter on the third day .
 The counteroffensive penetrates to six or seven miles from Quang Tri City, Vietnam . Supported by continued U.S. air and naval firepower, the counteroffensive continues .
 Weather modification techniques have been used in Vietnam and Laos since 1963 . Seeding clouds to suppress antiaircraft fire and hinder troop movements has been used since 1963, sources say .
 South Vietnamese troops advancing on Quang Tri are brought to a standstill at La Van Ngha village about two miles from the city . Troops advancing on the city were stopped by a village two miles away .
 Heavy Communist shelling of Hue continues; to the south in Binh Long Province, the main highway to An Loc remains blocked in several places . To the south, the major highway to an Loc Province remains blocked .
 Premier Souvanna Phouma accepts the offer of Pathet Lao leader Prince Souphanouvong to resume talks to end the fighting . The talks are scheduled to resume in the coming days .
 Negotiations will begin October 17 and continue throughout the year, but remain fruitless . Negotiating will begin in New York City, New Jersey, October 17 .
 At An Loc, an enemy artillery shell kills Brigadier General Richard Tallman and four other Americans . Tallman, four others, and two advisers were killed .
 He and his personal staff had just flown into the city to confer with U.S. advisers .
 President Thieu claims that his troops have entered Quang Tri, but fighting remains deadlocked outside the city . Fighting is still deadlocked in the city outside of the city of Quang tri .
 Some believe the Communists are opening a new front in the Mekong Delta southwest of Saigon . Meanwhile, the situation remains relatively static on South Vietnam’s two other fronts .
 Both sides restate their positions; central to the talks is the future of the Saigon government . Central to the negotiations is the fate of Saigon's government .
 Six national leaders of the 20,000-member Vietnam Veterans Against the War are indicted by a federal grand jury . They are accused of conspiring to incite an “armed rebellion” at the Republican National Convention .
 Citizens emerging from neighborhoods retaken by the paratroopers join the refugees heading south to Hue on Route 1 . The refugees are now heading to Hue, Vietnam .
 Washington and Hanoi announce that secret Paris peace talks have resumed . U.S. and Vietnam have been involved in secret talks since 1968 .
 Large force of South Vietnamese troops moves north toward the district capital at Hoi An . Opening a counteroffensive in coastal Binh Dinh Province, a large force of forces moves north . South Vietnamese forces move north toward district capital .
 Saigon’s forces succeed in taking the city two days later, but will lose the western half one week after that . Saigon's forces succeeded in taking Saigon but lost western half of the city .
 Defense Department acknowledges unsuccessful attempts to destroy rain forest cover in 1966 and 1967 by starting forest fires . Defense Department denies secrecy or any desire to create devastating fire storms .
 Operation Pink Rose defoliated an area the size of Philadelphia in the Boi Loi Woods, a dense forest area northwest of Saigon . The tropical forest proved too moist for the project, which was undertaken by the Defense Department and United States Forest Service .
 Cooper amendment to military aid bill stipulates complete withdrawal from Vietnam within four months of Hanoi releasing all U.S. POWs . Cooper amendment was passed by the United States Senate in Vietnam . Amendment stipulates withdrawal of troops from Vietnam .
 The overall bill fails to pass, in what is seen as a victory for the Nixon administration . Nixon administration: "It's a victory"
 U.S. planes and naval vessels have deliberately damaged dikes in North Vietnam that are essential to flood control during the rainy season . Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim discloses that he has received information that apparently confirms that the dikes have been deliberately damaged .
 The North Vietnamese have repeatedly claimed that their dikes have been deliberately bombed . U.S. air and naval attacks resumed above the 20th parallel in May . North Vietnam has repeatedly claimed its dikes were deliberately bombed by the United States .
 The United States Defense Department, President Nixon, and Secretary of State William P Rogers claim that any U.S. strikes against dikes were accidental .
 U.S. fighter-bombers attack supply complexes in Hanoi in first strikes against capital in a month . First strikes against the capital in the past month .
 Laserand TV-guided bombs cost four to five times as much as conventional bombs, U.S. official says . Laserand bombs have introduced “a whole new magnitude” of warfare, official adds . Laser bombs have proven highly successful and accurate .
 South Vietnamese paratroopers hoist their flag over Quang Tri Citadel . However, they are unable to hold the Citadel for long or secure Quang tri City .
 South Vietnamese troops under heavy shelling forced to abandon Fire Base Bastogne . The base is located in the southwest approaches to Hue .
 CIA report made public by the Nixon administration reveals that U.S. bombing has caused accidental minor damage to North Vietnam’s dikes at 12 places .
 Nearly 2,000 miles of dikes make civilized life possible in the Red River Delta . The dikes on the Tonkin plain and the sea make life possible . The Red River delta is the world's largest reservoir in the region .
 Destruction of dikes would mean the destruction of centuries of patient work and cause the drowning or starvation of hundreds of thousands of peasants . Destruction of the dikes .
 Bombing dikes had been advocated by some U.S. strategists since the beginning of the war . Bombing the dikes was rejected outright by United States presidents as an act of terrorism unworthy of the United States .
 The Soviet Union continues to publicize what it calls the two-month United States bombing campaign to destroy the dikes and dams of the Tonkin Delta . The U.S. bombed dikes, dams and dikes in the area .
 Clark reports damage to hospitals, dikes, schools, and civilian areas . Clark reports over Hanoi Radio that he has seen damage to dikes and dikes .
 About 2,000 South Vietnamese troops begin an operation designed to cripple a possible Communist operation against Route 4, which links Saigon with the Mekong Delta . Route 4 is a key link between Saigon and the rest of the world .
 Henry Kissinger meets privately with Le Due Tho and Xuan Thuy in Paris . Henry Kissinger met with the leaders of Vietnam, Vietnam's governments . Kissinger and Thuy met privately in Paris for the first time .
 The Communists relax somewhat their previous demands that President Thieu abdicate, but the North Vietnamese do not appear to be in any hurry to reach any agreement before the November presidential election . The Communists clearly favor George McGovern .
 2,000 rounds hit South Vietnamese marines trying to recapture the provincial capital of Quang Tri . The heaviest artillery bombardments since the Nguyen Hue Offensive began in April .
 ARVN troops reenter Fire Base Bastogne, lost earlier in the year, only to find it empty of enemy troops . Supported by United States B-52s, ARVn troops return to the base after it was lost earlier this year .
 President Thieu announces a decree requiring every daily newspaper to deposit $47,000 with the government as a guarantee against possible fines and court charges . The decree requires every daily paper to deposit the money .
 Sixteen newspapers and 15 periodicals will eventually cease publication, leaving only two opposition papers in Saigon . Only two opposition newspapers will remain in the city .
 North Vietnamese forces attack the Long Thanh rubber plantation 17 miles east of Saigon, inflicting heavy casualties on ARVN troops . ARVVN forces attack a rubber plantation near Saigon . The plantation was located 17 miles from Saigon.
 Seasonal bad weather limits the usual air strikes throughout North Vietnam, often reducing the usual number by one-third except for B-52s, which fly above clouds .
 Over 2,000 South Vietnamese rangers clash with North Vietnamese troops in Cambodia . North Vietnamese soldiers clash with South Vietnamese forces in Cambodia.
 U.S. warplanes destroyed 14 tanks the day before, near Kampong Trabek . United States warplanes destroy 14 tanks a day before . The United States says 14 tanks were destroyed .
 North Vietnamese forces block Routes 1,4, and 13, all major South Vietnamese supply routes to Saigon . North Vietnam forces block all major routes to the city .
 Communist forces repeatedly interdict key supply routes critical to Saigon’s survival . For the next two months, Communist forces regularly interdict these and other key supplies routes .
 3rd Battalion, 21st Infantry, Task Force Gimlet is deactivated, along with G Battery, 29th Field Artillery . The last U.S. ground combat unit in South Vietnam, the 3rd battalion, 21th Infantry, was deactivated . G Battery of 29
 Delta Company had completed the 3rd Battalion’s last patrol on August 5, ending the U.S. infantry war in Vietnam . Delta Company was the last unit to complete a combat patrol .
 This leaves only 43,500 advisers, airmen, and support troops in-country . Only 43,000 troops remain in the country now .
 This number does not include the sailors of the Seventh Fleet or the air force personnel in Thailand and Guam .
 The chief Viet Cong delegate in Paris maintains that the key issue in the current talks is a political settlement in Saigon . Calling Vietnamization the main target of the Communist forces is Vietnamization . Vietnamization is a main target in the talks .
 Viet Cong sappers raid ammo dump at Long Binh, destroying thousands of tons of ammunition . South Vietnamese forces have stabilized battle lines around the country .
 Some observers say that the Communists may be reverting to guerrilla tactics . Some observers believe that the Communist Party may have been re-tweiling .
 Engstrom says a military report he helped prepare in 1971 was suppressed and replaced by a “watereddown” version . Engstrom: A report that estimated 25 percent of enlisted men in Vietnam were addicted to heroin was suppressed in 1971 .
 South Vietnam's interior minister denies reports of widespread torture of political prisoners . Political prisoners have been rounded up since the start of the Communist offensive in March .
 Critics say at least 10,000 persons have been imprisoned in reeducation centers, with arrests continuing . Many prisoners have been taken to Con Son jail by the CIA’s Air America helicopters .
 There are charges that police have made little distinction between those who had Communist connections and those who were merely opposed to the Thieu regime .
 Former attorney general Ramsey Clark tours North Vietnam with the International Commission of Inquiry into United States War Crimes in Indochina . Clark says if George McGovern is elected president in November, all U.S. POWs will be freed by North Vietnam within three months .
 He says POWs he interviewed during his trip were “unquestionably... well treated” and that he saw damage to North Vietnam’s dikes in at least six places, and other extensive destruction in nonmilitary areas .
 Kissinger again meets privately with Le Due Tho and Xuan Thuy in Paris . Kissinger meets with the leaders of the two nations . Kissinger again met privately with the two Vietnamese leaders .
 Henry Kissinger leaves Paris to confer with President Thieu and his advisers . North Vietnam’s chief negotiator returns to Hanoi .
 In I Corps, there is major fighting near the northern district capital of Que Son and neighboring Camp Ross . The fighting is in I Corps' northern district .
 North Vietnamese capture both the town and the base, giving the Communists control of most of Quang Nam Province . After a heavy bombardment, the North Vietnamese take control of the base and the town .
 Delegates entering the Republican National Convention in Miami Beach are harassed by 3,000 antiwar demonstrators . Many of the demonstrators are painted with death masks . Delegates enter the Republican convention in Miami .
 The rest of the convention is marked by demonstrations outside the meeting hall . Hundreds of protesters are arrested and some are injured when police use riot-control agents .
 Richard Nixon and Spiro Agnew renominated at the Republican National Convention in Miami . Nixon and Agnew were renominated for the second time . Agnew and Nixon were both nominated at the convention in Miami, Florida .
 The rate of civilian casualties in South Vietnam has risen more than 50 percent since the beginning of North Vietnam’s spring offensive . U.S. officials say civilian casualties have risen 50 percent in the past year .
 Some 24,788 civilians have been wounded between March 30 and July 31 . An average of 6,197 per month, compared to an average of 2,700 for each of the six preceding months .
 In the heaviest bombing in four years, United States aircraft flatten North Vietnamese barracks near Hanoi and Haiphong . U.S. aircraft destroy North Vietnamese military facilities in Vietnam's capital .
 Four U.S. warships shell the Haiphong port area after dark from two miles offshore . The U.N. ships shell the area two miles off the coast .
 Cruiser Newport News sinks one of two North Vietnamese patrol boats in pursuit, and destroyer Rowan sets the other on fire .
 Captain Richard S Ritchie, flying with his Weapons Systems Officer, Captain Charles B DeBellevue, in an F-4 out of Udorn Air Base in Thailand, shoots down his fifth MiG near Hanoi . The United States Air Force gets its first ace since the
 By this time in the war, only one U.S. fighter-bomber base is left in South Vietnam . The rest of the air support is provided by aircraft flying from carriers or United States bases in Thailand and Guam .
 President Nixon announces withdrawals that will reduce total U.S. strength in South Vietnam to 27,000 by December 1 . President Nixon announced withdrawals in order to reduce total United States strength in Vietnam . The withdrawal is expected to reduce the number of American troops in Vietnam by about 30,000
 North Vietnam artillery hit South Vietnamese marine positions around Quang Tri with about 2,000 heavy-caliber shells . North Vietnamese artillery hit the South Vietnamese marines with about two,000 shells . South Vietnam marine positions were attacked by North Vietnamese troops .
 The shelling demonstrates that the North Vietnamese are experiencing no shortages in Quang Tri despite Allied efforts to cut supply lines . The shelling shows that the N. Vietnamese are not experiencing shortages despite Allied supply lines being cut .
 United States weekly casualty figures of five dead and three wounded are the lowest recorded since record-keeping began in January 1965 . U.S. weekly casualties are lowest since January 1965, with five dead, three wounded and five wounded .
 Phuc Yen, 10 miles north of Hanoi and one of the largest air bases in North Vietnam, is smashed by U.S. bombers . The base is one of North Vietnam's largest and most important air bases .
 A MiG is shot down during the attack, bringing the total to 47 MiGs shot down since the beginning of the offensive . The total number of MiGs has been shot down by North Vietnamese forces since the offensive began . The North Vietnamese offensive has seen a total of 47 shot down
 United States helicopters evacuate Meo tribesmen who have suffered heavy losses following fighting around the Plain of Jars that began in mid-August . Meo tribemen suffered heavy loss following fighting .
 South Vietnamese troops pull out of Tien Phuoc, 37 miles south of Danang, leaving the Communists in control of two-thirds of Quang Tin Province . The Communists are now in charge of the province, which is located near Danang .
 President Thieu abolishes popular elections in the country’s 10,775 hamlets . The move supersedes a 1968 law establishing the election of hamlet and village officers . Thieu abolished popular elections for the first time .
 The 44 province chiefs, all appointed by Thieu, are ordered to reorganize local government and appoint hamlet officials . Thieu has ordered the reorganization of local government in Vietnam .
 Thieu cites the Communist offensive as justification for these measures . Thieu says the measures are necessary to protect his country from a communist insurgency .
 He claims that many hamlet chiefs are Communists and provide support for insurgents . But the decree was actually drafted before the offensive began .
 The Defense Department admits that on July 17 the crippled American destroyer Warrington may have struck a U.S. mine emplaced during the United States mining of North Vietnamese waters . The mine mine may have been emplaced in the mines mine mine .
 Two South Vietnamese are killed, 20 hurt, and five South Vietnamese planes damaged at Tan Son Nhut . Five planes were damaged during the attack, killing two and injuring 20 .
 At Bien Hoa, 40 Americans were wounded and one gunship and 50 South Vietnamese helicopters were damaged . 40 Americans are wounded . One gunship, 50 helicopters are damaged .
 U.S. intelligence agencies report to the National Security Council that the North Vietnamese have 100,000 regular troops in the South . North Vietnam can sustain fighting in South “at the present rate” for two years, intelligence agencies say .
 It is estimated that 20,000 fresh troops have infiltrated into the South in the last six weeks . It is believed to have been in the area for six months .
 Number of NVA troops in Mekong Delta has increased as much as tenfold, up to 30,000 in the last year . Third oil pipeline, like the others nearly impossible to cut by air strikes, has been completed between North Vietnam and China .
 The South Vietnamese recapture Quang Tri City after four days of heavy fighting . Over 8,135 NVA have been killed in the battle, South Vietnamese claim .
 The city has been virtually destroyed by the intense fighting that has raged since NVA forces occupied it in May . The fighting has left it virtually impossible to rebuild .
 U.S. Air Force destroys 90 percent of North Vietnam’s largest rail yard, 38 miles from Hanoi . The yard is located on the northeast line running to China . Air Force says it destroyed 90 percent .
 Communist forces begin an offensive with simultaneous attacks on district capitals in southern Quang Ngai Province . Communist forces attack district capitals and districts in southern province .
 Three U.S. pilot POWs are released by Hanoi, the first captives released since 1969 . They are turned over to members of the Committee for Liaison with Families of American Servicemen Detained in Vietnam, who arranged their release .
 Hanoi cautions the United States not to force the 41 8 Vietnam War Almanac 1972 freed men to “slander” North Vietnam . The U.S. should avoid any “distortions” about the POWs .
 Captain Charles B DeBellevue shoots down his sixth MiG to become the leading ace of the war . Captain Charles shot down six MiGs in World War II .
 The air force reveals that United States planes have been mining the coastal rivers and canals of northern Quang Tri Province below the DMZ . It is the first mining of waterways within South Vietnam .
 The fighting in Quang Ngai Province moves closer to the provincial capital of Quang Nai City . South Vietnamese troops have been forced to abandon one fire base to the east and one west of the city . The fighting has also forced troops to abandon two fire bases to the west of
 U.S. deploys two squadrons of F-111 attack bombers to Takhli Air Base, Thailand, to give better low-level and all-weather capabilities for the approaching monsoon season in North Vietnam .
 Henry Kissinger and Le Due Tho, the chief North Vietnamese negotiator, hold the 19th session of their private talks . Kissinger and Tho hold a background of rumors of major diplomatic developments . The talks are scheduled to take place in a private session .
 North Vietnamese launch some harassing attacks in Quang Ngai Province . There is a general lull in heavy ground fighting for the sixth straight day . Heavy ground fighting continues in the area .
 United States planes hit North Vietnamese air bases in Phuc Yen, Yen Bai, Quan Lang, and Vinh . U.S. planes destroy five MiG fighters on the ground and damage nine others . These represent about 10 percent of the total North Vietnam air force .
 Twenty sailors die and 37 are wounded when a shell goes off in the barrel of a gun aboard the United States heavy cruiser Newport News . Twenty sailors died and 37 were wounded in the incident .
 Towed to Subic Bay in the Philippines for repairs, she is needed so badly on the gun line that she is returned to action with the damaged center gun turret sealed .
 More than 800,000 tons of ‘air ammunitions’ have been used over Indochina between January 1 and September 30 . 763,160 for all of 1971, Defense Department reports .
 South Vietnamese forces come under attack along Route 13 north of Saigon in a new phase of the Communist offensive . The offensive is part of the ongoing battle against the South Vietnamese government .
 Most of the 300,000 persons who fled Quang Tri Province during the spring offensive now live in squalid refugee camps at Danang . Most of those who fled the province are now living in the squalid camps at the Danang base .
 U.S. B-52s continue heavy raids in Binh Duong Province aimed at preventing Communist infiltration toward Saigon . United States continues heavy raids aimed at stopping Communist infiltration of Saigon.
 In one of the heaviest raids inside Phnom Penh since the beginning of the war, NVA troops blow up a bridge over the Tonle Sap, less than two miles from the center of the city, killing 36 Cambodian soldiers and civilians and losing 28 of their own force .
 Rumors arise that there has been a breakthrough in the secret talks in Paris . Rumors of a breakthrough emerge that the talks have been held in secret .
 North Vietnamese representative Le Due Tho presents a peace agreement proposing that two separate administrations remain in South Vietnam and negotiate general elections . North and North Vietnamese representatives propose that South Vietnam remain in a separate government and negotiate elections .
 This settlement accepts in substance the United States proposals, thus dropping demands for a political solution to accompany a military one . The U.S. proposal is accepted in substance, the U.N. says .
 Tho says the U.S. and North Vietnam should arrange a cease-fire governing all military matters between themselves . The political questions will be settled by the Vietnamese sides, who will be governed by a “National Council of Reconciliation” until a final settlement is reached
 Hanoi and Saigon will continue to occupy the territory each presently holds until then . The Vietnamese capital will be occupied by the two cities until then.
 Kissinger considers Hanoi’s offer a breakthrough . Kissinger agrees to North Vietnamese troops remaining in the South . Kissinger: "Hanoi's offer is a breakthrough"
 Operation Enhance Plus transfers $2 billion worth of military equipment to South Vietnam . Aircraft, tanks, and artillery pieces are among the items transferred to Vietnam .
 This program was designed to complete the Vietnamization process by giving South Vietnam as much equipment as possible before the peace agreement was signed . The program was intended to give South Vietnam the most equipment possible .
 U.S. Air Force B-52 lands at U Tapao Air Base, Thailand, after returning from a bombing mission over South Vietnam, October 1972 .
 Several hundred VC continue to control at least three hamlets within 20 miles of Saigon . Several hundred of the VC still control several hamlets .
 U.S. Navy aircraft attacking Gia Lam rail yard accidentally hit French, Indian, and Algerian legations in Hanoi . Delegate General Pierre Susini was killed .
 Thieu declares that peace will come only when the Communists have been exterminated . Thieu declared that peace only came only when Communists had been eradicated .
 He says, in a speech in Saigon, that “coalition with the Communists means death” and that the Communists will have to be killed “to the last man” before there will be peace, he says .
 The Ben Het Special Forces camp was struck by 1,500 rockets and then taken by the Communists . The camp was hit by more than 1,000 rockets and destroyed by the Communist Party .
 One U.S. soldier is killed and one wounded in the ambush of an ARVN convoy 25 miles southeast of Saigon . The ambush took place in the southern Vietnamese capital .
 The Communists retain control of at least two hamlets within 20 miles of Saigon . The Communists are still in control of a number of hamlets in Vietnam .
 General Creighton Abrams has been commander of U.S. forces in Vietnam since mid-1968 . He has been in charge of the United States' military since 1968 . Abrams was nominated to be army chief of staff by the Senate .
 Consideration of Abrams nomination has been sidetracked for months by hearings into unauthorized bombing raids against North Vietnam . General John Lavelle's testimony before the House Armed Service Committee implicates Abrams .
 Twenty-one black crewmen will eventually be charged with assault and rioting . They will appear before a court-martial in San Diego, California .
 Black/white clashes occur among 30 seamen at the naval station on Midway Island in the Pacific and among 33 seamen in Norfolk, Virginia .
 General Creighton Abrams assumes the office of United States Army chief of staff . Abrams will be the first commander of the armed forces .
 Communist attacks concentrate on major roads in the Saigon area, and the shelling disrupts traffic .
 There is a growing feeling that the secret talks in Paris have reached a critical stage . There is also a feeling that secret talks have reached critical stage.
 The U.S. Army chief of staff, General Abrams, is en route to Saigon . The Pacific commander in chief, Admiral Noel Gayler, is also in Saigon.
 Senior U.S. military and diplomatic personnel are meeting in Saigon . The rumor of an imminent cease-fire fuels the rumor of a truce is circulating .
 In Saigon, the city’s supply of food is restricted and driving outside the city is hazardous due to continued Communist activity against the highways around the capital . Driving outside of Saigon is also a hazard .
 Thieu rejects Hanoi’s proposals, opposing draft treaty provisions that allow North Vietnamese troops to remain in place in the South . Thieu: Draft treaty provisions would allow North Vietnam troops to stay in place .
 Defense Secretary Laird announces revised command procedures aimed at “further strengthening” civilian control of the military . Laird: "Further strengthening" civilian control .
 New group of inspectors general will conduct regular checks to see if orders from Washington are being carried out . Inspectors general from the various service branches will henceforth report to their civilian service secretaries as well as their military chiefs .
 The U.S. dropped a bomb that “inadvertently struck” the French embassy in Hanoi on October 11 . The United States formally admits that it mistakenly dropped the bomb . The bomb was dropped by the United States in Vietnam .
 The United States had previously asserted that the damage was done by a North Vietnamese SAM-2 antiaircraft missile . The U.S. had previously said that the U.N. had been hit by the missile .
 Many Frenchmen consider the incident a result of the U.S. using the bombing of North Vietnam to test new weapons . Frenchmen believe the bombing was part of the United States using it to test weapons .
 North Vietnam’s Premier Pham Van Dong announces that Hanoi will accept a cease-fire as the first step to a peace settlement . North Vietnam will accept the ceasefire as a first step in negotiations .
 A cease-fire would be followed by the withdrawal of U.S. forces, Dong’s proposal says . All POWs would be released when the settlement is agreed upon .
 It is stipulated that Saigon and the VC will join in a coalition followed by general elections within six months . Saigon has been ruled out of power by the Communist Party of Vietnam .
 Henry Kissinger meets with President Thieu in Saigon to try to secure Thieu’s agreement to the cease-fire draft . Kissinger was trying to secure agreement with Thieu, particularly to Viet Cong participation in postwar Vietnam .
 Thieu accuses the United States of conspiring with China and the Soviet Union to undermine his regime . He rejects the proposed accord almost point for point . Thieu wants South Vietnam recognized as a sovereign state .
 Bien Hoa airport is hit by a barrage of Communist rockets . South Vietnamese commanders report that they do not feel that peace talks have affected military action . South
 Increased fighting erupts as both Communist and government forces attempt to gain ground before an anticipated Indochinese cease-fire . Both forces are fighting for control of the country's territory .
 Government troops begin a drive to retake the southern village of Saravane, and will succeed six days later . But the village will change hands four more times by the end of the year .
 A U.S. message to Hanoi requests further negotiations, citing difficulties with Saigon . A United States message to Saigon requested further negotiations . The United States says Saigon has been a source of trouble .
 Nixon temporarily suspends the Linebacker raids north of the 20th parallel . Nixon suspends them as a sign of good faith .
 Secret talks in Paris have produced a tentative agreement to end the war . Radio Hanoi announces that secret talks have been held in Paris .
 It broadcasts a summary of the nine-point cease-fire draff treaty agreement . It accuses the United States of trying to sabotage it by claiming difficulties in Saigon .
 Kissinger confirms Hanoi’s announcement that a breakthrough occurred on October 8, with both sides reaching an overall agreement on a nine-point peace plan . Kissinger confirms that both sides reached an agreement on the plan .
 Hanoi and the United States reached an agreement on October 17 on all but two points: the release of POWs and post-cease-fire arms shipments . In Paris at a news conference, Xuan Thuy announces the agreement . The U.S. and Vietnam reached an
 It is decreed in Saigon that all South Vietnamese houses must have a national flag displayed . The possession or display of a VC flag will be punishable by death if displayed .
 President Thieu is still working on a decree that would make being a Communist or associating with a Communist punishable by death . Thieu also wants to make associating or being with a communist punishable by killing .
 The U.S. announces that the peace accord will definitely not be signed by October 31 . Optimism is expressed concerning early settlement of the remaining details .
 Communists are taking over 17 hamlets within 40 miles of Saigon, occupying 17 . of the city . Communists are steadily taking over settlements around Saigon . Communists occupy 17 . hamlets in the area .
 One hundred thirty-eight Communist attacks occur throughout South Vietnam, the highest number for any single day in 1972 . The highest number of Communist attacks occurred throughout the South Vietnam during that year .
 United States B-52s and fighter-bombers hit North Vietnam below the 20th parallel . U.S. troops bombed North Vietnam at the height of the conflict .
 Hoping to expand control of South Vietnamese territory before a truce goes into effect, several thousand North Vietnamese troops move out of sanctuaries in Cambodia and into South Vietnam’s Mekong Delta and the area surrounding Saigon . The burden of fighting Cambodian government troops to the Kh
 Xuan Thuy asserts that the problem with the peace settlement is not one of major or minor points, as the United States claims, but the seriousness of the U.S. is the problem .
 Hanoi does not object to another Kissinger-Le Due Tho meeting, but wants the U.S. to keep its word . Vietnam says it wants the United States to keep their word .
 CH-47 Chinook helicopter crash near My Tho in the Mekong Delta kills 22 U.S. personnel . 22 United States personnel are killed .
 Heavy U.S. bombing concentrates on North Vietnamese base areas in Laos and Cambodia . Heavy United States bombing concentrated on North Vietnam base areas .
 This operation is part of an offensive launched October 28 to gain ground before the expected cease-fire . This operation was part of a military offensive launched by the U.S. military .
 President Nixon announces that there will be no signing of the draft truce agreement until all remaining issues are resolved . Nixon: "There will not be a signing of a draft agreement until the remaining issues have been resolved"
 The White House discloses that the South Vietnamese air force will receive hundreds more aircraft than previously agreed upon . The South Vietnam air force is expected to receive hundreds of aircraft more than previously .
 This increase is seen as another attempt to coax President Thieu into early acceptance of the cease-fire . The increase in troop numbers seen as part of an attempt to get Thieu to accept it .
 Richard Nixon defeats Senator George McGovern and is reelected president of the United States . Nixon defeats McGovern in the 1972 presidential election . Nixon was reelected to the presidency in 1972 .
 Only 55 percent of the electorate votes in the election, the lowest turnout since 1948 . Nixon carries all states but Massachusetts for a total of 97 percent of electoral vote .
 The Democrats widen their majority in Congress, picking up two Senate seats . Democrats pick up two more Senate seats in the midterms . The Democrats are expected to take control of the Senate .
 B-52s set a record for concentrated bombing of a single province, Quang Tri, in a single day . The B.52s bombed the province in a record-breaking day .
 South Korean troops withdraw from the fighting and retire to rear bases . South Korean forces withdraw from South Korea and withdraw from fighting .
 The 37,000 troops of the ROK’s original 48,000-man presence who remain are scheduled to depart in December . The original ROK presence is set to leave the Korean peninsula in December.
 There are reports that hard-line Communist troops in the South led by General Le Vinh Khoa have rebelled in protest over the pending negotiated settlement .
 Hanoi denies reports of a rebellion, calling them examples of CIA psychological warfare . Hanoa says reports of rebellion are examples of 'psychological warfare' against the regime .
 The massive Long Binh United States military base is handed over to the South Vietnamese . It was once the largest U.S. installation outside the continental United States . The base is now the largest United States installation outside of the continental US .
 This effectively marks the end of direct U.S. participation in the war . The U.N. has been involved in Iraq and Afghanistan since 2003 .
 About 29,000 U.S. soldiers remain in South Vietnam . Most of them are advisers with ARVN troops, helicopter crewmen .
 The United States and Hanoi continue to move supplies into South Vietnam in preparation for a cease-fire . The U.S. and Vietnam are preparing for a ceasefire in South Vietnam .
 Communist shelling around Quang Tri City is the heaviest in the area since the summer . Communist shelling is heaviest in Quang tri City since summer .
 Nixon extends to President Thieu his “absolute assurance” that the U.S. will “take swift and severe retaliatory action” if Hanoi violates the pending cease-fire . One week after his reelection, President Nixon extended his "absolute assurance" that
 Kissinger instructed to present Le Due Thieu with 69 amendments to the treaty draff submitted by Thieu . Kissinger's protestations that the changes are “preposterous” and may wreck the treaty .
 Willard E Chambers, chief of the U.S. pacification effort in South Vietnam, quits . Chambers expresses extreme dissatisfaction with those running the war effort . Chambers quits ‘in sheer disgust,” expressing extreme dissatisfaction .
 Henry Kissinger and Le Due Tho hold the 21st round of secret peace talks in Paris . Henry Kissinger held secret talks between the two sides in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Besides these demands, there are still two major differences between the two sides . The two sides have not agreed on the terms of a deal .
 International supervisory force (Canada, Hungary, Indonesia, Indonesia and Poland) will monitor the agreement . The first concerns are the nature of the international supervisory forces .
 U.S. envisions a force of several thousand; North Vietnam sees this force as one of no more than 250 . North Vietnam has no more that 250 troops . The United States envisions several thousand troops .
 President Thieu insists upon South Vietnam’s sovereignty, which he insists upon . The other issue is South Vietnam's sovereignty, he says .
 In response to Thieu’s demands, Le Due Tho presents a set of new demands of his own . The Vietnamese leader presents a new set of demands .
 He withdraws the previously offered concession that American POWs would be released before political prisoners held by Saigon are freed . He also demands that all American civilian technicians depart along with the United States military personnel when they withdraw .
 A captured North Vietnamese directive signed by Le Duan orders Communist forces in South Vietnam to observe a cease-fire scrupulously for the first 60 days . North Vietnamese forces are ordered to take as much territory as possible before the ceasefire begins . The North Vietnamese government orders them to observe the
 The directive predicts that South Vietnam will violate the ceasefire with arrests and attempts to retake territory . South Vietnam is expected to try and retake territory in South Vietnam's territory .
 U.S. loses first B-52 to be brought down by a North Vietnamese surface-to-air missile near Vinh . U.N. forces lose the first to be hit by a missile on day of heaviest raids of war over North Vietnam .
 When talks break up with no resumption scheduled before December 4, there is speculation that talks have reached an impasse .
 The most significant issues are the implementation of the international supervisory force and Saigon’s insistence on the withdrawal of all North Vietnamese troops from South Vietnam . Saigon is insisting on withdrawing all North Vietnam troops from the South .
 Sources in Saigon reveal U.S. officials have been secretly building up United States civilian personnel under Department of Defense contracts . Sources say the move is part of a secret effort to build up the forces under the Defense Contract .
 10,000 U.S. advisers and technicians have been instructed to stay in South Vietnam after a cease-fire . They will essentially take over the role of the departing military advisers . U.N. military advisers will remain in Vietnam .
 There is heavy fighting in northern South Vietnam, in the foothills around Quang Tri . Heavy fighting is also reported in northern Vietnam .
 The North Vietnamese have lately relied on artillery, mortar, and rocket attacks, possibly reflecting a loss of personnel during the lengthy fighting . The North Vietnam has lately relied heavily on artillery and mortar attacks .
 White House press secretary Ron Ziegler says no more public announcements about troop withdrawals will be made . U.S. presence in Vietnam has fallen to 27,000 men .
 Defense Department sources say there will not be a full withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam until a final truce agreement is signed . Such an agreement will not affect the 54,000 United States servicemen in Thailand or the 60,000 aboard Seventh Fleet ships off the Vietnamese coast .
 Bad weather slows attempts by South Vietnamese troops to regain complete control of Quang Tri Province . The expected cease-fire is expected to last several days .
 B-52s bomb Quang Tri Province and North Vietnam’s southern panhandle . United States fighter-bombers fly 40 strikes despite bad weather, which slows attempts by South Vietnamese forces to regain control .
 President Nixon and Henry Kissinger meet with the Joint Chiefs of Staff to brief them on the Paris talks . Kissinger expresses the belief that a final agreement is near . Kissinger: "I think a final deal is near"
 Kissinger says the North Vietnamese have changed their position on all of the principal points agreed to by November 20 . Kissinger says that the North Vietnam has changed its position on the principal issues . Kissinger: The North Vietnamese are changing their position by the end of the month .
 Contradictory rumors about concessions, agreements, pressures, and plans continue to rise around the talks . Contradictsory rumors have risen around the negotiations .
 The rockets are directed at pre-cease-fire stockpiling of U.S. aircraft . The rockets were directed at . pre-culling of United States aircraft .
 Secret talks resume in Paris after a 24-hour break during which U.S. negotiators receive new instructions from the White House .
 Tan Son Nhut Air Base near Saigon is hit by the heaviest Communist rocket attack in four years . The attack is the heaviest attack in the country's history of rocket attacks on the airbase .
 One United States rescue helicopter is destroyed and a fuel dump is set ablaze . One U.S. rescue helicopter was destroyed and the fuel dump was set alight . One of the helicopters was destroyed .
 U.S. planes bomb suspected Communist positions within 10 miles of the air base . ARVN attacks on the area from which the rockets were fired are followed by attacks .
 Key issue at secret Paris talks is currently Saigon’s insistence that all North Vietnamese troops be withdrawn from South Vietnam . Saigon wants all N. Vietnamese troops withdrawn from Vietnam . Key issue is the withdrawal of all North Vietnam troops .
 Communist delegates renew their demand that the United States sign the October 17 draff agreement without any changes . Communist delegates at the formal talks renew their demands that the U.S. sign the agreement .
 Heavy bombing of Communist troops and supply depots along the DMZ continues for the third straight day . Heavy bombing continues to continue along DMZ along the border .
 Technical experts of both sides begin to work on the language of the accord, giving rise to expectations that a final agreement is close . Technical experts from both sides are working on the final agreement .
 General Alexander Haig is alerted to fly to Saigon with the accord so that President Thieu can sign at the same time as the U.S. and Hanoi in Paris . General Haig was in Washington, briefing President Nixon on the Paris talks .
 Fighting continues near Tam Ky and Quang Tri City, but Communist ground attacks are down countrywide . Fighting continues in the region, but the Communist Party is losing ground attacks .
 The Laotian government will respond with a counterproposal on December 19 that will be rejected by the Pathet Lao . The government's own cease-fire proposal includes the withdrawal of all U.S. and foreign troops within 90 days and formation of a coalition government . The
 Kissinger meets with Le Due Tho for six hours, the talks are deadlocked . Kissinger says he must return to Hanoi for consultation . Kissinger: "I'm not going to go to Vietnam. I'm going to Vietnam"
 The central issues of political power in South Vietnam remain unsettled . President Thieu’s demand that Hanoi withdraws its troops or at least recognize Saigon's sovereignty over South Vietnam .
 Kissinger suggests to President Nixon that he step up bombing of North Vietnam now or defer such action for one more try at negotiations in January, resuming aggressive bombing if new talks fail . Kissinger suggests that the bombing should not be postponed until January .
 Nixon issues a demand that North Vietnam begin talking “seriously” or suffer “grave consequences” at the same time directing the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to prepare plans for the most intense bombing of the war against military sites in and around Hanoi and
 Joint Chiefs of Staff have long lobbied for permission to bomb this area . Joint chiefs of Staff lobbied for the bombing to be allowed in the area .
 Teams of experts from each side meet to discuss technicalities and protocols . Teams from each team meet to talk about technicalities, protocols .
 North Vietnamese representatives submit a Vietnamese text of the protocol on prisoners containing several important changes . Hanoi failed to join in the main negotiating sessions .
 Kittikachachorn becomes premier, minister of defense, and minister of foreign affairs in a government dominated by military men . Not much changes; martial law continues .
 North Vietnam criticizes the U.S. for breaking the agreement to maintain silence on secret talks . North Vietnam says the talks were "stone-walled from beginning to end" in the technical talks .
 The Communists refuse to set a date for the resumption of negotiations . The Communist Party refuses to hold talks with the West .
 The deadlock centers on the nature of the international supervisory team and the United States insistence on Saigon’s sovereignty over South Vietnam . U.S. insistence on the sovereignty of South Vietnam is key to the negotiations .
 Kissinger charges that Hanoi is to blame for the failure to reach an agreement . Kissinger asserts that the U.S. will not be blackmailed, stampeded, or charmed into a deal . Kissinger says that the United States will not blackmail or stampeded into an agreement with
 In Thailand, Premier Thanom Kittikachorn gives approval, and MACV and Seventh Air Force Headquarters announce that planning has been completed for relocation of MACV from Saigon to Nakom Phanom Air Base .
 White House press secretary Ronald Ziegler says that the bombing will end only when all U.S. POWs are released and a cease-fire is in force . The bombing will only end when all United States POWs and an internationally recognized cease-fires are released .
 The move is designed to force the North Vietnamese back to the negotiating table . It is the latest attempt to get them to the talks table again .
 United States aircraft, including both B-52s and fighter-bombers, will conduct the most concentrated air offensive of the war . U.S. aircraft, as well as fighter bombers, will carry out the offensive .
 During this operation, also called the “Christmas Bombing,” the planes will drop 40,000 tons of bombs, mostly over the densely populated area between Hanoi and Haiphong . The operation, which lasts for eleven days, is called the Christmas Bombing .
 Staff Sergeant Samuel O Turner downs a trailing MiG-21 with a blast from .50 caliber machine guns near Hanoi . Staff Sergeant O Turner is the tail gunner on a Boeing B-52D bomber . Staff Sgt. Turner is a veteran of the Vietnam War .
 Airman First Class Albert E Moore, also a B-52 gunner, will shoot down a second MiG-21 after a strike on the Thai Nguyen rail yard . Six days later, Moore will also shoot down another MiG 21 after strike on a rail yard in Thailand .
 In Vietnam, heavy fighting continues for the third day around Quang Tri City . South Vietnamese paropers supported by U.S. B-52s have been battling for control of the city .
 Australia’s involvement in the Vietnam war ends with the withdrawal of a final group of about 60 military advisers from Saigon . About 60 Australians were involved in the war .
 Hanoi’s foreign ministry accuses the United States of premeditated intensification of the war and calls the action insane . The U.S. B-52 raids have been launched in Vietnam, Vietnam's capital and six provinces .
 MACV reports three B-52s and two fighter-bombers lost since resumption of bombing above the 20th parallel .
 The USS Goldsborough is hit by return fire, which kills two and wounds three . Two of the crew were killed and three were wounded .
 Italy, the Netherlands, and Sweden condemn the resumption of American bombing above the 20th parallel . China and the Soviet Union also condemn U.S. bombing .
 Pope Paul VI and Secretary-general Kurt Waldheim both express concern for world peace . Pope: World peace is a matter of concern for the future .
 Nixon administration officials claim that the raids have caused heavy damage to military targets . Nixon administration claims that the attacks have caused serious damage to targets .
 Communist delegations walk out of the formal Paris peace talks in protest over the bombing of North Vietnam . They call for another session on December 28 .
 Thich Nhat Hahn, chief of the Vietnamese Buddhist peace delegation to Paris, says suffering in Vietnam is at its worst in 10 years . Citing reports of heavy casualties and a million new refugees, he says Buddhists are astonished to read that most Americans think the war is over
 Major fighting continues in the Quang Tri City region . Ground action elsewhere is relatively light in the region .
 The Cuban and Egyptian embassies are hit in Hanoi, as one Russian and Chinese freighters in Haiphong . The Cuban, Egyptian embassies were also hit .
 Cambodian and South Vietnamese troops join in operation to clear insurgents from an area of southeast Cambodia 35 miles south of Phnom Penh .
 Bach Mai, Hanoi’s largest hospital, is hit by U.S. planes . Bach Mai hospital is damaged by United States planes; Indian embassy is damaged . The Indian embassy in Hanoa is damaged. Bach Mai is the largest hospital in Vietnam .
 Ten B52s, each costing $8 million, have been lost since December 18 . At least 55 flyers are listed as missing, a number equal to 13 percent of POWs held by Hanoi before the raids .
 U.S. religious leaders issue a pastoral letter condemning the bombing of North Vietnam . North Vietnam bombed North Vietnam in 1968 .
 Master Sergeant Louis E LeBlanc, a crewman on a B-52 shot down over Hanoi during Operation Linebacker II, is captured by militiamen in HaTay Province, northwest of Hanoa .
 The East German embassy and the Hungarian commercial mission in Hanoi are hit in the seventh day of U.S. bombing . Reports persist that a POW camp has been hit, with United States POWs killed and wounded .
 USAF officials say 97 percent of U.S. B-52s make it through Hanoi’s Russian SAM-2 bomber defense system . They say this proves that B-Qs can penetrate Russian defenses .
 Comedian Bob Hope gives what he says is his last Christmas show to U.S. servicemen in Saigon . Bob Hope was in Vietnam for the first time in his career .
 U.S. officials report the loss of an 11th B-52 and announce a temporary halt to the bombing . The temporary halt coincides with the 24-hour Christmas truce being observed by South Vietnam and the Communists on the ground in the South .
 Communist forces shell the Danang air base and surrounding areas, damaging five U.S. helicopters . Five helicopters were damaged in the attack .
 Intense U.S. bombing resumed above 20th parallel after 36-hour lull . Hanoi has sent no word that it is ready to resume peace talks, U.N. officials say .
 Hanoi is willing to resume negotiations once the United States stops bombing above the 20th parallel . Nguyen Thanh Le, spokesman for the North Vietnamese delegation at the formal Paris peace talks, says . Le: Talks will resume once the U.S. stops bombing .
 President Thieu signs decree that will eliminate virtually all of South Vietnam’s political parties except for his own Democratic party, which was formed in November . Thieu signed decree the day before the expiration of his special powers .
 Fighting in the Quang Tri area continues, with the South Vietnamese command reporting 56 Communist ground attacks in the last 24 hours . South Vietnam command reports 56 Communist attacks in 24 hours, including 56 ground attacks . Fighting continues in the area, with South Vietnam reporting 56 attacks .
 Australia ends its military aid to South Vietnam and its training program for Cambodian troops . Australia ends military aid and training program to Cambodia .
 Some observers feel that this surprise aid cut will adversely affect Nixon administration efforts to obtain military aid from Congress . Nixon administration hopes to obtain congressional support for military aid .
 Hanoi announces heavy damage and destruction of densely populated civilian areas in Hanoa, Haiphong, and their suburbs . The city was heavily populated by people in densely populated areas .
 More than 1,900 mortar and artillery shells hit South Vietnamese troops in Quang Tri Province . South Vietnamese soldiers were hit by the shells in the province .
 North Vietnamese troops beat back a South Vietnamese attempt to recapture Firebase November in the Central Highlands . North Vietnamese forces beat back an attempt to regain control of the base .
 Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, Belgium, and Austria protest the U.S. bombing of North Vietnam . The U.N. bombed North Vietnam in 1968 .
 England, France, and West Germany maintain official silence despite public demands for official condemnation . England, West Germany and France maintain silence despite demands for condemnation .
 Washington announces that negotiations between Kissinger and Fe Due Tho will resume on January 2 . Washington announced that negotiations will resume January 2. Kissinger's visit to Vietnam is scheduled to resume .
 President Nixon orders a halt to Finebacker II, but bombing below the 20th parallel continues . In response to the scheduled resumption of the peace talks, the bombing is halted .
 A total of 20,000 tons of bombs have been dropped on North Vietnam during the most intense U.S. bombing operation of the Vietnam War . The most intense United States bombing operation was in the 1960s .
 Fifteen B-52s and 11 other U.S. aircraft were lost, along with 93 flyers downed or killed, missing, or captured . 93 flyers were killed or killed in the war .
 Nixon supporters maintain that the bombing has brought the Communists back to the negotiating table . Nixon supporters say the bombing brought the Communist Party to the political brink .
 The Hanoi delegation to the regular peace talks asserts that the U.S. bombing did not succeed in “subjugating the Vietnamese people’s people” and calls attention to losses of United States planes and the unfavorable world reaction to the raids .
 By this date, U.S. military strength has declined to 24,200 from 159,000 at the start of the year .
 4,300 U.S. servicemen were killed during 1972, bringing the total number of United States military personnel killed in action to date to 45,926 . A total of 4,000 servicemen died in action during 1972 .
 South Vietnamese troop strength at the end of 1972 is 1. million men and women under arms . South Vietnamese troops were 1.2 million under arms at the time of 1972 .
 Nixon promises President Thieu privately that the U.S. will respond with “full force” if Hanoi violates the diplomatic settlement . Nixon: The United States will respond in full force’s response to any diplomatic breach .
 Captain Paul D Howman and First Lieutenant Lawrence W Kullman shoot down a MiG-21 near Hanoi, the last recorded aerial victory in the Vietnam War .
 Henry Kissinger and Hanoi’s Le Due Tho resume negotiations in Paris . Kissinger and Tho meet for the first time in a week to discuss the Vietnam-Hanoi talks . Kissinger has been in talks with the Vietnamese government in Paris since 1973 .
 President Nixon halts most concentrated bombing of the war, as well as mining, shelling, and all other offensive actions against North Vietnam . Citing “progress” in the Paris negotiations, Kissinger and Le Due Tho, Kissinger halts all offensive actions .
 The cessation of hostilities against North Vietnam does not extend to South Vietnam, where the fighting continues . North Vietnam is still fighting in South Vietnam .
 President Nixon threatens to cut aid to South Vietnam if Thieu does not comply with peace proposals . Kissinger and Le Due Tho are working out peace plans for Vietnam's future . Nixon threatened to cut South Vietnam aid to Vietnam in 1972 .
 Heavy fighting breaks out as both sides scramble to gain as much territory as possible before the cease-fire goes into effect . In the South, heavy fighting erupts in the early hours of the morning .
 Between January 17 and 25, United States planes make nearly 3,000 strikes in South Vietnam . U.S. planes make 3,500 strikes in Vietnam between Jan. 17 and Jan. 25 .
 President Nixon sends another ultimatum to President Thieu regarding signing of the peace settlement, demanding an answer by January 21 . President Nixon sent the letter to Thieu on January 20 .
 This agreement is very similar to the one they had agreed to in October . The agreement is similar to that they agreed to last year .
 Under the provisions of the agreement, all POWs will be released within 60 days . All POWs are expected to be released by the end of the month .
 Kissinger announces that a truce is also expected in Laos and Cambodia . Kissinger: A truce is expected in Cambodia and Laos and Laos .
 The United States, South Vietnam, the PRG, and North Vietnam formally sign “An Agreement Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Vietnam” in Paris . The U.S. and South Vietnam signed an agreement ending the war and restoring peace in Vietnam .
 Due to South Vietnam's unwillingness to recognize the Viet Cong’s Provisional Revolutionary Government, all references to it are confined to a twoparty version of the document signed by North Vietnam and the U.S.
 In order to get the South Vietnamese to sign the agreement, they are presented with a separate document that does not make reference to the PRG . Saigon’s long-time refusal to recognize the Viet Cong as a legitimate participant in the discussions to end the war .
 The United States agrees to the withdrawal of all United States troops and advisers and the dismantling of all U.S. bases within 60 days . In addition, the United States will also withdraw troops, advisers and dismantle all bases . The withdrawal is part of the withdrawal agreement .
 North Vietnamese agree to release all U.S. and other prisoners of war in return . In return, North Vietnamese release all American and other POWs . North Vietnam agrees to release American prisoners in exchange for prisoner exchange .
 Last U.S. serviceman to die in combat in Vietnam, Lieutenant Colonel William B Nolde, killed by an artillery shell in An Loc at 2100 hours .
 Saigon controls about 75 percent of South Vietnam’s territory and 85 percent of its population . The Vietnamese capital is located in Saigon .
 The South Vietnamese army is well-equipped via last-minute deliveries of U.S. weapons, and will continue to receive United States aid after the cease-fire . South Vietnamese air force is now the fourth largest in the world, with the air force now the world's fourth largest
 CIA estimates 145,000 North Vietnamese soldiers in South Vietnam, about the same as the year before . The CIA estimates that there are about 145,00 soldiers in the country's South Vietnam .
 Both the ARVN and NVA jockeying for key positions . The fighting renews almost immediately with both the ARN and the NVA . This proves to be only a momentary lull .
 Lon Nol proposes a cease-fire, but his proposal will be rejected by Prince Sihanouk on April 9 . Prince Nol's proposal will also be rejected, Prince Noll says . Nol: "Cease-fire is not a military solution"
 Laird resigns as secretary of defense and succeeded by Elliott Richardson . Laird is succeeded by Richardson .
 In a secret letter to North Vietnamese premier Pham Van Dong, President Nixon pledges to contribute to “postwar reconstruction in North Vietnam” in the “range of $3.25 billion” over five years . In the letter, Nixon promises to contribute in the "
 Direct talks begin between the Provisional Revolutionary Government and the South Vietnamese government, but there has been little progress .
 U.S. EC-47Q aircraft shot down over Saravan, Laos; eight airmen from the 56th Special Operations Wing are killed . Eight airmen were killed in the crash .
 In accordance with the Paris Peace Accords, supervisors from the International Commission of Control and Supervision have been delegated to oversee the cease-fire in place . They are from Canada, Hungary, and India .
 The first 20 POWs arrive at Travis Air Force Base in California on February 14 . They will be the first to arrive at the base .
 The United States and North Vietnam issue a joint communique agreeing to establish a joint economic commission to develop economic relations . The U.S. contribution to reconstruction and “healing the wounds of war” in North Vietnam, Kissinger says .
 Specialist Fifth Class James L Scroggins is mortally wounded when his CH-47C helicopter of the 18th Aviation Company, is shot down south of An Loc . Specialist Fifth . Class James . Scoggins was mortally injured when his helicopter was shot down .
 U.S. warplanes begin a series of missions over Cambodia in support of Lon Nol’s military forces . Khmer Rouge and their North Vietnamese allies pressed hard by the Khmer regime .
 Souvanna Phouma’s government and the Pathet Lao announce they have reached a cease-fire agreement . The agreement ends 20 years of war despite some continued fighting .
 The agreement provides for cessation of all military activities in Laos, including that by the U.S. and North Vietnamese . The agreement also includes cessation of military activities by the United States and North Vietnam .
 United States Navy Operations Market Time, Game Warden, and Clearwater are discontinued . Clearwater and Market Time are no longer available .
 General Tran Van Tra, one of the leading Communist commanders in the South, is summoned back to Hanoi to attend a high-level meeting . He is one of Vietnam's top Communist commanders .
 Hanoi launches a huge logistical program to prepare for future military operations in the South . Spurred by the absence of United States B-52s, U.S. B-47s are being used to train Vietnamese forces in Vietnam .
 An all-weather road is built from Quang Tri to the Mekong Delta, and work begins on a 3,000-mile oil pipeline . The major headquarters 75 miles northwest of Saigon, the major headquarters, is located in Loc Ninh .
 Allied officials report that Communist forces are building up supplies and military equipment in the border province of Tay Ninh, northwest of Saigon . Allied officials say Communist forces building up military supplies and equipment in border province .
 Last of the Royal Thai Army Volunteer Force departs from South Vietnam . The last of the RTA Volunteer Force leaves for Vietnam .
 President Nixon hints that the U.S. might intervene again in Vietnam to prevent Communist violations of the truce . Nixon: The United States might intervene in Vietnam again if the Communist forces violate the ceasefire .
 A Cambodian pilot bombs the presidential palace in Phnom Penh in an unsuccessful attempt to kill Lon Nol . The pilot was killed in the bombing of the palace in an assassination attempt .
 The White House announces that bombing of Cambodia at the request of Cambodian president Lon Nol will continue until Communist forces end military operations there and agree to a cease-fire .
 The 60-day, first phase of Vietnam’s cease-fire ends with continued fighting . The first phase, the first of the peace deal, is now in place in Vietnam .
 This date is announced as the cut-off date for award of the Vietnam Service Medal and the Republic of Vietnam Campaign Medal . The date is also known as the date of the award for the Vietnam War Medal .
 The last U.S. troops leave South Vietnam, ending nearly 10 years of United States military presence in that country . The last United States troops leave the country in 2007 .
 United States Military Assistance Command Vietnam headquarters is disestablished . The headquarters of the U.S. military Assistance Command was disestablished in 1973 . The U.N. Vietnam headquarters was established in 1975 .
 Only a defense attache office and a few marine guards at the Saigon American embassy remain . Some 8,500 United States civilians stay on . Only a few American embassy guards remain .
 Hanoi releases the last 67 of its acknowledged POWs, bringing the total number released to 590 . The total number of POWs released to date is 590, with 590 still unaccounted for .
 More than 3,000,000 Americans served in Vietnam; 47,253 were killed in action or died as a result of combat . 10,449 died of nonbattle injuries; more than 3.5 million Americans served .
 Some 313,919 Americans were wounded in action; 153,300 of these were classified as ‘seriously’ wounded . 1,340 Americans are listed as missing in action, while some 313, 919 Americans are wounded .
 4,865 helicopters and 3,720 fixed-wing aircraft were shot down or otherwise destroyed . A total of 4,000 aircraft were destroyed or shot down in the war .
 For South Vietnam 223,748 military personnel were killed and 499,026 were wounded . For the Vietnam War, more than 200,000 people were killed in total .
 The United States Senate approves 88-3 an amendment forbidding any aid to North Vietnam without prior and specific approval by the Congress . The amendment was approved by the U.S. Senate on Tuesday .
 President Nixon and President Thieu end a two-day visit with a joint communique expressing “full consensus” and a U.S. promise of continuing economic aid to South Vietnam . The United States promised to continue economic aid .
 Thieu says he will never ask the U.S. to send troops back to South Vietnam . Thieu: "I'm not going to ask the United States to send back troops to Vietnam"
 Nixon makes clear that future aid is dependent upon congressional approval . Nixon makes it clear that . future aid must be approved by Congress .
 The House of Representatives unexpectedly rejects a White House-sponsored request to increase military aid to South Vietnam . The House unexpectedly rejects the White House's request for increased military aid .
 Prince Sihanouk, acting as a spokesman for the Cambodian rebels, rejects Lon Nol’s truce proposal . Prince Nol is the leader of the rebel movement in Cambodia, which has been fighting in the past .
 On July 25, Federal District Court Judge Orrin G Judd rules in favor of their suit . The White House requests and receives a stay of Judge Judd’s decision from the court of appeals .
 On August 1, Justice William O Douglas orders the bombing halted on an appeal from Holtzman, but is overruled by a full sitting of the Supreme Court a few hours later . The bombing was ordered halted on appeal by Holtzman . Holtzman appealed the decision, but it was overr
 South Vietnamese forces conduct a successful attacks into Svay Rieng Province in Cambodia against Communist base areas . The attacks were successful in the province, which is home to the Vietnamese majority of Cambodia .
 The United States Senate approves a bill to block funds for any U.S. military activities in Indochina . The House of Representatives concurs, and the Senate approves the bill .
 Nixon and Kissinger lobby to postpone the ban until August 15, to enable the continued bombing of Cambodia . Kissinger and Kissinger lobbied for the postponement of the ban .
 A new accord seeks to strengthen the January 27 cease-fire agreement in South Vietnam . The new accord becomes known as “Son of Cease-fire’s” New accord will strengthen the agreement .
 Representatives of the original signers of the January 27 cease-fire sign a new 14-point agreement . The agreement calls for an end to all cease-fires violations in South Vietnam .
 The settlement includes an end to all military activities at noon, June 15 . An end to U.S. reconnaissance flights over North Vietnam and minesweeping operations in North Vietnamese waters . The resumption of United States talks on aid to North Vietnam .
 This agreement proves no more effective than the original peace agreement . The peace agreement was signed in 1992 . This agreement was the first attempt to reach an agreement to end the conflict .
 Graham Martin is sworn in as ambassador to South Vietnam . He replaces Ellsworth Bunker, who had served in that capacity since 1967 .
 Congress agrees that bombing in Cambodia can continue until August 15 . After that spending for any military activity in Indochina must be approved by Congress .
 United States Task Force 78 completes clearing of Haiphong and other North Vietnamese harbors of mines laid down by the U.S. since May 1972 . The clearing is in accordance with the cease-fire agreement of January 27 .
 The Senate Armed Services Committee begins a probe into allegations that the U.S. Air Force made thousands of secret B-52 raids into Cambodia in 1969 and 1970 . The raids occurred at a time when the United States recognized the neutrality of the Sihanouk regime in Cambodia .
 The Pentagon acknowledges that the raids against Cambodia were authorized by President Nixon and then-secretary of defense Melvin Laird . Nixon and Laird authorized the raids .
 Sihanouk denies the State Department claim that he requested or authorized the bombing . Laird and Kissinger deny that they knew of or authorized falsification of records .
 Vice President Agnew brands as “damned lies’s” reports that he took kickbacks from government contracts in Maryland . Agnew brands as ‘damned lie’ about reports of kickbacks in Maryland contracts .
 Operations Arc Light and Freedom Deal end as the United States ceases bombing Cambodia at midnight in accordance with the deadline previously set by Congress . The end of 12 years of combat activity in Indochina is the end of operations in the area around Phnom Penh .
 The United States continues unarmed reconnaissance flights and military aid to Cambodia and Laos . All direct U.S. military action in Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam cease .
 Washington reveals plans to withdraw United States troops from Thailand . U.S. troops have been stationed in Thailand since 2001 .
 President Nixon announces that Henry Kissinger is to become secretary of state . William P Rogers, who resigns the same day, resigns same day . Henry Kissinger replaces William Rogers .
 Candidates supported by President Thieu sweep South Vietnamese national elections, the first since 1972 . First since 1972, candidates supported by Thieu swept national elections .
 After heavy fighting around Kampong Cham, forces loyal to Sihanouk launch a direct attack on the town and make large gains . Forces loyal to the king launch an attack on Kampong .
 Le Minh firebase is taken by an NVA force supported by tanks, and an attempt by the ARVN to retake it on October 25 will be bloodily repulsed . ARNVN attempt to retake the firebase will be bloodyily repuffed .
 ARVN sweep against North Vietnamese forces backfires and a battalion is decimated . Heavy fighting takes place at Kheim Hanh, when ARVn sweep against N.Vn troops backfires .
 Cambodian government forces complete the process of regaining Kampong Cham . Cambodia's government forces are now in full control of the area . Cambodia is still fighting to regain control of its territory .
 Pham Van Dong and Le Duan, seeking military aid for North Vietnam, are rebuffed in both Moscow and Beijing . Pham van Dong is seeking military assistance from Russia and China . The two men seek military aid from both Russia and Beijing, but have been rebuffed .
 Vice President Spiro T Agnew pleads no contest to tax evasion and resigns . Vice President Agnew resigns from office . Agnew's resignation comes after he was found guilty of tax evasion .
 Leadership of the Communist forces in South Vietnam issues an order to begin counterattacks on South Vietnamese bases and other targets in retaliation for Saigon’s earlier operations . The order was issued in response to earlier operations by South Vietnamese forces .
 Henry Kissinger and North Vietnamese diplomat Le Due Tho were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating the Paris peace accords . Kissinger and Tho negotiated the Paris accords in the 1960s and 1970s .
 An all-weather road from North Vietnam to Tay Ninh Province has almost been completed . The road is almost completed . It will be the first road to be completed in the country .
 Nixon vetoes the War Powers Resolution, which would limit presidential power to commit armed forces abroad without congressional approval . Nixon also vetoes a proposal that would limit the president's authority to commit military forces abroad .
 The bill would require the president to report to Congress within 48 hours after commitment of armed forces to foreign combat . It would also limit to 60 days the time they may stay without congressional approval .
 Nixon claims the bill would impose “unconstitutional and dangerous restrictions” on presidential authority . Nixon claims that the bill is unconstitutional and dangerous .
 North Vietnamese tanks and troops seize two South Vietnamese camps near the Cambodian border in a two-day battle . The battle is one of the most savage since the January 28 cease-fire .
 The fall of three ARVN bases in Quang Due Province enables the communists to control the main communication route from Kontum and Pleiku to the south . The fall means the communists control a key communication route to the north .
 Congress overrides President Nixon’s veto and passes the War Powers Resolution . The resolution limits presidential authority to send troops into combat abroad . President Nixon vetoes the resolution, which limits his authority in combat overseas .
 Viet Cong raiders destroy 18 million gallons of oil in storage tanks near Saigon . The raid was the first of its kind in the country since 1968 .
 Gerald Ford is sworn in as the first unelected vice president, succeeding Spiro T Agnew . Ford was sworn in in Washington, D.C. on January 26, 1973 .
 Communist troops ambush a Joint Military Commissionsanctioned MIA recovery team, killing a U.S. Army officer . Four Americans and several South Vietnamese soldiers were wounded .
 The size of the United States military contingent in Vietnam is limited to 50 . 46,163 U.S. military personnel have been killed in action in Vietnam . The United States has a total of 50 troops based in Vietnam, Vietnam and Laos .
 Estimated strength of South Vietnamese forces is 1,110,000, with 223,748 South Vietnamese armed forces personnel killed in action to date . Estimated strength is estimated at 1,100,000 .
 55 soldiers have been killed in two clashes with Communist forces in Vietnam . South Vietnamese troops report 55 soldiers killed in the two clashes .
 President Thieu: "We cannot allow the communists a situation in which ... they can launch harassing attacks against us" Thieu orders his forces to launch a counteroffensive to retake lost territory . The war has “restarted”
 The announcement essentially marks the end of attempts to adhere to the agreements of the Paris Peace Accords . The announcement effectively ends attempts to comply with the agreements .
 Khmer Rouge inflict large number of civilian casualties when shelling Phnom Penh . Khmer guerrillas have been known to kill civilians in the past . The regime was overthrown in the 1970s .
 The cease-fire was initiated on January 28, 1973, under the provisions of the Paris Peace Accords and the June 13 “Son of Cease-Fire’s” agreement . The fighting continues in South Vietnam despite the peace agreement .
 Saigon: 13,778 government soldiers, 2,159 civilians, and 45,057 Communist troops have died in the fighting since the 1973 truce . Saigon reports that 13,000 government soldiers have died since the truce .
 ARVN troops begin major offensive against areas controlled by the Provisional Revolutionary Government in central South Vietnam and west of Saigon . Heavy fighting follows intense fighting between ARVn troops and Provisional Government forces in central and western Vietnam .
 The use of herbicides in Vietnam War by the U.S. did damage to the ecology of South Vietnam that might last as long as a century . The National Academy of Science reports that the use of chemical herbicides caused damage .
 Saigon information minister Hoang Due Nha warns that North Vietnam is planning a general offensive to reconquer South Vietnam . Nha: North Vietnam plans to attack South Vietnam with a 'general offensive'
 Fighting in the Central Highlands this month is the bloodiest since the cease-fire . Kontum and Chuong Nghia are fighting in Central Highlands . The fighting has been ongoing for more than a year .
 A new coalition government has been formed with Souvanna Phouma as premier . Prince Souphanouvong, leader of the Pathet Lao, will be one of the deputy premiers . Souphouma will be the prime minister .
 North Vietnamese general Tran Van Tra estimates that his forces have recaptured all the territory in the Mekong Delta taken by the South Vietnamese following the cease-fire . South Vietnamese general estimates he has recaptured the territory .
 Nixon administration request for $266,000,000 in military aid for South Vietnam rejected . Nixon administration requested $266.000 million in military assistance for Vietnam War .
 The House of Representatives Judiciary Committee opens impeachment hearings against President Richard Nixon . Richard Nixon was impeached on three counts on July 30 . The House voted to impeach him on July 31 .
 The United States House of Representatives approves a $474,000,000 cutback in aid to South Vietnam . The U.S. House has approved a cutback of $4,500,000 to $4.5 million in aid .
 Congress places a $1 billion ceiling on military aid to South Vietnam for fiscal year 1974 . Congress also limits $1.1 billion in military aid for South Vietnam .
 Military aid to South Vietnam in fiscal year 1973 was $2.2 billion . In 1975 it will be $300 million . Military aid in 1975 will be more than $1 billion . South Vietnam will receive $1.5 billion .
 Richard Nixon announces that he will resign the office of president at 12m. on August 9 . Nixon was under siege because of revelations of criminal acts connected to the Watergate scandal . Nixon announced that he would resign the presidency at 12.30pm .
 U.S. officials estimate North Vietnamese forces in the South are stronger than at any previous time in the war . United States officials estimate that North Vietnam forces are stronger now than ever .
 Richard Nixon resigns as president; Vice President Gerald R Ford becomes president . Richard Nixon was president of the United States . Nixon was elected president in 1972 .
 North Vietnam tanks break out from Ben Cat and get to within 15 miles of Saigon . North Vietnamese tanks break into Ben Cat . North Vietnam gets to within . 15 miles from Saigon.
 General Creighton Abrams, U.S. Army chief of staff, dies in office from cancer . Abrams was the Army's most senior commander in the Army .
 South Vietnam protests construction of air bases in the Provisional Revolutionary Government zone . South Vietnam says it has control of all air space over South Vietnam .
 A provisional administration is formed in Laos that includes members of both the Communist Pathet Lao and the former Royal Laotian government . A provisional government has been formed in the country .
 In the northern provinces, NVA troops are close to within 15 miles of Hue . In July and August, the NVA forces have pushed within a series of successful pushes in the region .
 Communist leaders tentatively decide on a major offensive to be launched in 1975 . U.S. unlikely to intervene and cannot save Thieu even if it does, they say .
 General Fred Weyand succeeds General Abrams as the U.S. Army chief of staff . General Abrams will be replaced by Gen. Robert E. Hagel . General Fred
 PRG calls on public figures and organizations in South Vietnam to work for overthrow of Thieu government and establishment of new regime in Saigon .
 Several leading South Vietnamese opposition members publicly denounce President Thieu and his “repressive” policies . Following rioting and protests, anti-government demonstrators in Saigon lead to violent clashes with police . Several leading opposition members have publicly denounced Thieu's policies .
 Kissinger concludes from discussions with Russia and China that both nations consider Saigon doomed and are concentrating on expanding their own spheres of influence . The Chinese in Cambodia and the Russians in Vietnam .
 The promise of aid from the Soviet Union encourages Hanoi to accelerate plans for military operations . The promise to aid from Soviet Union encouraged Hanoa to accelerate military operations.
 South Vietnamese intelligence reports that it has obtained documents indicating that the Communists are planning a sharp increase in fighting for the coming season . South Vietnam intelligence says it has . obtained documents .
 301st Corps, made up of the 7th Division and newly formed 3rd Division, attacked Phuoc Long Province, north of Saigon . General Tran Van Tra and Pham Hung, head of the Communist Central Office for South Vietnam and political commissar for Communist forces
 This is to be a test case to determine how the South Vietnamese will respond to a multi-division attack, but more importantly to see how the U.S. will respond . The United States will respond, says U.N. official . This is the first time this has been
 80,000 persons have been killed in fighting throughout the country this year, the highest total for any year of the war . South Vietnamese Command reports that 80,00 persons have died in fighting this year .
 Phuoc Binh falls to the North Vietnamese 301st Corps, about 60 miles north of Saigon . The capital of the province is the capital of Phouoc Long Province . Phouo Binh, the capital, is located 60 miles from Saigon, and falls to
 Phuoc Binh is the first provincial capital taken by the Communists since the fall of Quang Tri on May 1, 1972 . The Communists took the provincial capital from Quang Trang Tri in 1972 . It was the first province to be taken over by the Communist Party .
 Two days later, the North Vietnamese capture the last of the South Vietnamese positions in the region, gaining control of the entire province . The North Vietnamese captured the last remaining South Vietnamese position in the province two days later .
 The United States still does nothing, failing to intervene with airpower as previously promised . The U.S. continues to fail to intervene in Syria as promised .
 Le Duan urges more aggressive action against the U.S. This convinces the Politburo in Hanoi that the Americans will not return to Vietnam and encourages more .
 The decision is made to launch a new offensive to set the conditions for a general uprising and final victory in 1976 . The final victory was achieved in 1976, when the Soviet Union was defeated .
 With the fall of Phuoc Long Province, Hanoi orders a follow-on operation to take advantage of the situation . The fall of the province is the first to fall in Vietnam since Vietnam began fighting in 1968 .
 Gerald Ford does not mention Vietnam in his State of the Union address . President Gerald Ford did not mention the Vietnam war in his address .
 President Gerald Ford asks Congress for an additional $522 million in military aid for South Vietnam and Cambodia . Ford: "I want to give more money to Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos"
 North Vietnamese general Van Tien Dung goes south to take command of Communist forces in preparation for Campaign 275 . Dung takes command of North Vietnamese forces in the fall of Vietnam .
 A bipartisan congressional delegation arrives in Saigon to make a firsthand assessment of the situation . The delegation is expected to arrive in Vietnam for the first time since 1968 .
 They meet with Ambassador Martin, receive briefings, make trips to the field, and have dinner with President Thieu . They also have dinner and discussions with the president of Vietnam .
 President Ford urged the delegation to visit South Vietnam with hopes that they might return and support his request for additional military aid for Saigon . President Ford had urged them to return with support for his request of more military aid .
 All but Representative Bella Abzug advocate some increase in military and humanitarian aid .
 Democratic caucus in the House and Senate will vote to oppose any further aid to South Vietnam or Cambodia . In the end, however, Ford’s ploy does not work and a week later the Democratic caucus will vote against further aid .
 Many U.S. analysts feel that this may be the beginning of the end for South Vietnam . South Vietnam has been a major source of conflict with the United States in Vietnam .
 Ban Me Thuot, capital of Darlac Province, finally falls to the Communists on March 13 . Ban Me Thot is capital of the province, Darlacs Province .
 Many soldiers of the 23rd ARVN Division desert and try to rescue their families, a recurring phenomenon that will contribute heavily to the collapse of South Vietnamese forces over the next few months .
 The order will effectively cause the abandonment of those two key cities to the North Vietnamese . That may have been the idea, but the order is effectively causing the abandonment .
 Thousands of civilians join the soldiers streaming down Route 7B toward Tuy Hoa . The withdrawal from Pleiku and Kontum begins, with thousands of civilians joining .
 The withdrawal, scheduled to be completed in three days, is still underway on April 1 . The withdrawal is scheduled to take place on April 4 .
 Of 400,000 refugees, only 100,000 survive; the fate of the rest is unknown . Of the rest of the world's 1,000,000 refugee population, only 10,000 survived .
 North Vietnamese forces attack Quang Tri Province, in I Corps, which rapidly falls to North Vietnamese attack . With the fall of South Vietnamese forces in the Central Highlands, the attack occurs in Quang tri Province .
 The highway south from Quang Tri is inundated with fleeing soldiers and refugees . Troops and refugees are fleeing from the country's capital, Vietnam .
 Hanoi hands General Dung a new timetable calling for the liberation of the South before the spring rains begin in May . Hanois hands General . Dung's new timetable calls for liberation of . the South to be liberated before the Spring rains begin .
 To achieve this, North Vietnamese troops must reach Saigon no later than the last week of April . South Vietnamese forces must regroup to defend it, before they can regroup, say South Vietnamese .
 Saigon gives the order to evacuate Hue by sea and abandon it to the Communists . Saigon decides to abandon Hue to the Communist Party . Hue is the last city to be evacuated by sea .
 More than one million refugees are streaming toward Danang, which is already under heavy rocket fire . They are driven by memories of the Communist slaughter of civilians in Hue during the 1968 Tet Offensive .
 President Ford sends General Frederick Weyand, army chief of staff and former MACV commander, to Saigon to make an assessment of the deteriorating situation . President Ford sent Weyan to make assessment of deteriorating situation in Saigon .
 Ford assures Thieu of ‘steadfast support’ for South Vietnam . Upon arrival, he assures him of Ford’s “steadfast . support” for Vietnam, he says .
 President Ford orders U.S. Navy transports and “contract vessels” to assist in evacuation of South Vietnamese coastal cities . Ford orders transports and "contract vessels" to assist evacuation .
 Many citizens die in the chaos while attempting to escape from the airports, docks, and beaches . Many citizens died in the general chaos while trying to escape .
 After a brief fight by the ARVN 22nd Division, the cities of Qui Nhon, Tuy Hoa, and Nha Trang are abandoned by the South Vietnamese, yielding the entire northern half of the country to North Vietnamese control with very little fight . The cities
 More than half of South Vietnam’s territory is now controlled by the North Vietnamese . The North Vietnamese have taken control of the majority of the country's territory .
 Communist forces coming from the south push into Long An Province, just south of Saigon, threatening to cut Highway 4, Saigon’s main link with the Mekong Delta . Highway 4 is the main link between Saigon and Mekong River .
 Two thousand orphans of U.S. servicemen are taken to the United States for adoption . Two thousand others are orphans of servicemen . Most are eventually adopted by the U.K.
 General Frederick Weyand reports to Congress that South Vietnam cannot survive without additional military aid . South Vietnam can't survive without more military aid, he says . Congress is considering sending more troops to South Vietnam .
 Two regiments from the ARVN 2nd Division and one brigade of airborne troops are landed at Phan Rang airport, on April 6, in hopes of mounting a counteroffensive . The two regiments are part of a two-month-long mission to counter-engagement
 After three days of relative quiet, the airborne brigade is sent to Xuan Loc on April 10 where a major battle is developing . The airborne brigade was sent to the area where the battle was developing .
 North Vietnamese troops and tanks overrun Phan Rang and eliminate any significant ARVN presence in the region . Subsequently, North Vietnamese forces and tanks kill ARVVN troops and destroy ARVn presence .
 Le Due Tho arrives at Communist headquarters in Loc Ninh to oversee the final Communist offensive drive . Le due Tho arrived at the headquarters of the Communist Party in Vietnam .
 ARVN 18th Division in Xuan Loc begins battling two North Vietnamese divisions at the last South Vietnamese defense line before Saigon . Two divisions battle each other in the last remaining defense line .
 It will become the last battle in the defense of the Republic of South Vietnam . The battle is expected to be the last in the country's defense .
 During the first week a regiment of the 5th ARVN Division and an airborne brigade arrive as reinforcements, while two more North Vietnamese divisions arrive to join the attackers . The first week of the attack was the first month of the operation .
 The ARVN forces are well dug in and manage to hold out against a number of NVA assaults until they run out of tactical air support and are overwhelmed by sheer numbers . The Communists finally abandon Xuan Loc to the Communists on April 21 .
 Clashes occur between Pathet Lao insurgents and Laos government troops . Clashes occurred in Laos during the 1970s and 1980s .
 President Ford requests $722 million in supplemental military aid for Saigon . Congress denies his request, despite a personal plea before a joint session .
 The United States ambassador to Cambodia and his staff leave Phnom Penh on April 12 . Operation Eagle Pull is the aerial evacuation of the U.S. embassy in Cambodia .
 U.S. aircraft are parachuting supplies into Phnom Penh because the airport has been closed by enemy fire . The Department of Defense announces that United States aircraft are parachuteuting supplies . The airport was closed by enemies fire .
 Operation Baby Lift, the American airlift of Vietnamese orphans to the U.S. from South Vietnam, comes to an end . About 2,000 children were evacuated from Vietnam, having evacuated about 2,200 children .
 The People’s Assembly headed by Pol Pot, established in December, will institute a draconian agrarian collectivization program that will result in the infamous ‘Killing Fields’ and cause two to four million deaths over the next two years . Pol Pot's People�
 President Thieu resigns and transfers authority to Vice President Tran Van Huong before any of the several plots against him can be implemented . With the fall of Xuan Loc, Tran Huong can no longer be in office .
 Today, Americans can regain the sense of pride that existed before Vietnam, says historian . Americans can also regain a sense of patriotism that existed in Vietnam, he says . Today, America can regain its pride, he writes .
 Vice President Tran Van Huong transfers authority as chief of state to General Duong Van Minh, who helped overthrow Diem in 1963 . Minh is the South Vietnamese official with whom the Communists have indicated they are willing to negotiate with .
 Operation Frequent Wind begins removing the last Americans from Saigon, including Ambassador Graham Martin . Ambassador Martin was the last American ambassador to leave Saigon in Vietnam .
 81 helicopters carry more than 1,000 Americans and almost 6,000 Vietnamese to aircraft carriers waiting offshore . In 19 hours, 81 helicopters carried more than a million Americans and 6,500 Vietnamese to the carrier carriers .
 Corporal Charles McMahon, Jr., Jr., and Lance Corporal Darwin Judge are the last U.S. military personnel killed in action in Vietnam . They were struck by shrapnel from an NVA rocket while guarding Tan Son Nhut Air Base .
 Two U.S. servicemen become the last Americans to die in Vietnam . Their helicopter crashes near an aircraft carrier taking part in an evacuation .
 Communist troops enter Saigon as the last Americans and their dependents rush to evacuate . The last Americans are forced to evacuate from Saigon .
 The final helicopter lifts off from the roof of the American embassy at 7:53m., carrying the last 11 marine guards . The last 11 Marine guards were killed in the attack .
 Communist troops meet only sporadic resistance as they move into the city . The Communist troops are met with sporadic resistance from the city's residents .
 President Duong Van Minh surrenders unconditionally to the Communists . That morning after tanks crash through the gates of the presidential palace, the president surrenderes unconditionally . The day after the tanks crash, tanks crash into the presidential mansion .
 Colonel Bui Tin, who accepts the surrender from General Minh, explains, “You have nothing to fear.” “I’m not afraid,” says the Vietnamese. ‘You’re not afraid. You’ve got nothing to
 The coalition government formed a year ago is close to collapsing . There is fighting between Pathet Lao, supported by North Vietnamese troops, and rightist factions .
 Demonstrations by students and others are increasingly aimed at United States buildings and operations . Demonstrators by students aimed at U.S. buildings, operations, operations .
 By the end of the month, many of the top right-wing officials of the Laotian government will resign under pressure from pro-Communist forces . Many of the government officials are expected to resign by end of month .
 In Saigon, prostitution, dance halls, and “acting like Americans” are banned . prostitution, dancing halls and ‘acting like American’ are banned in Saigon .
 Rally in Saigon commemorates 21st anniversary of Vietnamese victory over the French at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 . 30,000 people attend rally commemorating capture of the city and victory over French .
 President Ford issues a proclamation designating this as the last day of the ‘Vietnam era’ for military personnel to qualify for wartime benefits . President Ford: This is the final day of ‘the Vietnam era” for military .
 The United States merchant ship Mayaguez, with 39 seamen aboard, is seized in the Gulf of Siam by the Cambodian Khmer Rouge government . The government claims the ship is part of a spy operation . The ship is believed to be a U.S. merchant ship
 President Ford orders a military rescue attempt to recover the crew of the Mayaguez . U.S. Marines land on Koh Tang Island to free the American freighter and its crew . The crew was rescued by the United States Marines .
 Thirty-eight Marines die in the operation, with 50 wounded and three missing . The crewmen of the Mayaguez are released unharmed the same day . 50 wounded, three missing, and 50 wounded .
 North Vietnamese and Viet Cong troops conduct victory parade in Saigon streets . North Vietnamese, Viet Cong forces win victory in Vietnam in 1968 .
 Congress appropriates $405 million to fund a refugee aid program . Congress authorizes resettlement of South Vietnamese and Cambodian refugees in the U.S. Congress also authorizes the resettlement of the refugees .
 Over 140,000 refugees are flown to the U.S. under the program in the next few months . The program is set to take in the United States in the coming months .
 At a meeting of the National Assembly in Hanoi, Pham Van Dong calls for normalization of relations with the U.S. The call is conditioned on United States economic aid and a pledge to observe the 1973 Paris cease-fire .
 Kissinger: U.S. prepared to hold talks with Vietnam and Laos and Cambodia on normalizing relations . Kissinger: Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and Cambodia should normalize relations . Vietnam, Cambodia, Vietnam and Cambodia will meet in Washington, D.C. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger says
 The Congress of the National United Front of Cambodia approves a new constitution . The state is renamed Democratic Kampuchea .
 Laos becomes a Communist state with Sophanouvong as president . The Lao coalition headed by Souvanna Phouma is abolished . The government of the coalition is abolished and the Lao government is replaced by a communist state .
 Last of 140,000 refugees who arrived under the resettlement program leave Fort Chaffee, near Fort Smith, Arkansas . The last of four processing centers established in the United States .
 The newly created National Assembly names Vietnam the Socialist Republic of Vietnam . Vietnam is reunited with Vietnam, Vietnam's Socialist Republic . The newly formed National Assembly was formed in 1973 .
 North Vietnamese premier Pham Van Dong becomes prime minister in the new government . All high offices but one go to former leaders of North Vietnam, including the prime minister .
 The North Vietnamese constitution becomes the national constitution, until a commission can draw up a new document . The new document will be drawn up by a new commission appointed by the assembly .
 Jimmy Carter defeats Gerald Ford in the U.S. presidential election . Jimmy Carter defeated Ford in a landslide in the 1976 election .
 Vietnam asserts that it is impossible to furnish a complete list of those missing in action . Vietnam says it is unable to furnish an accurate list of missing soldiers .
 A five-year-plan for 1976-80 provides for extensive expansion of industry and agriculture, foreign trade, and reinvestment, as well as large-scale redistribution of the nation’s population .
 President Carter pardons almost all draft evaders of the Vietnam era . In his first major presidential act, he pardons draft evading almost all Vietnam evaders .
 President Carter says he will immediately address the problem of upgrading the discharging of the nearly 100,000 deserters . Carter: "I will not be satisfied with the problems"
 The first U.S. government mission to Vietnam since the fall of Saigon in 1975 returns with the remains of 12 United States pilots . Hanoi pledges to cooperate in discovering the fate of other missing Americans .
 The United States and Vietnam open the first round of negotiations in Paris on normalizing relations . The U.S. and Vietnam will meet for the first time this week in Paris to normalize relations .
 The United States promises not to veto Vietnam’s admission to the United Nations . The U.S. also promises to lift its trade embargo against Vietnam once diplomatic relations are established . Vietnam's admission to U.N. will not be vetoed .
 State Department releases classified letter from President Nixon pledging $4.75 billion in U.S. reconstruction aid to North Vietnam . Nixon signed a letter pledging the aid to the North Vietnam in a classified letter .
 Nixon portrays himself as a wartime president who took action to save a nation “torn apart” by dissent . On this same day, in a television interview with David Frost, former president Nixon says he was a wartime leader .
 Heavy fighting raged along the Cambodian-Vietnamese border in May, forcing Vietnam to evacuate two southern border towns on land claimed by the Cambodians . Washington reports that heavy fighting raged .
 Socialist Republic of Vietnam is admitted to the United Nations at its 32nd General Assembly . Sponsored by a record number of countries, Vietnam is a major sponsor of the U.N. Vietnam's bid to join the world's largest political parties .
 President Carter signs a bill that opens the way for refugees to apply for U.S. citizenship . The bill also extends federal aid programs for refugees who have come to the United States following the 1975 Communist victories in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia .
 The Cambodian government breaks diplomatic relations with Vietnam . The government cites “ferocious and barbarous aggression” by Vietnam as the reason .
 Earlier in December fierce fighting occurred when Vietnam occupied the ‘Parrot’s Beak’ area of Cambodia, after a Cambodian raid into Tay Ninh Province killed or injured 2,000 persons .
 U.S. officials assert that Vietnamese-Cambodian fighting is a “proxy war” between China and the Soviet Union . United States officials say it is a "proxy war" between the two countries . Vietnam and Cambodia have been at odds for decades over the years
 Ethnic Chinese flee Vietnam following nationalization of privately-owned businesses in Saigon . Hundreds of ethnic Chinese flee following nationalisation of businesses .
 Beijing accuses Vietnam of abusing and expelling 70,000-90,000 Chinese since 1977 . It announces that it is sending ships to evacuate those who have fled .
 Socialist Republic of Vietnam joins Comecom (Council of Mutual Economic Assistance), the Soviet-sponsored East European economic alliance . Vietnam joins the Council of MSA (COMCOM) Vietnam joined Comecom, a Soviet-backed East European alliance .
 China announces termination of all economic assistance to Vietnam . Citing Vietnam’s treatment of ethnic Chinese, China announces the termination of economic assistance . Vietnam has been accused of ethnic discrimination against ethnic Chinese .
 Talks in Hanoi between Vietnam and China collapse when China recalls its delegation . China recalls delegation . Vietnam's diplomatic relations with China have been strained in recent months .
 Each side accuses the other of initiating a border clash involving refugees, during which, the Chinese claim, Vietnamese forces occupied Chinese territory . The Chinese claim to have occupied Vietnamese territory .
 The Socialist Republic of Vietnam signs a 25-year Treaty of Friendship and Mutual Defense with the Soviet Union . Vietnam signed a treaty of friendship and mutual defense with the USSR .
 This agreement calls for cooperation in the development of Vietnam and for “mutual consultation” in case either nation is attacked . This agreement also calls for consultation in the case of either nation being attacked .
 Malaysia temporarily reverses policy and announces it will admit Vietnam’s ‘boat people’ The "boat people" fled from Vietnam in crowded, unseaworthy boats . Malaysia temporarily reversed policy and will admit them .
 There is deep-seated hostility to Vietnamese settlement in any numbers . As in other neighboring Asian countries, there is also hostility to Vietnam settlement .
 There are many sinkings, drownings, and even attacks by pirates as the boat people are frequently turned back and refused asylum .
 President Carter announces that full-scale diplomatic relations between the United States and China will begin on January 1, 1979 . President Carter announced the move in a speech at the White House .
 A major invasion by Vietnamese troops into southern Cambodia halts 40 kilometers from the Mekong River port of Kratie . Vietnamese troops enter the area 40 kilometers away from the Cambodian port .
 The United States and People’s Republic of China establish normal diplomatic relations . The U.S. and China establish diplomatic relations in 1953 . China and the United States establish diplomatic ties .
 Hanoi-backed Cambodian National United Front for National Salvation remains as an occupying force . Phnom Penh falls to Vietnamese forces, who remove Khmer Rouge regime .
 Chinese forces launch an invasion of northern Vietnam in a “punitive attack,” largely as retaliation for Vietnam’s invasion of Cambodia . The invasion is seen as a ‘punitive’ attack on northern Vietnam . Chinese forces launched an invasion in response to Vietnam�
 While criticizing Vietnam for invading Cambodia, the United States calls for China to withdraw from Vietnam . The U.S. calls for the withdrawal of China from Vietnam as a result of the invasion .
 China announces that all Chinese frontier troops are withdrawing from Vietnam . China announces withdrawal of all frontier troops from Vietnam.
 China claims 20,000 Chinese and 50,000 Vietnamese troops were killed or wounded in the fighting . China later claims that 20,500 Chinese and Vietnamese troops died or wounded . China claims it killed or injured more than 100,000 troops in the battle .
 Vietnamese and Chinese negotiators fail to agree on a peace settlement that will normalize relations between their nations . Vietnam and China have been at odds for years over a decade over the years .
 China continues to insist that Vietnam withdraw all forces from Cambodia and Laos, a demand that Vietnam steadfastly rejects . China says it wants Vietnam to withdraw all its forces from the region .
 International conference in Geneva on the worsening plight of Indochinese refugees . Vietnam promises to stem the flow of these people .
 The number of people fleeing Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos has increased tenfold during the year, to 300,000 . The United States State Department calculates that the number of refugees has increased almost tenfold .
 At least 147,000 refugees are in camps in Thailand, 51,000 in Malaysia, and 20,000 are in other countries . Most of the refugees are unwanted for permanent settlement in Thailand .
 180,000 Vietnamese troops in Cambodia launch a new offensive against the Khmer Rouge . Total victory over Pol Pot forces was claimed on July 22, although total victory was claimed . Only 40,000 guerrillas are estimated to be involved in the offensive .
 Arrivals of boat people throughout Southeast Asia have dwindled drastically . Arrival numbers have also dwindled in recent years .
 Refugee officials report that arrivals from Vietnam during September numbered only 6,600, compared to 55,000 arrivals in June . Refugee officials: Arrivals from Vietnam in September were 6,000, down from 55,600 in June.
 The largest Red Cross food shipment to date arrives to relieve the famine in Cambodia . The largest food shipment in the country's history is expected to arrive in the coming days .
 Months of effort to relieve widespread starvation have been frustrated by the lack of agreement between various factions . Months of efforts to relieve hunger have been thwarted by the conflict .
 About 4,800 former Vietnam veterans have asked the Veterans’ Administration for treatment of disorders they believe were caused by contact with Agent Orange . Agent Orange contains a toxic chemical, dioxin, which can cause health problems .
 International Red Cross reports little of 33,000 tons of food it has delivered to Cambodia has been distributed . Red Cross says little of the 33,00 tons of donated food has yet to be distributed in Cambodia .
 U.S. accuses Phnom Penh Penh government and Vietnam of deliberately blocking distribution of aid . Relief officials blame technical and logistical problems, but the United States blames them .
 Thousands of tons of food and medicine piled up in warehouses are finally reaching the people . UNICEF director James Grant is able to announce, after a visit to Cambodia, that the food is finally reaching people . By January 1, the food and medicines will finally be delivered to the people
 Chinese premier Hua Kuo-feng pledges support for Cambodian guerrillas fighting the Vietnamese-supported Cambodian government . Chinese premier: "We are committed to supporting guerillas in Cambodia"
 Negotiations between China and Vietnam stall again when Vietnam refuses to discuss its invasion of Cambodia . Vietnam's decision to invade Cambodia is key to negotiations between the two countries .
 UNICEF now states that “The prospect of famine has significantly increased” due to a second harvest failure and logistical problems . Despite optimistic pronouncements in preceding months, the prospect of a famine has increased . The prospect of the famine has been increased due to logistical problems and a
 Vietnamese troops in Cambodia cross into Thailand and battle Thai troops for two days near a camp holding some 200,000 Cambodian refugees . Vietnamese troops crossed into Thailand from Cambodia and battled Thai troops in two days . The camp is near a refugee camp in Cambodia, which is home to around 200
 The Vietnamese seek to halt the repatriation of Cambodian refugees, many of whom they fear will join the fight against the Vietnamese . Many of the refugees are believed to have fled to the country to escape the conflict .
 UN General Assembly approves resolution calling on Vietnam to withdraw its troops from Cambodia . UN vote 97 to 23, with 23 abstentions, to withdraw troops from Vietnam .
 Ronald Reagan defeats Jimmy Carter in the U.S. presidentiaJ election . Ronald Reagan defeated Jimmy Carter . Jimmy Carter was elected president of the United States .
 Hanoi says it is prepared to withdraw an unspecified number of troops from Cambodia if Thailand stops assisting Cambodian guerrillas opposed to the Vietnam-supported Phnom Penh government . Thailand has been assisting Cambodia's opposition to the government .
 The Vietnamese government turns over the remains of three Americans to United States officials . The remains of the three Americans are found in Vietnam .
 Vietnam invites a group of U.S. war veterans to discuss Agent Orange and the fate of servicemen still missing in action . The Vietnamese government invites the group to discuss such issues as Agent Orange .
 The four veterans who participate are criticized for serving Vietnamese propaganda purposes . Four veterans who participated in the Vietnam War have been criticized for their involvement .
 President Reagan signs legislation to make it easier for thousands of Asian-born children of U.S. servicemen to enter the United States . Thousands of children of servicemen are now living in the U.N.
 Vietnamese foreign minister Nguyen Co Thach announces agreement to a long-standing United States request for regular meetings in Hanoi to resolve the POW/MIA issue . U.S. has requested regular meetings with Vietnam's foreign minister to resolve POW/mIA issues .
 The government of Vietnam turns over the remains of four Americans and ID data on three others . The government will also turn over the identification data of three other Americans . The remains of the four Americans will be returned to Vietnam .
 The Vietnam Veterans Memorial is dedicated in Washington, D.C., in memory of the 57,939 U.S. soldiers killed or missing in the Vietnam War . The Vietnam War memorial is dedicated to soldiers killed, missing in Vietnam .
 The memorial consists of two black granite walls forming a shallow “V,” listing the names of all the Americans killed in the war . The memorial was designed by Yale architectural student Maya Ying Li .
 Congress passes a resolution supporting President Reagan’s efforts on POW/MIAs . Congress passes resolution supporting efforts to get POW/MIAAs back .
 A group of unemployed Vietnam veterans begins a round-theclock candlelight vigil at the site of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C., to call attention to the United States servicemen still missing .
 A United States POW/MIA technical team visits Laos for the first time since the war’s end . A U.S. military team visits the country for a technical visit . Laos is Laos' most populous country .
 Vietnamese troops and artillery assault a refugee camp on the ThaiCambodian border, forcing thousands of Cambodians into Thailand . Thousands of refugees have been forced into Thailand by the Vietnamese government .
 Red Cross doctors abandon the camp hospital and flee with the refugees . Red Cross medics were forced to flee with refugees . The Red Cross hospital is located in a refugee camp in northern Syria .
 The government of Vietnam returns the remains of nine American servicemen . The government has returned the remains .
 Vietnamese government suspends technical talks on POW/MIA issue . Vietnam cites “hostile statements” by senior American officials of the administration . Vietnamese government cites ‘hostile’ statements’ by American officials .
 The Dow Chemical Company knew as early as the mid-1960s that exposure to dioxin might cause serious illness or death . The company withheld this knowledge from the government and continued to sell herbicides contaminated by diox in the U.S. Army and the public .
 Judge Pratt is hearing a multi-billion dollar lawsuit by 20,000 Vietnam-era veterans against several chemical companies . The lawsuit is being heard by a judge in the U.S. on Monday .
 Reagan administration’s sharp curb on press coverage of Grenada invasion traced to deep military resentment of Vietnam war reporting, when journalists had virtually free movement in Vietnam war zones .
 A United States technical team surveys a United States crash site in Southern Laos and proposes a joint excavation effort by both governments . At Lao government invitation, a U.S. technical team survey the site and proposes joint excavation efforts .
 A U.S. delegation led by Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard Armitage meets with senior Vietnamese officials . Vietnamese officials agree to resume technical meetings and accelerate cooperation on POW/MIA issue .
 Remains of five Americans turned over to U.S. representatives . Remains were turned over by United States representatives . The remains of the five Americans are turned over .
 China accuses Vietnam of shelling Chinese border villages during lunar new year celebrations . China says it killed a farm worker and wounded several others . Vietnam has been accused of shelling border villages in recent months .
 Vietnam says Chinese gunners have fired thousands of artillery rounds into Vietnam’s northern provinces this month . Chinese reconnaissance squads have penetrated as far as 1.5 miles into Vietnamese territory, Vietnam says .
 Federal District Judge Jack B Weinsten announces a $180 million out-of-court settlement against seven chemical companies . 15,000 Vietnam veterans sued manufacturers of Agent Orange in a class-action suit brought by Vietnam veterans .
 At least 40,000 veterans are involved in various suits against manufacturers of the defoliant . Potential claimants could be in the hundreds of thousands, with potential claimants in the thousands .
 On Memorial Day, the only unknown U.S. casualty of the Vietnam War is interred at Arlington National Cemetery at a ceremony attended by 250,000, including congressmen, members of the international diplomatic community .
 Many see the burial as a national gesture that lays to rest the polarization of the Vietnam era . Many see it as an effort to end polarization of Vietnam era.
 President Reagan, named honorary next-of-kin, delivers the eulogy at the hero’s funeral . Reagan urges greater efforts to locate the more than 2,400 servicemen still missing .
 The Vietnamese government returns the remains of eight persons, six of whom are later identified as Americans . Six of the eight bodies were later identified by the Vietnamese government .
 The Chinese claim that the Vietnamese invaded first and were repulsed after 10 hours . The Vietnamese charge that the Chinese began the fighting by shelling border villages and then moving troops into Vietnam .
 Many observers feel that the Chinese continue incursions in northern Vietnam to distract the Vietnamese from mounting a full-scale offensive against Chinese-backed guerrillas in Kampuchea .
 The United States has resettled about 300,000 of the 600,000 refugees who have entered Thailand since 1975 . Hundreds of thousands of refugees also remain in camps in Cambodia and Laos .
 Previously, captains had refused to pick up Vietnamese refugees at sea because of difficulty in finding ports at which they would be allowed to disembark .
 U.S. will ask Vietnam to release an estimated 10,000 political prisoners held in "re-education" camps for resettlement in the United States over the next two years . Secretary of State George Shultz announces the move . Shultz: The United States will ask for the release
 Most of the prisoners are anti-Communists who worked for U.S. programs . Most of these prisoners are Americans who have worked for the United States . The prisoners were anti-communists .
 Shultz also announces that the U.S. will admit 8,000 Vietnamese children fathered by servicemen over the next three years . Shultz: Vietnam will be admitted to the United States for the first time in three years.
 A statue of three servicemen, added to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial after protests by veterans, is dedicated . The statue is dedicated to the three men who died in Vietnam .
 U.S. and Lao technical personnel conduct the first joint crash site excavation . Lao crash site is first joint site to be excavated by the United States and Laos .
 The remains of six American servicemen are repatriated to U.S. officials during ceremonies in Hanoi . The remains were repatriated by Vietnamese officials at the time .
 Indonesian foreign minister relays a message to the United States from Hanoi of an agreement to reenter into high-level discussions with U.S. officials to resolve the POW/MIA issue within a two-year period, beginning January 1, 1986 .
 The government of Vietnam turns over to U.S. officials the remains of 26 Americans . It is the largest effort of its kind since the end of United States involvement in Vietnam . The largest effort to turn over the remains was the largest in the country's history .
 United States and Vietnamese technical officials meet in Hanoi to conduct the first joint excavation of a U.S. crash site in that country . United States, Vietnam will conduct first joint excavations of a United States crash site .
 The Vietnam government turns over to United States technical officials the remains of seven U.S. servicemen . Vietnam turns over the remains to the United States Technical officials .
 Vietnamese officials meet with U.S. delegation in Hanoi to discuss live sightings of Americans . Vietnamese officials pledge to investigate live sightings and admit possibility of Americans being alive .
 United States and Lao technical officials jointly excavate a second crash site in southern Laos to resolve the status of 14 Americans missing in a 1972 incident . 14 Americans were killed in the crash in Laos in 1972 .
 The government of Vietnam turns over to United States officials in Hanoi 21 remains believed to be U.S. personnel . 21 remains thought to be United States personnel believed to have been United States .
 Reagan thanks the governments of Vietnam and Laos for renewed efforts to help find MIA remains . President Reagan thanks governments for renewed effort to find the remains .
 Hanoi announces Doi Moi, a series of economic reforms . Soon thereafter, the government in Hanoa announced DoiMoi, an economic reform . Doo Moi is the name of a new regime of Vietnam .
 Retiring U.S. Army general John W Vessey, Jr., former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, is appointed special presidential emissary for POW/ MIA affairs . Retiring general John Vessey Jr. is appointed Special Presidential Emissary . Vessey is a
 The United States says plans to send a special envoy to Hanoi are on hold until that capital indicates an interest in resolving POW/ MIAs . The U.S. says plans for a U.N. special envoy are put on hold . The United Nations says plans are on
 Vietnam and China begin three days of military skirmishes over the disputed Spratly Islands . China and Vietnam have been at odds over the islands for more than a decade .
 Some 23,000 Vietnamese soldiers were killed and 55,000 wounded fighting Pol Pot’s forces for 11 years . Pol Pot's forces were in control of Vietnam during the 11 years of the country's reign . The conflict was centered in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Some 2,000 refugees agree to return to Vietnam voluntarily by year’s end . Vietnam has been hit by a wave of anti-Vietnam violence in recent years . Vietnam is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 Under U.N. auspices, Cambodian factions agree to form a coalition government and to hold national elections . Under United Nations auspice, Cambodia will hold elections and form a government .
 The European Economic Community establishes trade relations with Vietnam . Vietnam was the first country to join the European Community . The European Community established trade relations between the two countries .
 U.S. and Vietnam agree to establish a United States office in Hanoi to help determine MIAs’ fate . Vietnam and the United States agree to set up the office . The office will help determine the fate of MIAs .
 Washington presents Hanoi with a road map for phased normalization of relations and lifting of the embargo . Washington gives Vietnam a roadmap to normalize relations with the U.S. and lift an embargo .
 Vietnam resumes diplomatic relations with China following a visit to Beijing by Vietnamese premier Vo Van Kiet for talks with Chinese premier Li Peng . The visit was part of a visit by the Vietnamese premier to Beijing to meet Li Peng and other leaders .
 Britain and Vietnam sign an agreement on the repatriation of Vietnamese refugees from Hong Kong . The two countries signed an agreement to repatriate refugees .
 Joint Task Force Full Accounting is established to resolve the cases of Americans still unaccounted-for as a result of the Southeast Asia conflict . Joint Task force Full Accounting was established in 2009 .
 JTF will be headquartered in Honolulu with detachments in Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, and Thailand . The JTF is based in Honolulu and will be based in four countries .
 Washington lifts its embargo on telecommunication links with Vietnam . By the end of April, the U.S. will begin trading critical items such as medicine and food .
 The Vietnamese government confirms the release of all former South Vietnamese officials being held in reeducation camps . In a step toward normalizing relations with the United States, the Vietnamese government will release all former officials .
 The Vietnam National Assembly disbands the National Defense Council that played a leading role during the Vietnam War . The Vietnam Defense Council played a key role in the war in Vietnam .
 Guerrillas of Vietnam’s United Front for the Liberation of Oppressed Races surrender to U.N. officials . The guerrillas have been fighting for autonomy in Vietnam for 28 years .
 The U.S. presidential envoy, General John Vessey, visits Vietnam and receives that government’s promise to search through records and photographs relating to POW/MIAs . General Vessey: Vietnam government promises to search for records and photos of POW/MIAAs .
 Bill Clinton ends U.S. opposition to settlement of Vietnam’s $140 million arrears to the International Monetary Fund . Clinton ends United States opposition to settling of Vietnam's $140m arrear . The settlement clears the way for the resumption of international lending to
 A United States government delegation visits Vietnam and decides to create three temporary posts there for U.S. State Department officials . The posts will help in the search for POW/MIAs . Vietnam is a major source of POW and MIAs .
 President Bill Clinton announces relaxing of America’s trade embargo with Vietnam . U.S. companies can now bid for Vietnam projects that use funds from international organizations .
 Admiral Charles Larson is the highest ranking active-duty U.S. military officer to do so since the war’s end . Larson is head of United States Pacific Command, head of Pacific Command . Larson's visit is the first since the end of the war .
 He concludes lifting the trade embargo will help efforts to account for Americans missing from the war . He concludes that lifting the embargo will aid efforts to find Americans missing .
 The Senate approves a nonbinding resolution urging President Clinton to lift the trade embargo on Vietnam . Backed by broad bipartisan support, it is hoped the move will help get a full account of MIAs .
 President Bill Clinton announces lifting of the 19-year embargo on trade with Vietnam . Bill Clinton announced the lifting of a trade embargo on Vietnam . The embargo was lifted in 1993 .
 Vietnam hands over apparent remains of 12 American soldiers to U.S. authorities . Vietnamese government hands over the apparent remains to United States authorities . The remains are believed to be those of 12 soldiers .
 The House of Representatives passes a bill saying that MIA accounting should remain central to U.S. policy in Vietnam . The bill says MIA accounting is central to United States policy in the country . The House passes the bill .
 President Clinton extends United States diplomatic recognition to Vietnam . Lia liaison offices will be set up in Hanoi and Washington . James Hall becomes the first consul-general to Vietnam, but the U.S. desires more information about POW/MIAs before exchanging ambassadors .
 Hanoi publishes casualty figures for the war showing that more than 1 million Vietnamese combatants and some 2 million civilians were killed . More than 2 million Vietnamese were killed in the war .
 Douglas “Pete” Peterson, Florida congressman and former air force pilot, was shot down and imprisoned in North Vietnam for six years . Peterson is confirmed as the first U.S. ambassador to Vietnam .
 Le Van Bang is confirmed as Vietnam’s ambassador to the United States . Le van Bang was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on Tuesday night .
 Short biographies are provided for most of the key figures who were involved in, or had a primary influence on, the war in Vietnam .
 The length of a biography should not be seen as an indication of anyone’s overall importance in world history . The biographies focus on the individual's role in the Vietnam War, and the length of the biography is not an indication .
 Creighton W Abrams Jr. was born in Springfield, Massachusetts, on September 16, 1914 . He graduated from the United States Military Academy in 1936 and was commissioned in the cavalry . Abrams, Creighton Williams Commander, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, 1968—72 United
 He became famous in World War II as one of General George Patton’s foremost tank commanders . He led the armored relief column to Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge .
 He served as the deputy chief of staff for operations in the early 1960s . In 1967 he was responsible for modernizing the Army of the Republic of Vietnam .
 He was given the job of overseeing the gradual withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam while keeping North Vietnamese forces at bay . In 1969, he was tasked with overseeing the withdrawal of United States forces .
 The Cambodian “incursion’s” in 1970 was part of his plan to take the pressure off the South Vietnamese, he says .
 In 1972, General Abrams again succeeded General Westmoreland, this time as chief of staff of the army . Abrams was the second general in charge of the armed forces .
 His main task was rebuilding the army that was in disarray following its withdrawal from Vietnam . He was in charge of rebuilding an army that had been disarrayed following withdrawal .
 As undersecretary of state for economic affairs from 1945 to 1947, he helped formulate the containment policy and the Truman Doctrine . Dean Acheson was Dean United States secretary of state, 1949—53 . He was Dean of Dean at the University of Washington .
 After retiring from government service briefly, he returned and served as secretary of state from 1949 to 1953 . After retiring briefly he returned to government service .
 He began his tenure supportive of Southeast Asian nationalism, but by 1950 he began to see the Viet Minh as a front for Soviet or Chinese communism . He supported former emperor Bao Dai, rather than Ho Chi Minh, and advocated United States support for France in the First Indoch
 During the Johnson administration, Acheson was one of the ‘Wise Men,” a group of unofficial advisers to President Johnson . He was by then a respected eider statesman .
 This position no doubt had an impact on Johnson’s decision not to run for re-election . Johnson's decision to not run was likely to have a negative impact on his decision to retire .
 Adams joined the CIA after a two-year stint in the navy and became an analyst . Adams was an analyst from 1963-73 .
 Adams reviewed agent field reports about the strength of the Viet Cong and People’s Army of Vietnam forces . Adams concluded that the enemy had far more people than U.S. intelligence estimates showed .
 The U.S. military intentionally underestimated the number of troops to bolster claims of progress and to justify further escalation, he said . After more study, he further concluded that the United States . The United States. intentionally underestimated .
 Adams died in 1988, but his book, War of Numbers, was published posthumously in 1994 . Adams' book, "War of Numbers," was published in 1994 after his death .
 He claimed to speak for decent, conservative Americans against the radicalism that had emerged from the turmoil of the 1960s . He said he spoke for decent Americans against radicalism .
 Agnew's efforts contributed to Nixon’s “silent majority” strategy for marshaling support in the wake of antiwar protests . Agnew: Agnew helped Nixon to marshal support in wake of protests .
 Agnew resigned in October 1973, following allegations of criminal conduct while Baltimore County executive and governor of Maryland . Agnew was accused of misconduct in connection with Baltimore County .
 He preempted the Fontainebleau Conference by unilaterally and without authority declaring the Republic of Cochin China in southern Vietnam . He declared the Republic, which he declared without authority, in Vietnam .
 The bombardment of Haiphong in November 1946, which he ordered, led to open warfare with the Viet Minh in December and so evolved into the First Indochina War . He ordered the bombardment, which led to the war, which began in 1946 . The bombardment led to a
 Argenlieu was recalled to Paris in 1947 because of his extreme unpopularity among the Vietnamese, French socialists, and communists . He was recalled from the French capital in 1947 due to his unpopularity .
 George W Ball served as director of the United States Strategic Bombing Survey during World War II . Ball became undersecretary of state in the Kennedy administration . Ball was a respected attorney and government official .
 Ball warned in 1961 that sending 8,000 American advisers to Vietnam would lead to having 300,000 U.S. troops there in five years . Ball warned that the United States would become mired in a hopeless war with Vietnam in Vietnam . Ball: "The United States will be
 Ball continued to argue against U.S. escalation in Vietnam in the Johnson administration . Ball submitted 18 memoranda and talking papers in which he refuted the arguments for expanding the war . Ball: The decision to launch regular bombing attacks against North Vietnam was a mistake .
 Ball resigned from the State Department in September 1966 and returned to private law practice . He met stiff resistance from Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara, and McGeorge Bundy .
 Born Prince Nguyen Vinh Thuy on October 22, 1913, he succeeded his father, Khai Dinh, to the Nguyen dynasty throne upon his father’s death . Bao Dai Emperor ofAnnam, 1925, reigned 1932— 1945; last emperor of Vietnam,
 He set out to modernize Vietnam, but he was merely a figurehead under the French . He turned to a life of hunting, gambling, and womanizing . He was a womanizing figurehead .
 Japanese occupation forces invited him to form a supposedly independent government in Vietnam in 1945 . In March 1945, he was invited to form an independent government under Japanese rule . He was killed by the bombing of the city of Hànhànàná .
 After the Japanese surrendered and the Viet Minh seized power, he abdicated but served in a symbolic role as ‘Citizen Prince” under Ho Chi Minh . He became dissatisfied and fled to Hong Kong and ultimately to the French Riviera in 1946 .
 In 1949, at the request of the French, who had regained power, Bao Dai agreed to return to Vietnam and was reinstalled as a figurehead emperor of the newly proclaimed State of Vietnam . In 1949 he was re-empowered as the figurehead of Vietnam's newly
 Bao Dai then went into permanent exile in France, where he lived until his death . Bao Dao Dai was exiled to France and died there in 1963 .
 Le Van Vien was the leader of Binh Xuyen, Saigon’s powerful criminal syndicate in the 1940s and 1950s . Bay Vien led the powerful Saigon's powerful crime syndicate .
 Bay Vien became a general in the South Vietnamese army and head of the national police . Through payoffs to Emperor Bao Dai and with French approval, he became a major in the country's army .
 After the Ngo Dinh Diem government defeated the Binh Xuyen in a power struggle in 1955, Bay Vien fled to Paris . The Binh Yuyen government overthrew the Diem regime in 1955 . After the government's defeat in the power struggle, Bay
 General Bradley, noted World War II general, helped draft Pentagon contingency plans to assist the French in 1952 . Bradley, Omar N General, United States Army; first chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1947-53 During the Indochina War, General Bradley helped to draft military contingency plans
 After retirement, Bradley visited Vietnam in 1967 and declared his full support for the war effort . Bradley visited the country in 1967, declaring his support for Vietnam .
 In 1968, he was one of the few ‘Wise Men’ of President Johnson’s special advisory group to advise against withdrawal from Vietnam . He advised against withdrawal in Vietnam .
 President Richard Nixon appointed air force chief of staff by Richard Nixon in July 1973 . Senate hearings on Brown’s appointment raised the issue of his role in the secret bombing of Cambodia .
 Brown explained that the bombing missions had been kept secret for security reasons on orders from higher authority . Brown: The bombing missions were kept secret by higher authorities .
 Brown was confirmed as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . He was confirmed and a year later was appointed chairman of Joint Chiefs' Council .
 Brown took an active role in the Ford administration’s final attempts to save South Vietnam in March 1975 . Brown played a key role in efforts to save the country from Vietnam .
 The administration advocated sending military aid to South Vietnam in response to the North Vietnamese final offensive . The administration was constrained by recent congressional legislation limiting the president’s authority to act abroad . The War Powers Act of 1973 was passed by Congress .
 Brown later linked the collapse of Saigon’s forces during the final North Vietnamese offensive to congressional cutbacks in military aid . Brown later blamed the collapse in Saigon's forces on the collapse .
 He stressed aircraft, tanks, and armored personnel carriers lost in battle had not been replaced by the U.S. He stressed that aircraft, tankers, aircraft and armored vehicles were not replaced by U.K.
 General Brown retired from active duty in 1978 and died on December 5, 1978 .
 Brown chaired the group, which sponsored the largest antiwar demonstrations in the U.S. on October 15, 1969, and in Washington, D.C., on November 15,1969 . The group also sponsored demonstrations in Washington and New York .
 President John Kennedy appointed Bundy, a former dean at Harvard, his national security advisor in January 1961 . Bundy, McGeorge, was McGeorge United States special assistant to the president for national security affairs, 1961-66 . Bundy was appointed as McGeorge's national security adviser .
 From that time until Bundy’s departure from office in 1966, Bundy was one of the principal architects of U.S. policy in Southeast Asia under both Kennedy and Johnson . Bundy's departure in 1966 was Bundy's first major change in policy since JFK .
 He believed strongly in the support of South Vietnam as a bulwark against the spread of communism in Southeast Asia . He was a strong advocate for the dramatic increase in the U.S. military advisory effort in Vietnam under the Kennedy administration .
 By late 1964, he advocated that the U.S. adopt an extensive air campaign, varying the intensity of the bombing raids with the rate of Communist troop infiltration into the South . He advocated for an extensive bombing campaign .
 Operation Rolling Thunder began in March 1965 . The bombing campaign, subsequently named Rolling Thunder, began in 1965 . It was the first major bombing campaign to take place in the US .
 He also supported the use of U.S. ground forces to put pressure on Hanoi to agree to a negotiated settlement to the war .
 By 1966, Bundy began to question the escalation and what he saw as the lack of attention paid to the pacification effort . Bundy: "By 1966, however, Bundy had begun questioning the escalation of the conflict . Bundy began questioning the amount of attention given to the effort to pacify
 Ford resigned as president of the Ford Foundation after resigning from his post . Ford was president of Ford Foundation . He resigned from the position after the resignation .
 He continued to advise Johnson as one of the president’s ‘Wise Men’ He advocated de-escalation and eventual U.S. withdrawal .
 William Bundy, along with his younger brother, played a significant role in drafting U.S. policy in Vietnam during both the Kennedy and Johnson administrations . Bundy, William Putnam Central Intelligence Agency, 1951—61; United States assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs, 1961—63
 Bundy recommended an aggressive program to block Communist expansion in that country . Bundy recommended a program to stop Communist expansion of that country. Bundy recommended aggressive program . Bundy: "It's a good idea to get rid of the Communists in China"
 Bundy did not initially favor a ground combat role in North Korea . Bundy pushed for air strikes against military and industrial targets in the North . Bundy was not interested in ground combat .
 By 1964, Bundy believed that the administration needed congressional approval for further action in Vietnam . Bundy wrote preliminary drafts of what eventually would become the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in August 1964 . Bundy: "I believe that the United States needs congressional approval"
 Bundy headed a working group to formulate U.S. policy recommendations in 1964-65 . Bundy headed the working group for the United States . Bundy was a member of the U.N. policy team that helped develop the country's foreign policy .
 He opposed a large U.S. troop buildup, fearing that the fight would thus become the responsibility of the United States . He opposed large troop buildup .
 He argued that bombing was a viable means of bringing North Vietnam to the bargaining table . The U.S. should not cease bombing operations unless Hanoi agreed to limit infiltration of troops into the South, he said .
 By the spring of 1967, Bundy had changed his mind and he opposed continued escalation of the war . Bundy walked a line between the pro-war and anti-war factions within the administration . Bundy claimed that to escalate would have an adverse impact on United States allies and would have a limited
 President Johnson sent Bunker to Saigon by President Johnson to replace Henry Cabot Fodge as ambassador to South Vietnam in April 1967 . Bunker was a former ambassador to Argentina, India, Italy, Nepal, and Nepal .
 Bunker was a supporter of U.S. policy in Vietnam and of General Westmoreland’s methods of fighting it, even at a time when many other officials in the administration were beginning to have doubts . Bunker was one of the most vocal supporters of the Vietnam policy .
 He backed the 1970 incursion into Cambodia, believing that destruction of North Vietnamese bases in that country would give the South Vietnamese armed forces more time to develop as United States forces were withdrawn under President Nixon’s ‘Vietnamization’ policy .
 He accompanied Henry Kissinger during the contentious sessions that persuaded Thieu to accept the Paris Peace Accords in 1973 . He accompanied Kissinger in the sessions that convinced Thieu of accepting the Paris Accords .
 Bunker resigned his post in Saigon in 1973 and, after returning to Washington, became ambassador-atlarge . Bunker resigned in 1973 . Bunker served as ambassador to Vietnam .
 Second lieutenant, United States Army William L Calley was born on June 8, 1943, in Miami, Florida . Calley served in the U.S. Army in the Army .
 He was a platoon leader in the 1st Battalion, 20th Infantry Regiment, 23rd Infantry Division . He served in the Army during the Vietnam War .
 Calley directed his platoon in the massacre of several hundred Vietnamese civilians in the hamlet of My Lai, part of the northern coastal village of Song My, on March 16, 1968 . The massacre took place in a hamlet in the north-eastern coastal village .
 In March 1971, he was convicted of the premeditated murder of at least 22 people . He was sentenced to life imprisonment at hard labor, dismissal from the service, and forfeiture of all pay and allowances .
 After a lengthy review process, his sentence was reduced to 10 years . The case was reviewed by both military and civilian courts .
 After serving one-third of his term, he was released on parole in 1974 and given a dishonorable discharge . He was released in 1974 after serving one third of his sentence .
 Other officers and enlisted men were investigated and tried for their roles in the massacre . Calley was the only one to be found guilty of a crime at My Lai .
 General Cao Van Vien retained the top military post in South Vietnam through many government upheavations . Cao Vien was chief of Joint General Staff, 1965-1975 .
 In 1953 he was given command of a battalion of the Vietnamese National Army . He became an officer under the French in 1949, and in 1953 he became a generalist .
 He remained loyal to President Ngo Dinh Diem and did not participate in the coup that overthrew Diem in 1963 . He was loyal to Diem's predecessor, President of Vietnam from 1963 .
 As commander of III Corps, he belonged to the so-called Young Turks faction that took power in 1964 . He was a close ally of President Nguyen Van Thieu, who ruled Vietnam .
 General William Westmoreland met weekly with Vien . He resisted U.S. pressure to reform the ARVN or replace corrupt officers . Vien resisted United States pressure on reform .
 He was long an advocate of a major ground incursion into Laos to cut the Ho Chi Minh Trail . The plan was eventually executed in 1971 as Operation Lam Son 719 . It was the first major incursion against Laos since Vietnam in 1968 .
 Vien proposed the withdrawal from the Central Highlands that led to communist victory in April 1975 . Later, after United States troops had been withdrawn, Vien suggested withdrawal from Central Highlands .
 Vien worked at the United States Army Center for Military History, where he authored several monographs on the war . Vien gained asylum in the U.S. after gaining asylum in 2007 .
 He became a U.S. citizen in 1982 and died of sudden cardiac arrest in 2008 .
 Church was critical of U.S. involvement in South Vietnam and in 1963 opposed aiding the regime of Ngo Dinh Diem . Church was a member of the Foreign Relations Committee, critical of United States military involvement in Vietnam . Forrester United States senator, Church was member of
 In June 1965, he called for direct negotiations with the National Liberation Front . He called for free elections in South Vietnam, and a scaling down of the U.S. war effort . He also called for a scaled-down of the United States war effort in Vietnam .
 The adoption of the CooperChurch amendment represented the first limitation ever voted on the president’s power as commanderin-chief during a war . The amendment was adopted by the U.S. House of Representatives in 1945 .
 Congress passed a bill in 1973 cutting off funds for all U.S. military activity in Indochina . The bill was sponsored by Church and Senator Clifford Case (RN.J.)
 Church lost his bid for reelection to the Senate in 1980 . After a strong run for the presidency in 1976, Church ran for the Senate .
 As acting attorney general in 1966, Clark opposed draft resisters being inducted quickly into military service in Vietnam . Clark opposed a Selective Service System proposal to induct resisters quickly into service . Clark, Ramsey Assistant U.S. attorney general, 1965—67; United States attorney general
 As attorney general, despite pressure from the White House, he resisted policies to repress the antiwar movement . He allowed large, potentially violent demonstration, including the March on the Pentagon .
 He also criticized police violence toward citizens . He refused to use wiretaps except in cases of national security . He also rejected wiretaps .
 Johnson's positions led to criticism from within the Johnson administration and from conservatives, who labeled him soft on crime .
 Clark visited North Vietnam in 1972 to investigate reported U.S. bombing of civilian targets . Clark joined the anti-war movement after leaving office in 1969 .
 He defended Saddam Hussein in his trial before the Iraqi Special Tribunal in 2005 . Subsequently he practiced law and continued his political activism .
 While in exile in Algeria in August 1970, Cleaver made two broadcasts over Radio Hanoi aimed at black servicemen in Vietnam . Cleaver extolled the cause of the North Vietnamese in the broadcasts .
 Clifford advised LBJ in 1965 to seek negotiations rather than begin a military escalation in Vietnam that could risk becoming an open-ended commitment in an area of questionable strategic importance . Clifford was attorney and confidante of Democratic presidents beginning with Harry Truman .
 Clifford supported Johnson's decision to expand the war by sending U.S. ground troops . Clifford supported the effort, believing that the United States should take all measures to achieve a quick victory . Clifford: "I believe that the U.K. should take every measure possible to achieve victory
 In 1966 and 1967, Clifford advised against bombing halts . Clifford was convinced by optimistic briefings, he advised against a bombing halt . Clifford died in 1968, his wife died in a car crash .
 As one of President Johnson’s ‘Wise Men,’ Clifford supported further escalation and urged Johnson to stay the course . Clifford was one of Johnson's ‘wise Men’
 When Robert McNamara stepped down as secretary of defense in 1968, Johnson appointed Clifford to the post in the belief that he would stand firm on continuing the war effort .
 Clifford became convinced that the U.S. should halt all bombing of North Vietnam and withdraw its forces from Vietnam . However, when General Westmoreland requested 206,000 additional troops in the wake of the Tet Offensive, Clifford decided to withdraw his forces . Clifford was convinced that North Vietnam
 Clifford arranged a briefing for Johnson with the ‘Wise Men,” many of whom had come to share the same opinion . Johnson felt betrayed by the group, who had originally supported his handling of the war, but their recommendations deeply affected him .
 Johnson stunned the nation with his announcement that he would not run for reelection . Shortly after the meeting, Johnson denied the military’s request for more troops and stunned the country .
 Clifford spent the last months of Johnson’s presidency laying the groundwork for U.S. withdrawal and Vietnamization . Clifford returned to his legal practice in January 1969 .
 Benjamin Spock was convicted in 1968 for conspiring to encourage resistance to Selective Service laws . The verdict was reversed on appeal and charges against Spock and Spock were dropped .
 Colby was commissioned in the United States Army in 1941 . He was detailed to the Office of Strategic Services in 1943 to work with the French underground . Colby, William Egan, was director of the CIA in 1973-76 .
 First posted to Vietnam in 1959, he served as CIA station chief in Saigon until 1962 . He was involved in the recruitment of Montagnard tribesmen by U.S. Special Forces .
 In 1962, he returned to Washington, D.C., to become head of CIA’s Far Eastern Division . He presided over programs throughout Southeast Asia . In 1962 he was head of the CIA's Far Eastern division .
 He considered the 1963 coup against President Diem to be a grave error . The former president considered the coup against Diem a mistake .
 In 1968 he returned to Vietnam to succeed Robert Komer as deputy to the commander of MACV . He was responsible for the Civil Operations and Rural Development Support program, which included the Phoenix program .
 He denied charges that the Phoenix program was involved in assassinations . He and the program became a focus for the antiwar movement . Phoenix was aimed at eliminating the Viet Cong infrastructure .
 In 1970 and 1971, Colby was called before congressional committees to testify about the program . Colby testified before Congress in 1971 .
 He refused to state categorically that there had been no assassinations . He pointed out that many of the dead had been killed in battle, but refused to say if there were assassinations.
 North Vietnamese officials and former members of the National Liberation Front and Viet Cong have since acknowledged that it had a devastating effect on their war effort . The program was considered a failure at the time, but has since been considered a success .
 In June 1971, Colby resigned his post because of the serious illness of his daughter . Colby's daughter was seriously ill and he resigned .
 He became executive director-comptroller of the CIA in 1972 and CIA director in 1973 . His tenure was controversial because he revealed the CIA's illegal activities during the Vietnam War .
 Colby cooperated with congressional investigations . Under pressure from President Gerald Ford, Colby retired from the agency in 1976 . Colby was not pleased when he cooperated in the investigations .
 He died in a boating accident near his home in Rock Point, Maryland, on April 27,1996 .
 General Collins served as General William Westmoreland’s personal representative . He was responsible for coordinating Allied operations in Vietnam in May 1965 . Collins was a U.S. Army general general .
 Collins harshly criticized the ARVN officer corps, later suggesting that the United States should have insisted on removal of corrupt and incompetent officers . Collins later suggested that the U.S. should have removed corrupt officers .
 Collins wrote two books drawing on his experiences, and became the army’s chief of military history after the war . Collins was chief of the army's chief of . military history .
 Collins was one of Eisenhower’s most successful corps commanders in the D-day invasion of Europe in 1944 . Collins later became the United States Army chief of staff .
 As president, Eisenhower sent Collins to Saigon in November 1954 to assess the abilities of Ngo Dinh Diem . Collins set up military training program for Diem’s army .
 Collins recommended reducing U.S. support because of Diem’s refusal to institute democratic reforms . Collins: Diem refused to institute reforms .
 Eisenhower administration, at the time, decided to continue its support of Diem as the best available leader in the South .
 An expert in demolition and guerrilla tactics, he returned to Vietnam to organize covert operations against the Communists in Northern Vietnam in 1954 . He organized covert operations under Edward Lansdale’s Saigon Military Mission .
 In 1963, he aided the coup that ousted Ngo Dinh Diem . He went to Saigon in 1962 as an adviser to the South Vietnamese Ministry of the Interior .
 Cooper voted for the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in 1964, but became one of the early critics of U.S. involvement in Vietnam . Cooper, John Sherman, was a senator in the United States from 1957 to 1973 .
 He criticized the bombing of North Vietnam and warned against an escalation of the conflict in the aftermath of the 1968 Tet Offensive . He also warned against a further escalation in the conflict .
 Cooper cosponsored the unsuccessful Cooper-Church amendment with Frank Church . Cooper cussed out the amendment with Church . The amendment was unsuccessful .
 The amendment was a response to the 1970 Cambodian incursion . It prohibited the president from spending any funds for U.S. troops fighting in Cambodia after July 1 without the consent of Congress .
 The House deleted the Cooper-Church amendment from the appropriations bill . The Senate passed the measure, but the House deleted it from the bill .
 Congress later adopted a modified version of the Cooper-Church amendment in December 1970 that prohibited the president from committing U.S. ground forces to combat in Laos and Thailand .
 Cronkite was a war correspondent for United Press International during World War II . He soon became one of CBS’s most important network correspondents and later its chief anchorman . Walter Leland was the CBS Evening News anchor, 1954-81 .
 President Kennedy said success of the war in Southeast Asia would ultimately be determined by South Vietnamese willingness to pursue the struggle . President Kennedy granted Cronkite an exclusive interview in 1963 .
 In the mid-1960s, Cronkite was cautiously optimistic about the war in Vietnam . After visiting Vietnam during the Tet Offensive in early 1968, he said the war was not working and that the U.S. might have to accept a stalemate .
 The defection of Cronkite upset President Johnson, who had regarded the anchorman as an administration ally . According to many observers, the defection upset Johnson . Johnson was afraid that Cronkites accurately reflected public opinion .
 Lieutenant General Cushman assumed command of the III Marine Amphibious Force in Vietnam in June 1967 . He commanded the 1st and 3rd Marine Divisions, as well as all army units engaged in combat in I Corps . He was awarded the Navy Cross during World War II .
 Cushman oversaw defense of Khe Sanh, the battle for Hue, and the I Corps counteroffensive in the wake of the Tet Offensive . During his tour in Vietnam, he oversaw the battle of Hue, the I corps counteroffensive .
 He was commandant of the Marine Corps in 1972 . After returning to the U.S. in 1969, he became deputy director of the CIA and served in that position .
 David Dellinger was leader of the pacifist War Resisters League . He was a leader in the antiwar movement . Dellinger died in 1968 .
 He began lobbying against American participation in Vietnam in 1963 . He advocated immediate withdrawal of United States troops from Southeast Asia .
 He helped organize the Assembly of Unrepresented People in 1965, which sponsored acts of civil disobedience against the war . He also helped organize a group of people who participated in civil disobedience .
 He was among eight leaders of the demonstrations indicted for conspiring and traveling over state lines to incite rioting . He was one of eight leaders indicted on charges of conspiring to incite riots .
 Dellinger was acquitted of conspiracy, but found guilty of rioting, a conviction overturned on appeal . Dellinger's conviction for rioting was overturned after appeal .
 On September 26, 1945, Dewey was killed by Viet Minh machine-gun fire while driving a jeep near OSS headquarters in Saigon, becoming the first American serviceman killed in Vietnam .
 Major General “Wild Bill” Donovan dispatched a United States OSS team to French Indochina to rescue downed aviators and provide intelligence about Japanese forces in the region . Donovan, William J Director, Office of Strategic Services, 1942—45; United States Ambassador to Thailand
 Ho Chi Minh had asked the U.S. to support Vietnamese independence . Ho Chi-Minh asked the United States to support independence .
 The OSS mission, which worked with the Viet Minh against the Japanese, was the first U.S. involvement in Vietnam . The mission was first United States involvement in the country .
 Dulles was a supporter of Ngo Dinh Diem . He was the brother of John Foster Dulles . He served as CIA Director in Vietnam .
 He urged President Dwight D Eisenhower to bolster Diem’s government during its early years . President Eisenhower urged President Diem to bolster his government during his early years.
 He approved the first CIA mission, under Major General Edward G Lansdale, that went into South Vietnam on June 1, 1954 . The mission was the first mission under Lansdale .
 Dulles supported Diem’s blocking of the 1956 elections because of his belief that Ho Chi Minh would win . Dulles also backed Diem because he believed that he would win the election .
 Dulles was appointed secretary of state by President Eisenhower in 1953 . Dulles, John Foster, was appointed Secretary of State of State by Eisenhower .
 In the spring of the following year, the French sought United States intervention in Vietnam to relieve their beleaguered garrison at Dien Bien Phu . The French sought U.S. intervention in the spring, the spring and spring of that year .
 Dulles opposed the use of U.S. air strikes in support of the French . Dulles viewed the Viet Minh as another instrument of Communist aggression .
 He called for a policy of “united action,” a plan for the formulation of a multinational coalition to guarantee the security of Southeast Asia . Instead, he called for the formation of a multilateral coalition .
 U.S. allies, particularly the British, were unwilling to support such a coalition . However, United States allies, including the UK, were willing to support the coalition .
 At the Geneva Conference of 1954, Dulles opposed a negotiated settlement and on his order the United States did not sign the Geneva Accords, which divided Vietnam and left the Communists in control of the north and a pro-Western government in the south .
 In a unilateral declaration, the United States declared that “it would view any renewal of aggression in violation of ... agreements with great concern and as seriously threatening international peace and security,” thereby providing the basis for subsequent U.S. involvement in Vietnam .
 He initially had doubts about Ngo Dinh Diem’s ability to lead South Vietnam, but became an enthusiastic supporter . He announced that military and economic aid would be sent to South Vietnam to help Diem .
 Dulles resigned in April 1959 and died in May 1959 . He was terminally ill with cancer .
 He initially earned the favor of Ngo Dinh Diem, who promoted him to major general . He was awarded the title of major general in Vietnam in 1966 .
 Diem became suspicious of Minh’s popularity, appointed him “Special Adviser,” and removed him from troop command . Over time, Diem was suspicious of the popularity of the Vietnamese leader .
 Minh was one of the key figures in the plot to overthrow Diem in November 1963 . He was reportedly the one who gave approval for Diem’s assassination .
 After taking control of the South Vietnamese government as head of the Military Revolutionary Council, Minh was deposed by a countercoup on January 30, 1964 . Minh took control of South Vietnam's government in 1964 .
 Exiled abroad until 1968, he was seen by some as the leader of a “third force” between President Nguyen Van Thieu and his followers and the Communists . Some saw him as a "third force" between Thieu's followers and Communists . He was seen as a
 He was a presidential candidate in the South Vietnamese election of 1966, but was disqualified as an exile . He was disqualified from the election as a result of being disqualified from South Vietnam .
 He ran again in 1971 but withdrew in protest, complaining that the U.S. was meddling in the election . In 1971, he ran again but withdrew from the presidential race .
 In April 1975, Minh again came to the fore as the one most likely able to negotiate with North Vietnamese army forces closing in on Saigon . Minh was seen as the most likely negotiating with the North Vietnamese Army closing in .
 President Thieu resigned in favor of Vice President Tran Van Huong in 1975 . Huong appointed Minh as the new president on April 28, 1975 . Minh was appointed by Huong when Huong became ill and sick .
 Minh surrendered Saigon to Communist forces on April 30, 1975 . Two days later, Minh gave up Saigon and surrendered to the Communist forces .
 For years after the war Minh was imprisoned in Communist reeducation camps, until he was released and released in 1983 . Minh immigrated to France in 1983, where he was imprisoned for years .
 In the last four years of his life, he lived in Pasadena, California, with his daughter . He lived with her in his last years .
 President Eisenhower appointed Elbridge Durbrow, a career foreign service officer, to be the U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam in 1957 .
 He clashed with the Ngo Dinh Diem regime, sharply criticizing corruption and nepotism in Diem’s government . He was critical of the former regime .
 He faulted Diem’s American advisers for not speaking out against his repressive tactics . At the same time, he believed the South Vietnamese people were supporting the Viet Cong .
 President Kennedy replaced Diem with Frederick Nolting in 1961 . Durbrow reluctantly backed Diem in the failed coup of 1960, but continued pressing him to build popular support .
 Eisenhower was born on October 14,1890, in Denison, Texas . Eisenhower was the U.S. president of the United States from 1953 to 1961 .
 He supported the French in their war with the Viet Minh with money, arms, and a small contingent of technical personnel . Seeking to contain communism, he backed the French with money and arms .
 He believed that if Vietnam fell to communism, other Asian nations might collapse in turn, according to his domino theory . He believed if Vietnam collapsed, other countries might also collapse . Vietnam was one of the last countries to fall to communism .
 Despite this, he decided not to intervene when the Viet Minh surrounded the French at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 . He decided to stay out of action .
 Lack of Allied support, especially from Great Britain, played a major role in this decision . Lack of congressional support, and the opposition of the U.S. Army chief of staff, General Matthew B Ridgway, also played a part in decision .
 After the conference, the administration dispatched economic and military aid to the government of South Vietnam and military advisers to the newly formed South Vietnamese armed forces . The administration took the lead in creating the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization as a bulwark against Communist expansion .
 Eisenhower administration provided $1 billion in aid to the Diem government . The Eisenhower administration was urging him to democratize his regime .
 After his presidency, he publicly supported the Vietnam policies of the Kennedy and Johnson administrations . But he became increasingly dissatisfied with Johnson’s inability to bring the war to a successful conclusion .
 Ellsberg was a strong proponent of the Johnson administration’s Vietnam policy . He toured Vietnam in 1965, a strong supporter of the policy .
 Ellsberg participated in a massive study of U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia commissioned by Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara in 1967 . Following his return to the RAND Corporation, he returned to work at RAND .
 The study convinced Ellsberg that the war was unjust . It was the result of several presidents’ unwillingness to bear responsibility for the loss of South Vietnam to the Communists . The study was published in 1972 .
 This helped transform him from a stalwart war supporter to an antiwar activist . This helped him become an anti-war activist, he says .
 In 1969, after urging immediate withdrawal from Vietnam in memos, position papers, and magazine articles, he used his top-secret clearance to obtain the Pentagon study and photocopied it . In 1969 he urged immediate withdrawal in Vietnam .
 The Nixon administration sought an injunction against the Times . The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the newspaper's right to publish the documents .
 Ellsberg was tried twice for theft of government property and espionage . But all charges were dropped because of evidence of government misconduct, he says .
 Nixon administration organized a clandestine unit, known as the "plumbers, to break into the office of Ellsberg’s former psychiatrist . Among other abuses, the Nixon administration had organized a . clandestine unit .
 The “plumbers’ later became involved in the ill-fated Watergate break-in . The ‘plumber’s role in Watergate broke out in the early 1970s .
 After the war ended, Ellsberg became active in the antinuclear movement . He was active in anti-nuclear movements .
 Fall was a critic of both French and U.S. policy in Vietnam . Fall authored seven well-regarded books about the French and American wars there . He became an expert on the war .
 Fall was killed by a Viet Cong booby trap along Highway 1 near Hue in 1967 . Fall died in Vietnam in 1967 after being hit by a roadside bomb .
 Felt recommended against sending U.S. troops to South Vietnam in 1961 . Felt, Admiral Harry Donald (19021992) Admiral, United States Navy; United States commander in chief, Pacific, 1958—64 .
 He changed his position and became a vocal supporter of intervention, predicting victory in three years . He now supports intervention in Syria .
 The first reports of the insurrection against President Ngo Dinh Diem occurred while Felt was on an official visit to Saigon in November 1963 . Felt visited Saigon on a visit to see Diem in 1963 .
 Felt retired and was replaced by Admiral Grant Sharp, Jr., Jr., in June 1964 . Felt was replaced as Admiral United States Grant Sharp Jr. was replaced in June 1963 .
 Ford was born on July 14, 1913, in Omaha, Nebraska . Ford was a congressman, vice president, president of the United States, 1974—77 . He was also a vice president .
 He was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1948 . He was House minority leader in 1965 . He criticized President Lyndon Johnson for not prosecuting the Vietnam War vigorously enough .
 Ford supported President Richard Nixon’s pursuit of detente with the Soviet Union, rapprochement with China, and Vietnamization of the Vietnam War . Ford supported Nixon's pursuit of . detente .
 Ford was appointed vice president by Richard Nixon when Spiro Agnew resigned from office in 1973 . Ford publicly defended the administration’s record on Vietnam .
 As president, he tried to bolster the sagging governments in South Vietnam and Cambodia . He also tried to shore up the economies of South Vietnam, Cambodia .
 Congress appropriated less than half of the $2 billion in aid for South Vietnam that Ford requested for fiscal year 1975 . Ford requested the aid for the Vietnam War in 1975 .
 When the Communists launched their final offensives in Vietnam and Cambodia, Ford asked for supplemental appropriations for South Vietnam’s defense . Ford requested supplemental appropriations to South Vietnam's defense in response to the threat .
 Congress, convinced that the extra funds would not make any difference, refused the request . Ford said that the decision gravely impaired the chances of survival for South Vietnam . Congress refused the additional funds .
 All remaining U.S. military and embassy personnel were ordered to evacuate from Saigon and Phnom Penh . Communist forces closed in on the two capital cities . President Nixon made two unsuccessful efforts to secure emergency military assistance .
 In May 1975, Ford responded with military action when Cambodia seized the U.S. merchant ship Mayagnez . Ford responded to the seizure of the ship .
 He ordered air strikes on Cambodian bases and a rescue mission that cost the lives of 41 Americans . The rescue mission was carried out even as the ship’s crew was being released . President Obama ordered the rescue mission .
 In 1976, the American public was disgusted with how the Vietnam War had ended, fed up with political scandals such as Watergate and Watergate . Jimmy Carter promised to restore morality to domestic and foreign policy in the wake of Watergate .
 Fulbright supported the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations’ containment policies and the U.S. presence in South Vietnam . Fulbright, James William Fulbright was a senator from the United States in Vietnam .
 A friend and political ally of President Johnson, he was instrumental in passage of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution . The resolution gave the president legal authority to expand and Americanize the war in Vietnam .
 President Obama shifted his position on the war, deciding intervention in Vietnam was not in America’s interest . Intervention in Vietnam threatened to weaken U.S. society, undermine relations with the Soviet Union, and might even precipitate a war with China .
 He became a major critic of Johnson’s policy in Vietnam . Calling for de-escalation of the war, he became a critic of the Johnson administration .
 He convened hearings in 1966 to give war critics a platform for their views . The hearings were held to give critics a voice in the war .
 In 1967 he published The Arrogance of Power, a book that offered a cogent liberal intellectual critique of the war that helped legitimize domestic opposition to the war . In 1967, he published the book, which helped legitimate domestic opposition against the Vietnam War .
 Fulbright continued his staunch opposition to U.S. policy in Vietnam . After Richard Nixon became president, Fulbright became a prominent critic of Vietnam policy . Fulbright died in 1966 .
 He opposed Nixon’s Vietnamization policy because he saw it as an attempt to avoid serious negotiations with North Vietnam . Nixon opposed Nixon's Vietnamization .
 He denounced the April 1970 Cambodian incursion and worked to enact the Cooper-Church amendment . He denounced April 1970 incursion in Cambodia .
 John Kenneth Galbraith was a key adviser to President John F Kennedy . He argued that South Vietnam lacked the strategic or economic importance to justify U.S. involvement .
 By 1960, Goldwater had emerged as the national leader of a growing conservative movement . Goldwater was a senator from 1953-65, 1969-87; 1964 Republican presidential candidate .
 Beginning in 1963, he became a vocal critic of the Johnson administration . He became a prominent critic of President Johnson .
 He condemned Johnson’s Great Society platform as an expensive and excessive expansion of government power . He challenged the restrained, advisory approach of U.S. policy in Vietnam .
 Johnson never actually advised using nuclear weapons against the North . The Johnson campaign was able to convey the impression that he had .
 His doctrinaire views and advocacy of escalation in Vietnam hurt him with voters, many of whom saw him as a trigger-happy extremist . He received 39 percent to Johnson’s 61 percent in 1964 voting .
 He remained a hawk on the Vietnam War, advising President Richard Nixon to carry the war to North Vietnam . He advised Nixon to continue the war in North Vietnam.
 He served in the Senate until 1987, playing a key role in the passage of the Goldwater-Nichols DOD Reorganization act of 1986 . He served until 1987 .
 He died on May 29,1998, at the age of 89 of complications from a stroke .
 Greene strongly supported John R Kennedy’s policy in Vietnam . He was the U.S. Marine Corps commandant, 1964—68 . Greene was the first Marine Corps commander in Vietnam, 1964 .
 In the autumn of 1964, he advocated escalation of the war, to include the bombing of North Vietnam and increased combat role for the U.S. Marines . In the fall of 1964 he advocated increased combat roles in Vietnam .
 Greene maintained optimistic view of U.S. prospects in Vietnam . By early 1966, he was advocating a major change in United States policy, shifting the focus from combat against enemy main forces to pacification .
 Ernest Gruening was an early critic of U.S. involvement in Vietnam . Gruening, a Democrat from Alaska, and Senator Wayne L Morse cast the only votes against the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in 1964 .
 Gruening subsequently became a vocal critic of the war on the Senate floor, in public appearances, and in the media . Gruening has since become a vocal voice in the Senate on the war .
 Beginning in May 1965, he voted against every military appropriations bill . He voted against all military appropriations bills .
 Alexander Haig served in Vietnam and was wounded in 1966 while commanding the 1st Battalion, 26th Infantry Regiment, 1st Infantry Division . He later received the Distinguished Service Cross after the Battle of Ap Gu .
 In 1969, Haig became military assistant to Henry Kissinger at the National Security Council . In 1970, he was promoted to Kissinger’s deputy . Haig was promoted in 1970 to be Kissinger's deputy .
 Nixon began sending Haig on missions to Vietnam to survey the situation there . Nixon sent Haig to Vietnam in order to assess the situation in Vietnam .
 Haig was one of the principal emissaries Nixon used to persuade Nguyen Van Thieu to sign the Paris Peace Agreement . In late 1972 and early 1973, Haig helped secure the agreement in Vietnam .
 Haldeman resigned as a result of the growing Watergate scandal . He had resigned from the White House as part of the Watergate scandal in 1972 . He was replaced by President Richard Nixon .
 Haig played a major role in the Nixon administration’s efforts to deal with the Watergate scandal . Haig was a key figure in the administration's efforts to find out what happened .
 After Nixon’s resignation in 1974, Haig served as supreme allied commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization from 1974 to 1978 . Haig is the current leader of NATO .
 He went to Vietnam in 1962 supportive of the basic aims of the U.S. effort there . He visited the country in 1962 and died in 1968 .
 He died in an automobile accident in Menlo Park, California, on April 23, 2007 .
 Paul Donald Harkins was commander of U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, 1962-64 . He was chief of staff of Eighth Army in Korea, where he also commanded two infantry divisions . Commissioned in the cavalry, during World War II Harkin served with Patton
 During the next two years he supervised the buildup of the U.S. support effort in Vietnam, continually providing optimistic and upbeat reports that encouraged Kennedy to believe victory was imminent .
 He countered any pressure from Ngo Dinh Diem to liberalize his regime . He severely disciplined subordinates who criticized Diem's policies .
 He worked well with U.S. ambassador Frederick Nolting, who was also a Diem supporter . But he soon clashed with Henry Cabot Lodge, who replaced him as ambassador, who clashed with Lodge .
 He opposed the plot that led to the overthrow and subsequent assassination of South Vietnamese president Ngo Dinh Diem . He opposed plotting that led the overthrow of the South Vietnamese leader .
 In July 1964, he was replaced by his deputy, General William C Westmoreland, and retired from active duty that year .
 William Averell Harriman played a key role in shaping U.S. policy in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War .
 In 1962, he was instrumental in negotiating the Geneva agreements that resulted in the neutrality of Laos . In 1962 he negotiated the Geneva agreement that ended the conflict in Laos .
 As the U.S. role in Vietnam expanded in the mid-1960s, Harriman opposed a purely military solution to the war . He believed that a permanent settlement could only be achieved only through political and diplomatic means .
 Harriman became increasingly critical of President Diem . In August 1963, he drafted a cable that would set in motion the U.S. decision not to stand in the way of the coup . The coup was carried out on November 1 by South Vietnamese military officers .
 In 1965, President Johnson appointed Harriman Ambassador at Large with the principal duty of handling Southeast Asian affairs . President Johnson made the appointment in 1965 .
 In 1966, Johnson dispatched him on a worldwide tour seeking support for U.S. Vietnam policy . Johnson was looking at the possibilities for a negotiated settlement of the war .
 When preliminary peace talks opened in May 1968, Harriman went to Paris as chief U.S. negotiator . He would hold a post until succeeded by Henry Cabot Lodge in January 1969 .
 Later that year, Harriman endorsed the October 15 Moratorium antiwar protest . Harrimans endorsed the Moratorium Moratorium .
 During the Nixon administration, Harriman pressed for a complete withdrawal of Americans from Vietnam on a fixed schedule . He pressed for the withdrawal of U.S. troops from Vietnam .
 In 1971, he urged Congress to use the power of the purse to end the war . He urged Congress in 1971 to use that power to end war .
 Mark Hatfield was a leading antiwar senator during the Vietnam War . Hatfield, Mark O. Hatfield served as a U.S. senator from 1967-97 . He was an anti-war senator .
 Hatfield co-sponsored with George McGovHilsman, Rogerjr. Hatfield's amendment to an arms appropriations bill that provided for a cutoff of funds for the Vietnam War after December 31, 1970 .
 Antiwar activist Tom Hayden went to North Vietnam in 1965 and 1967 with other antiwar activists . Hayden was a founder of Students for a Democratic Society .
 In 1968, he was arrested for helping lead the antiwar demonstrations at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago . He was one of the “Chicago Seven’s” charged, and later acquitted of, conspiracy .
 Hayden and his future wife, Jane Fonda, led the ‘Free the Army’ campaign . The campaign held meetings at sites near military installations to influence U.S. military personnel to question the war .
 Richard Helms served with the OSS during World War II and worked his way up through the CIA . Helms was the first career officer appointed director of central intelligence . He served in this position longer than any other man, except Allen Dulles .
 In 1966, during the Johnson administration, Helms was at the center of a debate over the appropriate level of U.S. bombing and the number of troops the United States should commit . Helms: "I'm not sure what I think about the Vietnam War, but I'm
 The bombing, he believed, had not worked, neither breaking the resolve of the North Vietnamese, nor disrupting their supply lines to the south . The bombing did not break their resolve, he said . He said .
 Later, Helms became involved in a dispute with the Pentagon over the North Vietnamese Army’s order of battle, which widened the existing rift between the CIA and the military . Helms and the Pentagon were involved in the dispute over the N.V. Army's orders of battle
 In the late stages of the war, Helms came under attack from critics protesting covert CIA operations in Southeast Asia .
 Nixon pressured Helms into involving the CIA in Watergate . Helms first agreed, but then disengaged the CIA from the cover-up . The director first agreed to involve the CIA but disengaged .
 Helms believed that Nixon’s personal use of the CIA made it vulnerable to congressional attack . Helms said that Nixon used the CIA to protect his own interests . Nixon's use of CIA made the CIA vulnerable to attack, Helms says .
 President Nixon dismissed Helms in November 1972 but subsequently appointed him United States ambassador to Iran . Helms served until 1977, when he was appointed as ambassador to the country .
 Seymour Hersh broke the story on the My Lai massacre in November 1969 . Hersh won the Pulitzer Prize for reporting on the massacre in Vietnam .
 His report was a major factor that led to a lengthy U.S. Army investigation of the incident and its cover-up . His report led to an Army investigation into the incident .
 Hilsman influenced United States counterinsurgency programs in Vietnam in the early 1960s . He argued for efforts to win the allegiance of the peasants while isolating the Viet Cong from the population through the Strategic Hamlet program .
 In late 1962, President Kennedy sent Hilsman and Michael Forrestal to Vietnam on a fact-finding mission . President Kennedy was in Vietnam in late 1962 when he sent them to Vietnam .
 The resulting report expressed reservations about U.S. policy in Vietnam, but concluded that it was essentially sound . The report was published by the U.N. State Department of Vietnam .
 Report questioned stability of the Ngo Dinh Diem regime . However, the report questioned the stability of Diem's regime .
 Following Diem’s repression of Buddhists in 1963, Hilsman recommended that Kennedy encourage a coup against Diem . The former president of South Vietnam, Vietnam's leader, was assassinated in 1989 .
 The cable also instructed Lodge to inform a group of South Vietnamese army generals that the U.S. would not stand in the way of a coup to remove Diem from office . The cable was sent to Lodge to tell them that the United States would not support a coup .
 In 1967, he criticized the Johnson administration’s escalation of the war . In his 1967 book, he wrote about the war in Vietnam .
 In November of the following year, he arrived in Canton, China, as Comintern agent . He was assigned to form a Marxist-Leninist revolutionary organization in French Indochina . In November, he died of a heart attack .
 He was arrested by the British police in Hong Kong in mid-1931, but was released after being held for a year and a half . He was held by British police for more than a year before his release .
 In 1940 he reestablished contact with the ICP in Vietnam . He went to China in 1938, and in 1940 he went back to Vietnam .
 Ho Chi Minh returned to Vietnam for the first time since 1911 . At the end of that year, having changed his name to Ho Chi-Minh, he returned to the country .
 This was a nationalist front organization under Communist leadership created to mobilize the citizenry . The group was created by the Communist Party in 1968 .
 Ho traveled to China in 1942 to seek help from the Chinese Nationalist government for operations against the Japanese . He was arrested by the Chinese as a Communist agent . Ho was arrested in 1942 and died in 1945 .
 The Viet Minh entered into an alliance with the American Office of Strategic Services . They provided intelligence about the Japanese in Indochina and helped recover downed U.S. pilots .
 After the Japanese surrender in 1945, the Viet Minh seized power in Hanoi during what became known as the August Revolution . After the war, the Vietnamese government took control of the country .
 Through clever political maneuvering, he gained almost total political power by the time the French returned to Vietnam in early 1946 .
 Ho attempted to work out a compromise position for Vietnam within the French Union . Instead of confronting French power, Ho traveled to Paris for that purpose in May 1946 .
 The French, determined to reimpose colonial rule over Vietnam, refused to compromise . The French were determined to impose colonial rule on Vietnam . They refused to accept compromise .
 During the fall of 1946, Ho sought to avoid hostilities, but differences between the Vietnamese and French could not be resolved . Ho sought the end of the conflict, but the conflict was never resolved .
 In December, fighting between the French and the Viet Minh broke out and the nine-year First Indochina War ensued . The war began in December, and ended in December .
 Waging guerrilla war against the French, Ho’s fortunes ebbed and flowed . Ho was one of the most successful statesmen in the world .
 France was able to cast the conflict in cold war terms, garnering United States materiel support in the process . The DRV was recognized by most Soviet bloc countries, and thus France gained the U.S. support .
 After years of bloody stalemate, France finally agreed to peace talks in Geneva in April 1954 . Unable to defeat the Viet Minh, France was unable to defeat them after years of bloodshed .
 A truce was signed on July 20, 1954, and the First Indochina War ended . The war was the first to end in Vietnam .
 The truce left Vietnam divided, and Laos and Cambodia became independent . Vietnam and Laos became independent from each other .
 In Ho’s own province a revolt broke out against these excesses in November 1956 . Ho was the prime minister of Ho's own province in 1956 .
 Ho's troops ruthlessly stamped out the revolt, and 6,000 peasants were killed or imprisoned . Ho’s troops brutally crushed the revolt . Ho was the prime minister of the Ho family .
 From 1956 to 1959, Ho Chi Minh continued to consolidate his power in the North . From 1956 until 1959, he continued to consolidate his power .
 He had organized some 37 armed companies in the South . He discouraged them from armed attacks on the South Vietnamese government . He believed that South Vietnam would collapse on its own .
 Expansion of Ho Chi Minh Trail began in May 1959 . In July aid was begun to the Pathet Lao guerrillas in Laos .
 In December 1960, the National Liberation Front was organized in the South . The front organization was formed in December 1960 . The Front Front was a front organization for African Americans .
 Ostensibly a nationalist coalition to oversee the Viet Cong, it took its orders directly from the North Vietnamese Politburo . Ostensibly an anti-Viet Cong coalition, it was formed by the Communist Party .
 Ho Chi Minh mobilized the Vietnam population and never wavered from his goal of reunifying North and South Vietnam under Communist rule . For the next 10 years, he mobilized the nation's population . The Vietnam population was mobilized by the Communist Party .
 Ho did not live to see his country reunited; he died on September 2, 1969, with final victory almost six years away . Ho died in 1969 .
 He remained radical until his death on April 12, 1989, from an apparent suicide . He remained a radical until he died in 1989 .
 President Johnson chose Humphrey as his vice presidential running mate in 1964 . Humphrey was chosen by President Johnson to be his running mate for 1964 .
 After the election, Humphrey irritated the president by arguing against a hard-line policy in Vietnam . He questioned the effectiveness of trying to bomb North Vietnam into negotiating .
 Johnson excluded Humphrey from foreign policy meetings for a year . Humphrey was angered by Johnson's treatment of him . Johnson excluded him from meetings for one year .
 President sent Humphrey on a tour of nine Asian nations, including South Vietnam, in February 1966 . In February 1966, Humphrey toured nine Asian countries, including Vietnam .
 After his return, Humphrey outdid other administration officials in his optimism about the Vietnam War . He became a vigorous advocate of the war and became a strong advocate of it .
 The Democrats associated the Democrats with violence and chaos in the eyes of the public . However, bitter disputes inside the convention hall and clashes between police and antiwar protesters outside the hall intensified riffs within the party .
 In 1970, Humphrey won the Senate seat vacated by Eugene McCarthy and was reelected in 1976 . Humphrey served until his death on January 13, 1978 .
 Huynh Phu So declared himself a holy man in 1939, and thereafter was regarded as a prophet by his followers . His followers, the Hoa Hao sect, located mainly in the villages of the lower Mekong River Delta .
 The sect based on internal faith and simple prayers rather than elaborate rituals in pagodas . Ideas that conflicted with the prevailing Confucian view .
 In the 1940s, the French, fearing that the sect would undermine French colonial control and encourage revolutionary activities, committed So to an insane asylum . The French feared that So would undermine colonial control .
 The sect split into three factions after the death of their leader, but they would eventually reunite in opposition to the Ngo Dinh Diem regime . They would eventually join the Binh Xuyen and Cao Dai armies in opposition .
 This coalition was defeated by Diem’s forces in 1955 . Hoa Hao sect was further crushed in 1956 when Ba Cut, one of its leaders, was captured .
 Some Hoa Hao remnants joined the National Liberation Front, but most took refuge near the Cambodian border . Most took refuge in Cambodia near the border with Cambodia .
 After Diem’s overthrow, many Hoa Hao rallied to the Saigon government . The Hoo Hao became a strongly pro-government force, providing a number of Civilian Irregular Defense Group companies .
 Hoa Hao forces would clash with President Nguyen Van Thieu’s forces when he refused to tolerate independent militia forces . President Thieu's government would not tolerate independent HoaHao militia forces in the 1970s .
 President Lyndon Johnson appointed him over 43 more senior generals to replace Earle Wheeler as army chief of staff . He was a survivor of the infamous Bataan Death March and three years’ imprisonment by the Japanese in World War II .
 The president sent Johnson to South Vietnam on a fact-finding trip in March 1965 to make an assessment of the situation . Johnson was sent to Vietnam in 1965 to assess the situation in Vietnam .
 General Johnson recommended sending the first U.S. combat troops . General Johnson came to regret his decision to do so .
 He commissioned a study later that year, Program for the Pacification and Long-term Development of South Vietnam . The study reinforced his misgivings about how the war was being conducted .
 In the long run, General Johnson had little influence on the course of the war in Vietnam . He was rarely consulted on operational matters and rarely consulted .
 During the height of the American buildup from June 1965 to June 1966, General Johnson saw the president privately only twice . General Johnson was President Johnson's secretary of state at the time of the war .
 Johnson was born August 27, 1908, at Stonewall, Texas . He graduated from Southwest Texas State Teachers College in 1930 . Johnson was a United States representative, 1937-49; United States senator, 1949—61; vice president, 1961—63; president of the United States
 A Democrat and strong supporter of the New Deal, he was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1937 . He served four terms there, serving four terms in the House .
 When World War II broke out, he joined the military without resigning from Congress . When he was in the military, he served in the armed forces without leaving Congress .
 He tried for the Democratic nomination in the presidential race of 1960, but was defeated by John F Kennedy, who chose Johnson as his vice presidentiai running mate .
 They won the election by a slight margin over Richard Nixon and Henry Cabot Lodge . Nixon and Lodge won by a narrow margin .
 In 1961, Kennedy sent Johnson to Vietnam to assure the government of Ngo Dinh Diem that the U.S. intended to protect South Vietnam from a Communist takeover . Kennedy's visit to Vietnam in 1961 was to assure Diem's government that the United States would protect Vietnam from
 Johnson promised Diem technical and financial aid and military supplies, hinting at the possibility of sending U.S. combat troops . Johnson promised financial and military aid and supplies .
 Johnson advised against the Kennedy administration endorsement of a military coup that toppled Diem’s government and resulted in his murder . Diem was killed in the coup that ended his government in 1968 .
 Upon Kennedy’s assassination on November 22, 1963, Johnson assumed the presidency . The president was assassinated in November 1963 .
 During the first severai months of his presidency, Johnson sought to continue the Southeast Asian policy that Kennedy had initiated, but he was more interested in domestic matters than foreign affairs .
 He was fearful a Communist victory in Vietnam would open the rest of Southeast Asia to Communist domination, embolden the Soviet Union and China, and give the Republicans a point of attack against his administration .
 Kennedy’s top foreign policy advisers were Robert McNamara, Dean Rusk, Maxwell Taylor, Walt Rostow, and McGeorge Bundy . He retained Kennedy‘s top policy advisers—Robert McNamara .
 They advocated the “flexible response’s doctrine, which called for the gradual application of force to halt Communist aggression wherever it appeared . They urged the new president to stand firm in Vietnam .
 As commander-in-chief of U.S. armed forces, Johnson was responsible for the stepby-step military escalation of the war . Johnson was ultimately responsible for some of the military escalation in Iraq .
 Plans to increase U.S. military aid began in late 1963, when it became apparent that the South Vietnamese government was losing ground in its battle against the Viet Cong .
 Johnson authorized Oplan 34A, a program of covert attacks against North Vietnam, and contingency planning for a bombing campaign against the North . Johnson also authorized the program .
 Johnson resisted implementation of the bombing campaign because he did not want it to affect his coming bid for reelection . Johnson was president of the United States in 1964 .
 The Gulf of Tonkin incident of August 2-4, 1964, led Johnson to authorize retaliatory bombing of North Vietnam . The incident led to Johnson's authorization of bombing of Vietnam .
 This allowed him to refute the charges that he was soft on communism in Vietnam . He was able to refute Goldwater's claims that he had been soft on Communism .
 In February 1965, Communist guerrillas attacked U.S. military installations at Pleiku and Qui Nhon . This prompted the president to initiate Operation Rolling Thunder, a protracted bombing campaign against North Vietnam . President Johnson received ciaiming that the VC were expanding their control of
 Two combat-ready U.S. Marine battalions were authorized to protect the air base at Danang . On April 1 he approved the use of United States ground troops for offensive operations .
 The gradual expansion of U.S. forces would continue until early 1968, when some 500,000 American military personnel were in Vietnam .
 Between 1965 and 1967, Johnson announced repeatedJy that he favored negotiations with the North Vietnamese . Several bombing halts were called, ostensibly to facilitate the start of talks .
 Hanoi's leaders did not respond to the president’s ‘peace feelers’ in part because they insisted upon an unconditional halt to the bombing of the North, but also because they felt they could wear down the U.S. will to carry on the war
 In late 1967, in an effort to shore up public support for the war, Johnson launched an information campaign claiming that the Communists were close to defeat . Johnson launched the information campaign in an attempt to shore-up public support .
 Tet Offensive of February 1968 severely strained the administration’s credibility . Some 90 South Vietnamese cities were attacked by both VC and NVA forces in the Tet Offensive . The Tet Offensive was a major event in Vietnam's history .
 The offensive, although a military disaster for the Communists, helped convince Johnson to deescalate the war . The offensive ended in a humiliating defeat .
 Following Tet, Joint Chiefs of Staff asked for more than 206,000 additional troops . About half of the troops were deployed to Vietnam and the rest to strengthen security in other parts of the world .
 Johnson appointed his new secretary of defense, Clark Clifford, as head of a task force to study the proposal . The task force will examine its impact on the budget, public opinion, and future prospects for negotiations with the North Vietnamese .
 Clifford’s report, based upon extensive discussion with senior military and civilian officials, called for mobilization of the Reserves but only to meet contingency situations . He said additional troops in Vietnam would have no positive effect and might even provoke a “domestic crisis” at home .
 On March 25, an informal group of “Wise Men’s” assembled at the State Department . Dean Acheson, George Ball, Matthew Ridgway, and Henry Cabot Lodge were among them .
 When Johnson asked them for their recommendations, the consensus was to deescalate, Johnson said . Johnson: "The consensus was that deescalating"
 Earlier that month, on March 12, Senator Eugene McCarthy had made a strong showing in the New Hampshire Democratic primary .
 Just four days later, Senator Robert Kennedy announced he too would run as an antiwar candidate . Robert Kennedy had announced he would run for President in 1968 .
 The Clifford report and the recommendations of the ‘wise men’ combined with the political developments within his own party to convince Johnson that drastic measures had to be taken .
 At the close of the broadcast, Johnson announced that he would not seek reelection . Johnson shocked the nation by announcing that he wouldn't seek reelection.
 Johnson returned to his ranch in Texas in 1969, where he began work on his memoirs . Johnson's memoirs will be released in April 2015 .
 He died on January 22, 1973, five days before the Paris Agreement on Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Vietnam was signed .
 David C. Jones was vice commander and director of operations of the Seventh Air Force in Vietnam in 1969 . Jones helped plan Operation Menu, the secret bombing of Cambodia, and kept it concealed from Congress .
 Promoted to full general in 1971, he left Vietnam to command U.S. Air Forces in Europe . He was promoted full general general in 1970 .
 He succeeded General George Brown as United States Air Force chief of staff in 1974 . He was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in 1978 . He succeeded George Brown in 1974 as Chief of Staff .
 U.S. attorney general, 1965—66; undersecretary of state, 1966—69 . As attorney general in 1965, Katzenbach supported war effort and promised to investigate those who protested .
 Later, however, he came to advocate that the government should resist further increases in U.S. troop levels . He came to oppose further troop increases .
 By 1968, he had concluded that the U.S. should withdraw from Vietnam . By 1968 he had decided that the United States should withdraw .
 In 1973, Katzenbach charged that President Nixon had exceeded his constitutional powers . He supported the War Powers Act, which was passed in 1973 .
 Edward Kennedy is the younger brother of President John F Kennedy . During his first six years in office, Kennedy focused primarily on domestic issues .
 He offered limited support to President Johnson’s Vietnam policy in January 1966 by not opposing the bombing of North Vietnam . In January 1966, he offered only limited support for the bombing .
 Kennedy visited South Vietnam in 1965 and in 1967 began to criticize America’s involvement in the war . Kennedy visited Vietnam in 1967 and criticized the war in Vietnam .
 Kennedy became openly outspoken against the war after the assassination of his brother, Robert, on June 4, 1968 . Kennedy became an outspoken critic of the Vietnam War after his brother's death .
 This plan included an end to the bombing of North Vietnam, negotiations with North Vietnam to remove all foreign troops from South Vietnam, formation of a government in South Vietnam that could survive a United States departure . A decrease in the United States military presence to begin in 1968 .
 Kennedy sponsored a similar plank at the 1968 Democratic convention, but the delegates voted against it . Along with Senators Eugene J McCarthy (D-Minnesota) and George McGovern , Kennedy sponsored similar plank .
 Kennedy continued to be a vocal opponent of President Nixon’s war policy . He denounced what he saw as the bloody futility of the battle for Ap Bia in 1969 .
 He gave a speech at the Boston protest of 100,000 people in the 1969 moratorium, criticizing Nixon’s apparent lack of a timetable for ending the war .
 In 1970, Kennedy sharply condemned the Cambodian incursion and demanded a withdrawal from Vietnam . Kennedy condemned the incursion in 1970 .
 By 1973 he fully opposed further U.S. involvement in the war in Vietnam . By 1973, he was opposed to further involvement in that war .
 Kennedy was born on May 29, 1917, in Brookline, Massachusetts . He was a United States representative, senator and president .
 Kennedy defeated Richard Nixon in 1960 to become the 35th president of the United States . Kennedy was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1946 and to the Senate in 1952 .
 As a senator, Kennedy had favored United States aid to the French in the Indochina War . Kennedy had called South Vietnam “the cornerstone of the Free World in Southeast Asia” and advocated support for South Vietnam .
 As president, Kennedy was concerned with containing the spread of communism . Kennedy was worried about containing the spreading of communism in the U.S.
 Kennedy turned to a policy of “flexible response,” which included an expanded military establishment with sufficient conventional, nuclear, and counterinsurgency forces to oppose any level of Communist aggression throughout the world .
 Eisenhower told Kennedy that the crisis point in Asia would be Laos, where an American-supported right wing regime under Phoumi Nosavan was fighting a coalition of neutralist and Laotian Communist forces . North Vietnam and the Soviet Union supported the coalition of forces supported by the U.
 A compromise settlement was reached in Geneva, which temporarily decreased the crisis in Laos . The crisis was temporarily decreased by a compromise settlement in Geneva .
 Kennedy’s attention then turned to Vietnam, where communist guerrillas were growing stronger and pressuring the Diem regime . Kennedy then turned his attention to the communist guerillas .
 Kennedy sent General Maxwell Taylor and National Security Council aide Walt Rostow to Vietnam on a two-week fact-finding mission in the fall of 1961 . Kennedy was alarmed by reports that the military situation in South Vietnam was deteriorating .
 The Taylor-Rostow report recommended a substantial increase in the United States involvement in Vietnam . The dispatch of some 8,000 U.S. ground troops to Vietnam to indicate America’s commitment to Diem and his governement .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff urged the dispatch of regular combat troops . The administration is considering sending combat troops to Afghanistan .
 Kennedy was concerned that a commitment of combat units might embroil the U.S. directly in the Vietnam war . He also sought to avoid the loss of South Vietnam—and the rest of Southeast Asia—to the Communists .
 He rejected the combat force option and opted for stepping up the level of military and economic aid . The number of advisers would surpass 16,000 by the time of his assassination in 1963 in 1963 .
 Special Forces troops trained and led indigenous troops in combat against the Viet Cong . As part of this increased military aid, Kennedy dispatched Special Forces to Vietnam .
 He also sent both helicopter squadrons and United States Air Force pilots, who also found themselves in combat .
 The administration maintained the pretense that these U.S. military personnel were in Vietnam only as advisers . The White House maintained that they were only advisers to Vietnam .
 Kennedy hoped that these measures would sufficiently bolster the Diem regime and preclude the need for regular U.S. combat troops . Kennedy hoped these measures were enough to secure the regime .
 By the end of 1962 the situation had worsened, as the Communist forces expanded and stepped up their insurgency campaign . With increased American support, Diem and his military forces appeared to be making some progress against the Viet Cong .
 Diem's continued refusal to institute reforms convinced the president and his top advisers that Diem was an impediment to U.S. policy objectives in Vietnam . On the political front, Diem’s continued refusal and suppression of opposing political and religious factions .
 This realization eventually led the Kennedy administration to give tacit approval to a coup that overthrew the Diem government on November 1, 1963 . The coup resulted in the death of Diem and his brother Nhu .
 Robert Francis Kennedy was attorney general after brother John won 1960 presidential election . He served as chief counsel of the Senate Rackets Committee in the 1950s . He was also a U.S. senator (DNewYork), 1964—68 .
 Kennedy initially supported President Johnson’s Vietnam War policy . He voted for an additional supplemental appropriations bill in May 1965 for the war .
 In February 1966, he broke with the administration, calling for a coalition government in Saigon . He called for a government of government in Vietnam, but later broke away .
 He became increasingly critical of the war effort following the president’s resumption of the bombing of North Vietnam . He continued his attacks on U.S. policy throughout 1967 .
 Eugene J McCarthy declared his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination in March 1968 . McCarthy's surprisingly strong showing in the March 1968 New Hampshire primary led him to the nomination .
 Throughout his campaign, Kennedy made the war the central issue, repeatedly advocating a negotiated settlement to the war . Kennedy was elected president in 1964 .
 Shortly after midnight on June 5, after defeating Senator McCarthy in the California primary, Kennedy was shot and died .
 Civil rights leader; Cochairman, Clergy and Laity Concerned About Vietnam, 1966—68 Born in Atlanta, Georgia, King graduated from Morehouse College .
 At the end of 1955, he became famous while leading a campaign to end racial segregation of the city buses in Montgomery, Alabama .
 In 1960, he helped organize the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee . He was a member of the SNAF, a student protest group .
 King broke with the Johnson administration over the Vietnam War in July 1965 in a controversial speech opposing escalation and calling for a negotiated settlement . King first broke with President Johnson over the war in 1965 over Vietnam War .
 President Johnson felt betrayed by King’s criticism of his Vietnam policy . President Johnson allied with King to gain passage of Civil Rights Act and Voting Rights Act of 1965 .
 By late 1966 he decided he could no longer remain silent and became co-chair of Clergy and Laity Concerned About Vietnam . King maintained a low profile for the next year .
 King based his opposition to the Vietnam War on his belief in nonviolence, his concern for the war’s cost and its effect on the Great Society, and the racial implications of the war . King claimed that a disproportionate number of young black men were fighting and dying in Vietnam .
 King’s criticism of the war became increasingly forceful throughout 1967 . King was speaking out against the Vietnam War in 1967 .
 He explicitly aligned the civil rights movement with the antiwar movement . He renewed his call for civil disobedience, and urged young men to seek conscientious objector status .
 Henry Kissinger served as a consultant to the Kennedy and Johnson administrations in the areas of arms control and foreign policy . He was named Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs by Richard Nixon in December 1968 . Kissinger was Secretary of State of State from 1973-77 .
 Nixon and Kissinger were determined to avoid a defeat in Vietnam . They both believed that a defeat would seriously cripple the U.S. on the world stage .
 Kissinger sent Kissinger to Paris, where the ongoing peace talks were making little progress . Kissinger was sent to Paris to meet with President Nixon . Nixon sent Kissinger back to Washington, D.C.
 Kissinger initially insisted on a mutual withdrawal of troops from South Vietnam, but the North Vietnamese steadfastly refused to agree to remove their troops . The North Vietnamese demanded the ouster of South Vietnamese president Nguyen Van Thieu .
 Kissinger supported Nixon’s Vietnamization policy and his escalations of the war, to include the secret bombing of Cambodia, the 1970 Cambodian incursion, and the 1971 South Vietnamese push into Laos .
 Kissinger and Nixon were pursuing an alternate route to a settlement of the Vietnam War as part of an overall strategy to exploit strained Sino-Soviet relations . With the fighting in Vietnam continuing and the public and private negotiations in Paris making little progress in Paris, Kissinger was pursuing an alternative route to
 Kissinger went to Beijing in July 1971 to lay the groundwork for a historic visit there by Nixon in February 1972 . Kissinger's visit was part of preparation for a visit by Nixon to China in 1972 . Nixon's visit to Beijing was a precursor to a Nixon visit to China .
 After his trip to Beijing the president traveled to Moscow in May 1972 for a summit with Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev . After his visit to Beijing in 1972, he traveled to Beijing to meet with the Soviet leader .
 Nixon made resolution of the Vietnam conflict a high priority . In discussions with North Vietnam’s two strongest allies, Nixon made it a priority . Nixon also made it clear that North Vietnam was a major ally of the U.S.
 The North Vietnamese launched a major conventional offensive that was stymied largely by U.S. bombing . The U.N. bombed North Vietnam in the spring, but it was largely unsuccessful .
 By October of 1972, Kissinger and Le Due Tho had worked out a peace agreement . Both sides had moderated their previous positions somewhat .
 President Nixon ordered Operation Linebacker II, intense bombing of the Hanoi-Haiphong area to pressure the north into resuming negotiations . Nixon’s backing led to a storm of condemnation from the press at home and abroad .
 In January, Kissinger and Le Due Tho settled on a peace agreement that was substantially the same as the October agreement . Kissinger and Tho agreed to a peace deal in October .
 Nixon reassured Thieu of continued U.S. support and advised him to approve the settlement . Nixon reassured him of continued United States support .
 Its terms included the withdrawal of United States military forces, a prisoner-of-war exchange, and a cease-fire .
 North Vietnam troops would be left in place and the Thieu government would remain in power . North Vietnamese troops would leave in place . North Vietnam would stay in power under Thieu's government .
 In June 1973, Kissinger met again with Le Due Tho concerning the observance of the January agreement, but to little avail, and the fighting in Vietnam continued . Kissinger: "In June 1973" was Kissinger's last stop in Vietnam .
 In September 1973, Kissinger was named secretary of state by President Nixon, a post he would hold until the end of the Ford administration . Kissinger would hold the post from 1973 to 1975 .
 The following month he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize with Le Due Tho, who refused to accept it . The next month he won the Peace Prize, but refused it .
 After service as an analyst for the CIA, he became a Middle East expert on the National Security Council . After service in the U.S. he became an expert in the Middle East .
 Named special assistant to President Johnson in March 1966, he was charged with revitalizing the effort against the insurgency in Vietnam . In March 1966 he was named special assistant .
 In May 1967, he went to Vietnam to assume the role of deputy to the commander of MACV, with the rank of ambassador . He went on to Vietnam in May 1967 to become ambassador .
 He initiated the controversial effort to eliminate the Viet Cong infrastructure, known as the Phoenix program . The Phoenix program is the name of a program to eliminate Viet Cong .
 Komer's optimistic reports in late 1967 proved somewhat embarrassing when the Communists launched the Tet Offensive early in 1968 . Although the CORDS effort achieved some success under Komer, his optimistic reports were somewhat embarrassing .
 President Johnson appointed Komer ambassador to Turkey in November 1968 . In November 1968, Komer was appointed Ambassador to Turkey by President Johnson .
 He worked for the Rand Corporation from 1969 to 1977 . While there he wrote a study that criticized the “over-militarization” of U.S. policy in Vietnam .
 Kong Le was an officer in the Royal Lao Army who provided the military forces for the bloodless coup of December 25, 1959, which brought the rightist Phoumi Nosavan to power . Kong Le led the neutralist military forces in Laos, 1960-62 .
 Kong Le led another coup in August 1960, overthrew a pro-United States regime and returned neutralist Prince Souvanna Phouma as head of the government . However, Kong Le later led a coup that overthrew the pro-US regime .
 Le’s coup alarmed U.S. policy makers, who feared the spread of communism in Southeast Asia . Le's coup alarmed United States policy makers who feared it would spread .
 By December, rightist Laotians supported by the United States Central Intelligence Agency defeated Kong Le’s troops and retook the capital city of Vientiane . The U.S. Central Intelligence agency supported the Laotian government .
 Kong Le and Souvanna Phouma retreated to the Plain of Jars, where they allied with the Pathet Lao and the People’s Army of Vietnam . They began to get aid from the Soviet Union .
 Souvanna Phouma returned to Vientiane as prime minister in 1962 . He was prime minister of the Second Coalition Government of 1962 .
 Soviet and PAVN support for Kong Le’s forces ceased, and by the end of 1962, he turned to the United States for aid .
 He resigned as commander of the neutralist armed forces in November 1966 and fled Laos in 1967 . He fled Laos after the coup in November 1967 .
 After the fall of Laos to the Pathet Lao in 1975, he tried to organize a resistance movement against the Communist government . He cooperated with the government of China in organizing guerrilla groups to be infiltrated into Laos .
 Victor H. Krulak was a U.S. Marine Corps general and commander of Fleet Marine Force, Pacific . He was a World War II and Korean War veteran . A 1934 Naval Academy graduate .
 As a major general, Krulak served as special assistant for counterinsurgency and special activities for the Joint Chiefs of Staff from February 1962 until January 1964 . He was a major major general from February 1961 to January 1964.
 As such he was responsible for the development of counterinsurgency doctrine and policy, especially as it applied to Vietnam . As such as the Vietnam War, he was a key figure in the US anti-war strategy .
 After a fact-finding mission to Vietnam, Krulak told the Kennedy administration that the war was winnable if the U.S. supported Ngo Dinh Diem . That recommendation contradicted that of State Department official Joseph Mendenhall, who accompanied him to Vietnam . Mend
 Krulak assumed command of Fleet Marine Force, Pacific, in March 1964 . He served in that post until his retirement in June 1968 . He was promoted to lieutenant general in 1966 .
 In this capacity, he was responsible for the readiness and organization of all marine units in the Pacific, including Vietnam . He was responsible in Vietnam for the Vietnam War .
 Krulak influenced marine strategy in South Vietnam’s northern provinces . Although not in the operational chain of command, he influenced military strategy in Vietnam . He influenced marine policy in the region .
 With his emphasis on pacification and focus on protecting the Vietnamese people, he was a strong dissenting voice against the search-and-destroy tactics and attrition strategy pursued by the operational commander, General Westmoreland .
 Krulak believed that the manpower necessary to secure the countryside was sapped by the requirements of a war of attrition . The manpower necessary for securing the countryside in the war was reduced by attrition, he said .
 In 1952, Melvin Laird was elected to the United States House of Representatives . In 1969, he was appointed secretary of defense by President Nixon . He served in the U.S. Navy in World War II .
 In that office, he pushed hard for the rapid withdrawal of U.S. ground forces, putting him at odds with National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger .
 He was instrumental in creating the ‘Vietnamization’ program . The program was designed to improve the capabilities of South Vietnam’s armed forces while withdrawing U.S. forces .
 Laird was initially concerned about the political reaction to the Cambodian incursion in the spring of 1970 . Laird backed the operation fully after President Nixon announced it, arguing that it was necessary for the safe withdrawal of American troops from Vietnam .
 Laird wielded considerable influence early in the Nixon administration . Due to disagreements with Kissinger and the president over Vietnam policy, he later was not always informed of White House decisions .
 He opposed the secret bombing of Cambodia and the 1972 “Christmas bombing of North Vietnam . He opposed secret bombings of Cambodia, the 1972 "Christmas bombing" of Vietnam .
 He resigned in March 1973, choosing not to serve in the second Nixon administration . He returned to private life and went on to work in private life .
 Lansdale helped organize the departure of nearly one million Catholic refugees from the north as the Communists took over . Lansdale organized the evacuation of nearly 1 million Catholics .
 Lansdale became an adviser to Prime Minister Ngo Dinh Diem in Vietnam . Lansdale spent two years in Vietnam as an advisor to Diem .
 Lansdale helped the South Vietnamese government set up plans for the integration of northern refugees into the South . Lansdale aided in the development of programs to train government administrators in provinces vacated by the Viet Minh .
 Lansdale supported Diem during the sect crisis of early 1955 . Lansdale became a close personal friend of Diem and supported him .
 From 1957 to 1963, Lansdale served as the deputy director of the Pentagon’s Office of Special Operations . Lansdale also served in the Army's Special Operations Division .
 From 1965 to 1968, Lansdale served as a special assistant to the United States ambassador in South Vietnam to work on pacification issues . Lansdale worked on pacifying issues in Vietnam during the Vietnam War .
 He tried to reorient the United States war effort toward counterinsurgency, but his influence on U.S. policy was limited . He left Vietnam in 1968 and ended his career with the government .
 He was a combat fighter pilot in the European theater of operations during World War II . He commanded a supply depot in Japan during the Korean War .
 Laveile was assigned as vice commanderin-chief of the Pacific Air Force in Honolulu in September 1970 . In that position he controlled United States Air Force strikes against North Vietnam . In September 1970 he was assigned to control U.S. strikes against Vietnam .
 General Lavelle said that the missions had been encouraged by both General Creighton Abrams (commander of Military Assistance Command, Vietnam) and Admiral Thomas Moorer (chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff), which Abrams denied . During his testimony, General LaVELle said he had
 He became a member of the Central Committee in Ho Chi Minh’s Democratic Republic of Vietnam in 1945 . He was one of the first members of the Communist Party Central Committee .
 In 1946, Le Due Tho was given responsibility for leading the resistance against the French in Nam Bo, the southern third of Vietnam . He was largely due to his backing, he was given the support of the Vietnamese government .
 In August 1956, he wrote “The Revolutionary Line in the South” arguing that Ngo Dinh Diem would have to be overthrown by revolution . The recommendation would not be adopted by the party until 1959, although it would be adopted until 1959 .
 Le Duan, Le Due Tho, and Pham Hung were close allies in Hanoi from the late 1950s onward . Le DueTho and Le Due, who had worked together in the South, were allies in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Le Duan played a major role in the decision of the 15th Plenum in 1959 to initiate guerrilla warfare in the South . He played a key role in leading the decision to start guerrilla warfare .
 Le Duan emerged as the leader of the government of North Vietnam when Ho Chi Minh’s health began failing in the mid-1960s . He succeeded Ho upon Ho’�s death in 1969 .
 He directed the war that saw final victory with the capture of Saigon in 1975 . Working with Pham Van Dong and Vo Nguyen Giap, he directed .
 During the Viet Minh war against France, he headed the resistance movement in southern Vietnam . During the Vietnam war, he led the Vietnamese resistance movement .
 Tho continued as a principal party leader during the war against the Americans . Elected to the Politburo in 1955, he continued to lead the Communist Party in the war .
 He supervised the war in the south from hidden jungle bases in the 1960s . He oversaw the fight in the South from secret jungle bases .
 When the Paris peace talks began in 1968, Le Due Tho was the principal negotiator for the Democratic Republic of Vietnam . He was a principal negotiator during the peace talks for the country .
 He personally conducted most of the secret negotiations with Henry Kissinger beginning in 1969 . He held firm to Hanoi’s insistence on combining political and military issues .
 He worked out the compromises with Kissinger that led to the tentative agreement of October 1972 . The deal was reached in October 1972, when Kissinger signed it .
 He declined the 1973 Nobel Peace Prize, which was to be shared with Kissinger, because, he said, the war in Vietnam continued . He said, "I'm not going to give it to Kissinger because I'm not sure what I think about it"
 Le Due Tho was sent south to convey the decision to military commanders there personally . When the Politburo decided in March 1975 to launch what was hoped would be the final offensive, he was sent .
 Working with Pham Hung and Van Tien Dung, he helped supervise the final North Vietnamese assault on Saigon in 1975 . He was involved in the final battle for Saigon from 1975 .
 He resigned his leadership position and retired in 1986, but remained very powerful until his death in 1990 . He resigned from his leadership post in 1986 .
 Curtis LeMay became an officer in the United States Army Air Corps in 1930 . LeMay was the U.S. Air Force chief of staff, 1961 —65 .
 As commander of the 20th Bomber Group, he presided over fire-bombing of Japanese cities in 1945 . He presided over the fire-bombsing of Japan cities .
 General LeMay believed that air power could achieve most military aims . He believed air power was the key to the success of the military .
 In late 1963, he advocated a massive bombing campaign against North Vietnam . He called for bombing of North Vietnam in Vietnam .
 Lodge was elected to the United States Senate in 1936 . He resigned his seat to serve with the U.S. Army in Europe during World War II . Lodge served as ambassador to South Vietnam, 1963-64 and 1965-67 .
 Lodge was appointed ambassador to the United Nations in 1953 by President Eisenhower . Lodge was defeated for reelection in 1952 by John F Kennedy .
 He ran unsuccessfully as Richard M Nixon’s vice presidential candidate in 1960 . He was defeated once again by Kennedy in the presidential election .
 He arrived in Saigon on August 22, in the midst of a crisis precipitated by President Ngo Dinh Diem’s repression of the Buddhists . President Diem's repression of Buddhists led to the death of many Buddhists in Vietnam .
 A week after his arrival, Lodge cabled Washington expressing his opinion that the war could not be won with Diem in power . Lodge wrote Washington that Diem could not win the war with him .
 On November 1, 1963, the generals launched their coup, ousting and killing Diem and his brother Nhu . Diem's brother was killed in the coup .
 Lodge made an attempt to win the Republican nomination for president in 1964, but failed . Lodge resigned his post in May 1964, and made a bid for the presidency . Lodge was a Republican presidential candidate in 1964 .
 He revitalized the pacification program, hoping to create popular support for the South Vietnamese government in the countryside . The program is based on a pacification effort in the South Vietnam countryside .
 Lodge was a member of the ‘Wise Men’ who met with President Johnson to assess the course of the war following the Tet Offensive . Lodge recommended an end to searchand-destroy operations in South Vietnam and suggested that United States troops be used as a shield to protect the
 In January 1969, President Nixon appointed Lodge chief negotiator to the Paris peace conference . Lodge was named chief negotiator at the peace conference in Paris .
 Frustrated by North Vietnamese intransigence, he asked to be relieved in October 1969 . He was relieved by the North Vietnamese in October .
 Lodge became the president’s special envoy to the Vatican in July 1970 . Lodge held the post until 1977, when he was in charge .
 Lon Nol was prime minister of Cambodia, 7 966—67, 1970—72; president of Khmer Republic and supreme commander of armed forces 1972—75 . Born in Prey Veng Province in Cambodia, he was educated in Saigon .
 Lon Nol became chief of the Cambodian National Police in 1950 and chief of staff of the Cambodiaian armed forces in August 1955 . He was chief of police in 1950, chief of national police in 1952 and of army in 1955 .
 In 1966, he became prime minister, but Sihanouk became distrustful of him and removed him from control of the army . In 1966 he was prime minister but was removed from army control .
 He was prime minister again in August 1969 . After going to France for medical treatment, he returned, becoming minister of defense in May 1968 .
 Lon Nol and Deputy Prime Minister Prince Sisowath Sirik Matak took over the government in a bloodless coup in March 1970 . In March 1970, while Sihanouk was away from Cambodia, the government was overthrown in a coup . The coup was a blood
 Lon Nol had a stroke in early 1971 and went to the U.S. for treatment . Nol was hospitalized in the United States for treatment in 1971 .
 Upon his return, he resigned his positions as prime minister, defense minister, and army chief of staff, but took the new title of marshal . He resigned from his post as defense minister but took new title as marshal of the country .
 His poorly led forces suffered a string of defeats by the Khmer Rouge and the North Vietnamese Army, and popular discontent against his regime mounted . His poorly-led forces were defeated by the . Khmer . Rouge and North Vietnam Army .
 On March 10, 1973, he became president of a newly designated Khmer Republic . He was the first Khmer president of the country .
 He proved to be an inept leader, and Cambodia fell into violence and social chaos . Cambodia was ruled by the Khmer Rouge in the early 1950s .
 On April 1, 1975, he fled to Indonesia as the Khmer Rouge were about to overrun Phnom Penh . He fled to the island nation in 1975 . He was one of the first to flee to Indonesia to escape the Khmers Rouge .
 Mansfield was an early supporter of Ngo Dinh Diem and of the U.S. commitment to South Vietnam . After several visits to Vietnam, he became disillusioned with the war effort . He concluded that the South Vietnamese government enjoyed little popular support .
 In 1965, he counseled President Johnson against sending ground troops to Vietnam . He urged him to pursue peace negotiations rather than escalate the war . His advice was disregarded .
 Mansfield was one of the leading Democratic critics of the Nixon administration's Vietnam policy . Mansfield: Nixon's Vietnam war policy was a mistake .
 Mansfield supported the Cooper-Church and McGovern-Hatfield amendments in 1970 . Mansfield called for a cease-fire in 1969 and 1970 .
 The following year he introduced his own end-the-war amendment, which required the withdrawal of U.S. military forces within nine months after the bill’s passage, subject to the release of all American prisoners of war .
 Mansfield decided to retire from the Senate following the 1976 election . Mansfield was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1976 .
 President Nixon appointed him the last U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam in 1973 . Martin was a longtime diplomat and protege of Averell Harriman . He was appointed ambassador to Thailand and Italy .
 Martin tried to assure President Nguyen Van Thieu of continued U.S. support, while also lobbying Congress to provide that support . Martin was in Saigon after the Paris Peace Accords .
 His optimistic reports to Washington about the situation in Saigon delayed recognition that the war was lost . His encouragement of Thieu and his optimistic reports delayed recognition of the war's end .
 To avoid creating panic during North Vietnam’s Spring Offensive of April 1975, Martin declined to implement contingency plans for an orderly departure from Saigon . Martin chose to leave Saigon during the Spring Offensive .
 The hasty departure also left behind many South Vietnamese who were closely associated with the Americans and who fell victim to the North Vietnamese . Many of the Americans who were close to the U.S. were killed by the North .
 He bitterly blamed the North Vietnamese victory on Congress’ termination of military aid to South Vietnam . Congress terminated the aid to Vietnam in 1973 .
 Martin served as special assistant to Secretary of State Henry Kissinger until his retirement in 1977 . Martin was Henry Kissinger's special assistant until he retired in 1977.
 Admiral John McCain was the first admiral’s son to become a full admiral himself . He was a highly decorated submarine commander in World War II . McCain was also a decorated U.S. Navy sub .
 He held important navy staff posts, including that of top congressional lobbyist . He commanded amphibious landings in Dominican Republic in 1968-72 .
 McCain succeeded Admiral Ulysses S Grant Sharp as commander-in-chief Pacific on July 31,1968 . McCain succeeded Grant Sharp in the Pacific as commander of the Pacific .
 He long advocated mining Haiphong harbor, which was approved by Nixon in 1972 . President Nixon approved it in May 1972 .
 McCain also called for increased bombing of Hanoi even though his son was held prisoner there . McCain's son, Lieutenant Commander John S McCain III, was a U.S. Navy aviator .
 Eugene McCarthy won election to the United States House of Representatives in 1948 and to the Senate in 1958 . McCarthy was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1959 and 1971 . He was also a candidate for president in 1968 .
 As a congressman, he criticized cold war anticommunist hysteria . He helped to found the liberal Democratic Study Group . He also criticized the Cold War cold war .
 As a senator, he was not an early dissenter, having voted for the Tonkin Gulf Resolution in August 1964 . He avoided any public criticism of President Johnson’s war policy until January 1966 .
 Senator calls for continuation of the suspension of air strikes against North Vietnam begun in December . At that time, he joined 14 other senators in sending a letter to the president calling for a continuation .
 He spoke often against the war, questioning the morality and constitutionality of the war . He spoke out against the morality of the conflict .
 McCarthy announced in 1967 that he was running for the Democratic presidential nomination to further the campaign for a negotiated settlement of the war . In 1967, after persistent urging by antiwar liberals, McCarthy announced that he would run for president in 1968 .
 McCarthy won 42 percent of the vote to Johnson’s 48 percent . McCarthy won the New Hampshire Democratic primary in New Hampshire .
 McCarthy’s moral victory may have influenced President Johnson's decision not to seek reelection . Senator Robert Kennedy's announcement that he would also contend for the Democratic nomination may also influence President Johnson . President Johnson decided not to run for reelection .
 McCarthy’s campaign, however, was soon overshadowed by those of Kennedy and Humphrey . McCarthy's campaign was overshadowed by that of Humphrey and Kennedy .
 McCarthy was defeated by Humphrey at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago in August 1968 . The convention minority rejected McCarthy’s proposal for a bombing halt and negotiations to establish a coalition government in South Vietnam .
 He refused to campaign for the Democratic ticket and offered only grudging endorsement in late October . The former governor refused to endorse the Democratic candidate .
 McCarthy unexpectedly resigned from the Foreign Relations Committee in 1969 . McCarthy retired from the Senate in 1970 . McCarthy resigned from his post as a senator in the 1970s .
 George S. McGovern was elected to the United States House of Representatives in 1956 . In 1962 he became South Dakota’s first Democratic senator in 26 years . A decorated bomber pilot during World War II, McGovern served as a bomber pilot . In 1972 he was a presidential candidate
 He first criticized U.S. involvement in September 1963 . He voted for the Tonkin Gulf Resolution the following August . The resolution was partly in hope of derailing Barry Goldwater’s presidential campaign .
 He began criticizing U.S. participation in what he believed to be a Vietnamese civil war . However, he soon began criticizing United States participation in the war .
 In 1965, he proposed a negotiated solution, leading to the withdrawal of U.S. troops and the neutralization of Vietnam protected by a UN presence . In January 1965, the United States proposed a gradual withdrawal of troops .
 After the invasion of Cambodia by U.S. and South Vietnamese troops in April 1970, McGovern voted for the Cooper-Church amendment to cut off funds for United States operations in Cambodia . The amendment was passed in 1970 .
 Later that year, Hatfield introduced with Senator Mark Hatfield an “end-the-war” amendment to a military appropriations bill that would have legislated withdrawal of all U.S. combat troops from Southeast Asia by the end of 1971 .
 In 1974, he won reelection to the Senate, but his radical reputation led to his defeat . In 1980, he was defeated in the conservative electoral sweep of the 1980s .
 In 1984, McGovern made an unsuccessful bid for the Democratic presidential nomination . McGovern ran for president in 1984 .
 During World War II, he set up a statistical control system for the United States Army Air Corps . He rose to the rank of lieutenant colonel before returning to civilian life in 1946 .
 He joined Ford Motor Company after the war and in 1960 was named its president . Together with other Air Corps statistical control experts who came to be known as the “whiz kids,” he joined Ford .
 In 1961, McNamara supported the recommendations of Maxwell Taylor and Walt Rostow, who advocated that the U.S. commit all the necessary resources to prevent the fall of South Vietnam to the Communists .
 He promoted this position throughout President Kennedy’s administration . He assumed greater dayby-day responsibility for conducting the war .
 In February 1965, McNamara approved retaliatory air strikes against U.S. bases in Vietnam . The first contingent of 3,500 marines was sent to defend the American base at Danang .
 McNamara approved the general’s request that 185,000 troops be sent to Vietnam by the end of the year . After meeting with Westmoreland in July, McNamara agreed to the request . He approved the request for the troops to be sent by the general .
 McNamara also supported a call-up of the Reserves and a tax increase to pay for the war . McNamara was also opposed to a tax hike .
 By late 1965, McNamara had begun to have growing doubts about the situation in Vietnam and whether a military solution was possible . McNamara, though publicly optimistic, had growing doubts .
 Communist victory had been prevented, but American casualties were high . Secretary was pessimistic about chances of bringing an end to the conflict in the near future .
 McNamara pleased with the pace of reform within the government of South Vietnam . McNamara was not pleased with pace of reforms in Vietnam .
 By 1967 he had become openly skeptical about the effectiveness of bombing the North to cut down the infiltration of men and materiel to the South .
 McNamara became increasingly interested in finding a way to end the conflict through a negotiated settlement . McNamara was concerned about the military conduct of the war .
 In the summer of 1967 he helped draff the San Antonio Formula, a peace proposal asking the North Vietnamese only to begin productive discussion in exchange for an end to U.S. bombing .
 A month later McNamara submitted a memorandum to Johnson recommending that the U.S. lower its political goals, freeze its troop levels, cease bombing of the North, and turn over major responsibility for the ground war to the South .
 Johnson rejected the proposals outright and lost confidence in his secretary of defense, deciding to replace him . Johnson rejected these proposals outright .
 McNamara accepted Johnson’s offer to resign and left the Pentagon in 1968 to become the head of the World Bank . Increasingly at odds with the president, McNamara became increasingly at odds .
 John T. McNaughton influenced Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara’s Vietnam policy . John T was assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs, 1964-67 .
 In 1964, McNaughton advocated increased U.S. military involvement in Vietnam . He endorsed bombing of North Vietnam . In 1964 he advocated increased United States involvement .
 In 1964 and 1965, he drafted many of the memoranda to McNamara and President Johnson . He argued strongly in favor of committing substantial U.S. ground forces .
 He was a major architect of the strategy of limited air war, which resulted in the 1965 Rolling Thunder bombing campaign . He was the architect of a strategy that resulted in a limited bombing campaign in 1965 .
 By late 1966, McNaughton was skeptical that the U.S. could prevail in South Vietnam . He believed that the United States was fighting primarily to avoid defeat and humiliation . The U.N. was fighting to avoid humiliation and defeat .
 He revised his earlier position that a Communist Vietnam would threaten U.S. interests in Asia . The domino theory, he now believed, did not apply to the Vietnam situation, and the loss of Vietnam would therefore be of no grave consequence for the United States .
 McNaughton’s change of view influenced McNamara who, in turn, resisted further troop requests and called for disengagement . President Johnson forced McNamara out of the Defense Department .
 McNaughton, his wife, and one of his sons, were killed in a plane crash in July 1967 . He and his wife died in the crash in 1967 .
 He was in command during the March 16, 1968, action that later became known as the My Lai massacre . The massacre was the first known massacre in Vietnam .
 Medina, defended by attorney F Lee Bailey, was acquitted in a United States Army court-martial in 1971 . Medina was acquitted as a result of flawed instructions by the military judge . Medina's trial was held in the U.S. Army in New York City .
 President Kennedy sent Mendenhall, who had been counselor for public affairs at the U.S. embassy in Saigon, and General Victor Krulak to Vietnam on a four-day investigative trip in September 1963 . President Kennedy was president of the United States in 1963 .
 Krulak concluded that South Vietnam was winning the war . Mendenhall, the director of the State Department’s Far East Planning Office, reported that the Diem government could not win the war, but Krulaks concluded .
 These conflicting reports astonished Kennedy and reflected the split over Vietnam policy among the president’s advisers . The conflicting reports shocked Kennedy, reflecting the split in Vietnam policy .
 Mendes-France promised to end France’s involvement in Indochina within 30 days or resign or quit . Mendes France was prime minister of 1954-55 . Mende-France was elected premier June 17,1954 .
 He met his deadline by helping secure a settlement at the Geneva Conference . He helped secure a deal with the world's largest powers powers .
 Last-minute negotiations between Mendes-France, Pham Van Dong, Zhou Enlai, and Vyacheslav Molotov broke the conference deadlock . The latter two abandoned Communist unity with the Viet Minh to pursue their respective geopolitical goals .
 Chou and Molotov pressured Pham Van Dong to retreat from the strong positions won by the Viet Minh on the battlefield and accept partition and late elections . The two men pressured the Vietnamese to accept partition, partition and later elections .
 Mendes-France extricated France militarily from a lost war and won much for France by negotiation, while denying the Viet Minh the total victory they had won on the battlefield . Mendes France-Viet Minh was the first French victory in a war that saw the
 General Momyer was assigned as commander of the Seventh Air Force in Vietnam in 1966 . He was concurrently deputy commander of United States Military Assistance Command Vietnam in July 1966 . A highly decorated World War II pilot, he was a highly decorated WWII pilot .
 He was responsible for Operation Rolling Thunder, the prolonged bombing campaign against North Vietnam, and the massive air effort in South Vietnam . He was also responsible for the massive bombing campaign in Vietnam .
 A vocal advocate for air power, Momyer believed that it could have done more if restraints had been lifted . A vocal air power advocate, he believed that the U.S. Air Force could have used more power .
 He commanded the Tactical Air Command until he retired from active duty on October 1, 1973 .
 On October 13, 1962, Moorer was appointed commander in chief of the Seventh Fleet in the Pacific . Moorer is credited with saving the lives of his wife and children .
 On June 26, 1964, he was named commander in chief of the Pacific Fleet . He was the first commander in command of the world's largest fleet .
 Moorer strongly advocated using naval and air power to dissuade North Vietnam from its support of insurgents in South Vietnam and Laos . Moorer also advocated using air and naval power to stop North Vietnam supporting insurgents .
 In August 1964, he helped persuade Washington to launch retaliatory air strikes against North Vietnam . The Gulf of Tonkin incident precipitated direct U.S. combat involvement in the Vietnam War .
 In August 1967, President Johnson appointed him chief of naval operations . In July 1970 he was appointed chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 Admiral Moorer played a major role in withdrawing U.S. forces from Vietnam and in the ‘Vietnamization’ of the war . He played a key role in withdrawal from Vietnam . He was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff of the Armed Forces .
 He convinced President Nixon to resume the bombing of North Vietnam and resume the mining of Haiphong Harbor . He also coordinated U.S. military responses to the 1972 North Vietnamese Army Easter Offensive .
 He directed the intensified bombing of Hanoi in late 1972, which led to the Paris Peace Accords in 1973 . The intensified bombing led to Paris peace talks .
 Admiral Moorer retired from active duty in July 1974 . In July 1974, his tour as chairman complete, he retired in July .
 Until his death in 2004, he remained critical of U.S. conduct of the war . He maintained that the United States should have invaded North Vietnam . He died in 2004 .
 Wayne Morse was an early, outspoken opponent of U.S. participation in the Vietnam War . Morse was a former Republican .
 He and Senator Ernest Gruening cast the only votes against the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in 1964 . He argued that the resolution violated the Constitution .
 Morse’s defeat for reelection in 1968 led to his defeat in 1968 . Morse served as a Democrat in Oregon . He was elected to Congress in 1964 .
 Henri Navarre was French commander in chief of French forces in Indochina, 1953-54 . A career soldier, he shared colonial background of his post-World War II peers, with service in Syria and French Morocco .
 He also distinguished himself as a Resistance leader from 1943 to 1945 . He earned a promotion to brigadier general .
 Navarre was named to replace Raoul Salan as commander in chief of French forces in Vietnam in 1953 . Navarre replaced Salan in 1953, replacing him as the French commander in Vietnam .
 He retired from the army in 1956 and the same years published Agonie de la’Indochine, a book in which he blamed the defeat on the French political system .
 Ngo Dinh Diem was prime minister and president of South Vietnam, 1954-63 . Born in Hue to a family converted to Catholicism as early as the 17th century . His grandparents had been poor peasants and fishermen in Quang Binh province .
 At the time of his birth, Ngo Dinh Kha had become a high mandarin at court, thanks to the French colonial conquest that had helped Christian Vietnamese climb quickly up the ladder of success .
 Diem attended Le Lyceum Pellerin, a Catholic secondary school in Hue . Third in a family of eight children, Diem was born in Hue, Hue . Diem is the third child of his eight children .
 After graduation, Diem enrolled in the French school of administration, College Hau Bo .
 Diem became minister of the interior under Emperor Bao Dai in 1933, but resigned to protest French colonial rule . Diem resigned from the post in 1933 to protest colonial rule of China .
 Diem’s anticommunist and anti-French attitude thereafter made him appear as a credible nationalist figure to many in Vietnam and in the West . Diem was a leader of Vietnam's anti-communist movement in the 1960s .
 His nationalist credentials had been tarnished by his willingness to work with the Japanese . In the eyes of others, however, he had worked with Japan .
 Diem's nationalist stature was reestablished when he refused an offer of a high position in Ho Chi Minh’s government in late 1945 . He regarded the Viet Minh as ultimately responsible for the assassination of his brother Ngo Dinh Khoi .
 During a stay at a Catholic seminary in New Jersey, he met many American religious and political leaders, including Francis Cardinal Spellman and Senators John F Kennedy and Mike Mansfield . During a visit to the seminary, he also met many religious, political leaders .
 Bishop Ngo Dinh Thuc, Diem’s older brother, ran the Catholic Church . The church was composed largely of northern refugees who gave the regime its only appearance of mass support . Diem's older brother ran the church .
 The majority of high officials in the government were members of the church . In a country that was more than 90 percent non-Catholic, the majority of officials were church members .
 Membership in the party was a prerequisite for advancement to higher posts in the administration and military . Membership was a requirement for advancement in the military and administration .
 Nhu and his wife exercised enormous influence over Diem and power over the government and the country . Nhu's influence was so great that he was able to influence Diem's government .
 In an effort to consolidate power and stabilize the regime, Diem mounted a repressive campaign against all potential opposition in the urban area and the countryside . He mounted a merciless pacification program against the countryside, according to a report .
 As part of pacification, Diem instituted a land program that in effect allowed landlords to reclaim lands the revolution had already parceled out to peasants . Landlords were able to collect land rents for as many years back as the landlords could claim .
 With the help of U.S. and British experts, in 1959 Diem began a wholesale resettlement program that forced the resident population into so-called agrovilles . The program was an effort to weed out Communists and control the population .
 North Vietnam approved the shift to armed struggle in the South after the insurrection of January 1960 in Ben Tre . The insurrection resulted in the takeover of nearly the entire province by former Viet Minh cadres and caused a chain reaction .
 Some 20 organizations opposed to the United States and the Diem regime merged with former southern Viet Minh revolutionaries into the National Liberation Lront . From then on the NLL dealt the regime repeated military and pacification setbacks . The urban opposition created such turmoil and instability that the U.S
 Vietnamese troops killed nine Buddhist protesters in Hue on May 8, 1963 . Tensions between Diem and the U.S. reached a crisis in Vietnam .
 By mid-June the United States threatened to break with Diem over the issue of Buddhist repression . The U.S. threatened to end its support for Diem's government .
 In October 1963, the U.S. ambassador, Henry Cabot Lodge, secretly informed a group of South Vietnamese military officers plotting a coup against Diem . The United States government would not oppose a change in leadership, Lodge said .
 On November 1-2, 1963, Diem and his brother were ousted and murdered, and Duong Van Minh became leader of South Vietnam . Diem's brother was killed and Diem was ousted and killed .
 Ngo Dinh Khoi became governor of Annam, the central provinces of Vietnam, in 1933 . Khoi was elder brother of Ngo Diem .
 During the early 1940s, Khoi reportedly had personal disagreements with Pham Quynh, a famous scholar and high mandarin, and retired from office in 1943 .
 In August 1945, the Communists assassinated Khoi as part of their campaign to eliminate all potential rivals . Khoi was assassinated by the Communists in a bid to eliminate any potential rival .
 With such information Diem and Nhu were able to thwart all attempts to remove them from power . The information was enough to thwart attempts to oust them, says Nhu .
 Calls for Diem to get rid of Nhu intensified after Nhu sent his Special Forces into Buddhist pagodas on August 21, 1963 . Nhu's Special Forces sent his forces into Buddhist Pagodas .
 United States officials repeatedly told Diem that Nhu and his wife had to be removed, but he refused . Diem refused to remove them from his country .
 Nhu’s brutal suppression of Buddhist demonstrations against the government set in motion a sequence of events that climaxed in a military coup that took place on November 1 . Diem and Nhu were murdered on November 2 .
 Ngo Dinh Nhu was born Tran Le Xuan in 1924 in Hanoi to a wealthy family that was active in the French colonial government . She converted from Buddhism to Catholicism in 1943 and converted from Buddhist to Catholicism . She was married to the brother of the late Ngo
 Madame Nhu acted as surrogate first lady and official hostess for her bachelor brotherin-law from 1955 to 1963 . When Diem became president, she acted as unofficial first lady .
 She organized and headed an anti-Communist paramilitary organization, the Vietnamese Women’s Solidarity Movement . She used it to lobby the government and promote legislation outlawing divorce, dancing, prostitution, and other activities .
 She was traveling abroad when President Diem and his husband were assassinated on November 2, 1963 . She eventually went into exile in Rome .
 Ngo Dinh Thuc Roman Catholic archbishop of Hue . Eldest brother of Diem, Thuc exercised considerable influence in his brother’s regime .
 An ardent anti-Communist and nationalist priest, Thuc served as the liaison to South Vietnam’s 1.1 million Catholics . Thuc was an ardent opponent of the Communist Party and anti-communist .
 Diem lobbied for Thuc’s appointment as archbishop of Saigon, but the Vatican refused . The Vatican refused because it would appear as a public endorsement by the Vatican of Diem's government . Thuc's appointment would have been seen as an endorsement by Diem�
 In 1961, Thuc became archbishop of Hue, where in 1963 he intervened to forbid display of the Buddhist flag during celebrations of Buddha’s birthday, which subsequently resulted in demonstrations and a chain of events that culminated with the November 1, 1963, coup that overthrew Diem
 Thuc was in Rome at the time of the coup; he lived in exile for the rest of his life . He was in exile in Rome for the duration of his exile .
 He was later excommunicated from the church twice for investing priests without the Vatican’s permission . He was twice forgiven for his actions, but was ex-communicated twice .
 Ngo Quang Truong was born in Kien Hoa Province in the Mekong Delta . Truong received his commission in the South Vietnamese Army in 1954 . He is a general general in the Vietnamese Army .
 He was commander of the ARVN 1st Division in June 1966 . He served with distinction in Vietnam .
 He and his troops played a major role in the bitter fighting in Hue during the 1968 Tet Offensive . Widely regarded as one of the most competent commanders in the ARVN .
 In August 1970, Truong was promoted and assumed command of IV Corps in the Delta . Truong continued to perform admirably in the Army .
 In May 1972, after Quang Tri in the north fell to the invading North Vietnamese Army, he was sent to Hue to replace General Hoang Xuan Lam as commander of I Corps . He was sent back to Hue in May 1972 to replace Lam as I Corps commander .
 Truong planned and led the counterattack that regained lost territory and saved the ARVN’s reputation . Truong was the leader of the anti-NATO forces in Vietnam in the early 1980s .
 After the cease-fire in 1973, he remained in command until the Communist victory of 1975 . He was in charge until the end of the war .
 With the fall of South Vietnam, Truong and his family escaped to the United States . Truong died of cancer on January 22, 2007 .
 Nguyen Cao Ky was born in Son Tay Province, northwest of Hanoi . Prime minister of South Vietnam, 1965—67; Vice President, 1967—71; . Vice President of Vietnam .
 After graduation from junior high school, he joined the French air force as a corporal . After graduation, he became a French Air Force Corporal .
 Although only the air vice-marshal during the November 1963 coup against Diem, the absence of the air force chief and the personal loyalty of the men toward Ky gave him the power to control of the country's military .
 Ky joined General Nguyen Khanh in a coup against Duong Van Mi nil’s government in January 1964 . In January 1964, he joined General Khanh and took over the government . He was shot dead in the head of a rebel army in Vietnam .
 General Maxwell Taylor and General William Westmoreland relied on Ky to urge the Armed Forces Council to remove Khanh from his position of commander in chief . After General Khanh purportedly sought secret negotiations with the NLF, in February 1965, General Taylor and . General Maxwell . Taylor and West
 In June 1965 Ky joined with General Nguyen Van Thieu and General Nguyen Chanh Thi to oust South Vietnamese premier Phan Huy Quat . With United States backing Ky became the new prime minister of Vietnam .
 The United States mission judged that among the triumvirate Ky, a nominal Buddhist, would be the safest bet to be the new prime minister . The U.S. mission judged among the three leaders, the U.N. mission said .
 Ky announced that the Buddhist movement had fallen into Communist hands and requested United States aid in shuttling loyal troops to Danang . On April 3,1966, with the approval of both Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge and General Westmoreland, Ky requested U.S. aid .
 Aided by United States Marines, Ky brutally crushed the Buddhists and their supporters . The Buddhists were brutally crushed by the U.S. Marines .
 In June, Ky turned against the city of Hue and once again succeeded in ending that opposition . In June he turned against Hue and ended the city's opposition .
 In 1967, Ky used his proteges to rig the presidential election and intimidate the National Assembly into ratifying the results that allowed Ky and Thieu to become vice president and president, respectively .
 Relations between Ky and Thieu deteriorated after the 1968 Tet Offensive . Relations between the two nations deteriorated after 1968 Tet offensive .
 He fled Vietnam for the U.S. just before the collapse of Saigon in April 1975 . He fled for the United States in 1975 .
 Also known as Truong Son, Thanh was born in Thua Thien Province, where he began his revolutionary activity at the age of 17 . Nguyen Chi Thanh is a general in the People's Army of Vietnam .
 From 1950 to 1961, he was head of the People’s Army of Vietnam General Political Directorate . He was a member of the Politburo in 1950 or 1951 .
 In the early 1960s, Thanh was responsible for overseeing the struggle in the South . Thanh is credited with overseeing the fight in the 1960s .
 In 1964, he was sent south to take control of the Central Office of South Vietnam . This made him the commander of Communist military operations in the southern half of the country .
 He sought a quick victory using conventional tactics, and his forces sustained heavy losses when United States troops were deployed in 1965-66 . He sought to use conventional tactics .
 The Tet Offensive of 1968 was originally Thanh’s idea, but he died in July 1967 during the early stages of planning for the operation . Thanh's idea of the Tet Offensive was his own death in 1967 .
 There remain some disagreement on how he died . One version says that he died of a heart attack while attending strategy meetings in Hanoi . Another version insists that he was killed in the South by American bombs .
 It is generally believed that he was placed under arrest by the Diem government and escaped in 1961 . Some think he spent this time in North Vietnam, returning only in 1961, according to reports .
 He was apparently chosen for his broad public appeal to anti-Diem elements, giving the impression that the NLF as a whole was not a Communist organization . He was chosen to give the impression of the organization as not Communist .
 It appears that he was actually a figurehead without significant power during the war . It appears he was not a major figurehead during the conflict .
 He became one of the two vice presidents of Vietnam in 1976, and served briefly as acting president, 1980-81 . He was briefly president of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, Vietnam .
 Nguyen Khanh ran away from his wealthy, well-connected family to join the Viet Minh . He fought the French for a year before being dismissed for poor discipline . Khanh was prime minister, South Vietnam, 1964—65; president, 1965 . He was also president of Vietnam
 Khanh then switched sides, attended a French officers school, and led colonial troops against the Viet Minh . Khanh later switched sides and attended an officers school in France .
 Khanh joined the coup that killed President Diem in November 1963 . Khanh was deputy chief of staff to General Duong Van Minh, who died that day .
 Khanh led the Young Turk faction of officers who overthrew Duong Van Minh . Two months later, Khanh was in charge of a faction that overthrew the Vietnamese government . Khanh later led a faction of Young Turk officers to overthrow Duong van Minh.
 He never won over his own people, and he alarmed U.S. advisers by jeopardizing the war effort with repeated attempts to establish a dictatorship . He alarmed United States advisers by . attempting to establish an . dictatorship .
 His purging of the ARVN officer corps turned Khanh’s fellow generals against him, while stepping up draft calls angered the populace . Khanh's fellow generals turned against him and stepped up draft calling angered the public .
 Khanh used the Tonkin Gulf incident to proclaim a state of emergency on August 7, 1964 . Khanh declared the emergency in response to rising protests against his rule .
 He proclaimed himself president, but angry mobs forced him to resign on August 25 . Angry mobs in Saigon forced him out of Saigon in August .
 Khanh returned to power on August 27 as a member of the Provisional Leadership Committee . He was reappointed prime minister on September 3 . Khanh has been in power since August 27 .
 He foiled a coup attempt by Catholic officers on September 13, and appointed a civilian council to draw up a new constitution . The coup attempt was thwarted by a Catholic officers .
 Khanh led the Armed Forces Council in yet another coup on December 20 . Tran Van Huong was named prime minister of the new government on November 4, but Khanh retained supreme command of the military .
 Ambassador Maxwell Taylor suspended U.S. military aid in hopes of forcing Khanh to resign . Khanh then dismissed the rest of the Armed Forces Council and assumed dictatorial powers . A month later Khanh dismissed the other members of the council .
 Khanh’s supporters deposed him on February 21, 1965 . Khanh's supporters, General Nguyen Van Thieu, and . Nguyen Van Cao, and Air Vice-Marshal Nguyen Cao Ky, deposed .
 Nguyen Ngoc Loan joined the Vietnamese National Army in 1951 and entered officer training school . He was a classmate of Nguyen Cao Ky He went to Morocco to be trained as a pilot . He is the chief of South Vietnamese national police .
 He flew as wingman to his old friend Ky by that time commander of VNAF, on the Flaming Dart air strikes against North Vietnam in February 1965 . Ky was the commander of that time .
 When Ky became prime minister of the Republic of Vietnam in June 1965, he gave Loan control of military intelligence and security . Loan was the country's first prime minister .
 Loan was made, in April 1966, director general of the National Police . In April 1966 he was made Director General of National Police in addition to his post . Loan was also made director of the Police in 1966 .
 In that role, he helped to crush the dissident Buddhist movement in Danang and Hue . Several months later, he was in charge of crushing the movement in Vietnam .
 During the 1968 Tet Offensive, a Viet Cong officer in civilian clothes was captured by the police in Cholon, the Chinese section of Saigon . The police captured the officer during the Tet Offensive in 1968 .
 Associated Press photographer caught the execution in a still photo . NBC TV crew recorded it with a movie camera . Associated Press photographers captured the execution .
 Loan initially explained that this particular Viet Cong had killed a lot of Vietnamese and Americans . A subsequent story was circulated that he had killed the family of a subordinate and personal friend of a personal friend .
 In 1975, Loan fled to the United States, where he operated a pizza restaurant in Virginia . Loan fled the U.S. in 1975, and operated in Virginia, Virginia .
 Nguyen Thi Binh was born near Saigon and became active in revolutionary activities as a student . She was born in Saigon, Vietnam, and is the current minister of foreign affairs .
 In the early 1960s, she became a member of the Central Committee of the National Liberation Front . She became a vice president of the South Vietnamese Women’s Union for Liberation .
 From 1962 until 1969, she served in the front’s diplomatic corps . She toured the world as a diplomatic spokesman for the front . She served as a diplomat from 1962 to 1969 .
 When the Paris peace talks opened in 1969, the Provisional Revolutionary Government appointed her as its foreign minister . She was sent to Paris as its official representative at the talks .
 There she focused on exacting a settlement that diminished Nguyen Van Thieu’s monopoly on political power in the South . The settlement was part of a settlement in which she exacted a settlement .
 After the war, Binh served in various government positions in Hanoi, Vietnam . She was vice president of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam 1992-93 .
 Nguyen Van Thieu served as a combat officer with French forces during the French-Viet Minh War . Born near Phan Rang, Thieu was president of Vietnam 1967—75 .
 As a colonel, he led an ARVN division against the presidential palace during the coup against Ngo Dinh Diem . He gained promotion to general from the new government .
 Thieu became a leader of a military faction known as the Young Turks . The Young Turks gained control of the government in June 1965 . Thieu was one of three Vietnamese leaders who died in 1965 .
 With Thieu as head of state and Ky as premier, the two men shared power for awhile . Thieu and Ky were both heads of state for a time .
 They met with Lyndon Johnson in 1966 and pledged to strengthen the South’s armed forces . They pledged to prepare a constitution and strengthen the armed forces in the South . They met in 1966 with President Lyndon Johnson .
 Rivalry developed between the two officer-politicians, and Thieu was able to secure the presidency of South Vietnam in a manipulated election in 1967 that made the younger and brasher Ky vice president .
 In 1971, Thieu gained reelection as president in another rigged process from which Ky ultimately withdrew, leaving the South basically with oneman rule . Ky withdrew from the South in 1971, leaving it basically under Thieu rule .
 As president, Thieu made some attempts to allow elected village governments . But he also repressed dissent, eventually suspended local elections, and amassed a personal fortune .
 He consistently resisted a negotiated settlement with Hanoi . He refused to cooperate with major U.S. diplomatic efforts .
 Thieu took the offensive in attacking North Vietnamese Army forces in the South in 1973 . With secret promises of generous financial support from Richard Nixon, Thieu attacked North Vietnam Army forces . Thieu's attack was the first of its kind .
 The NVA began effective counterattacks in 1974, and in the spring of 1975, the North launched its final, successful offensive against the South . The North's final offensive in 1975 was launched in spring 1975 .
 Military, political, and economic conditions in the RVN were poor, and Thieu’s government had little popular support . The RVN was one of the most successful nations in the world, with little political support .
 Nixon had resigned, and the American Congress was not willing to provide Thieu more aid . Thieu died in 1968, but the U.S. did not want to provide more aid to Vietnam .
 Thieu bitterly denounced the U.S. for abandoning his government and then fled to Taiwan before the fall of Saigon . The former Vietnamese leader bitterly denounced his government .
 He was Dwight D Eisenhower's running mate in the 1952 presidential race . He served as vice president from 1953 to 1961 . He was elected to the House of Representatives in 1946 and Senate in 1950 .
 Nixon ran successfully in 1968, becoming the 37th president of the United States . Defeated in his attempt for the presidency in 1960, Nixon ran again in 1968 . Nixon was defeated in the 1960 presidential election .
 Nixon entered office after the war in effect had been lost, since by 1969 both the American people and Congress had turned against the war . Nixon entered .
 Some 250,000 people gathered in Washington, D.C., in November to protest the war . Following large-scale antiwar demonstrations in several cities in October, some 250,00 gathered in November .
 President Nixon ordered the secret bombing of North Vietnamese Army staging areas and supply bases in Cambodia on March 18, 1969 . Nixon ordered a 60-day “incursion” into Cambodia to destroy NVA base and assembly areas in April 1970 .
 Despite widespread public opposition and campus protests, Nixon persisted in this military campaign . Some of the protests, some turned violent, turned violent .
 Nixon had been working to undermine North Vietnamese alliances with the Soviet Union and China . Meanwhile, on the diplomatic front, Nixon was trying to undermine the Soviet-China alliance .
 In February 1972 he visited Beijing, breaking more than 20 years of SinoU.S. hostility . He visited China breaking 20-year U.S.-China relations .
 Nixon ordered the bombing of Hanoi and the mining of Haiphong harbor on May 8 . This overture to China increased Soviet interest in a detente with the United States . The U.S.-Soviet summit meeting was held in Moscow on May 22 .
 North Vietnam began negotiating in earnest in August 1972, three months before the U.S. presidential elections . The North Vietnamese began negotiating with the United States in 1972 .
 Hanoi’s chief negotiator Le Due Tho and National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger held frequent private talks in a Paris suburb . By October it appeared that a peace settlement was imminent . Kissinger and Tho were seen to be close to an agreement .
 The United States dropped its demand for the withdrawal of NVA forces from the South . North Vietnam no longer insisted on the removal of the South Vietnamese president Nguyen Van Thieu .
 President Thieu denounced the settlement . However, after hearing the details, he denounced the deal .
 Kissinger and Le Due Tho resumed negotiations but stalled in December over the future of South Vietnam . Kissinger: "Kissinger and Tho have been at odds for decades"
 It was a contest of wills, and Hanoi evidently believed that U.S. antiwar sentiment would cause Nixon to capitulate . Nixon believed that anti-Nietnam sentiment would lead to Nixon capitulating .
 Nixon ordered an intensive bombing of Hanoi on December 17, 1972, which critics dubbed the Christmas bombing . After an 11-day air campaign, the North Vietnamese agreed to resume the talks .
 When negotiations reconvened on January 8, 1973, Hanoi soon agreed to terms . When negotiations resumed, negotiations resumed in 1973, negotiations began again .
 The January agreement was substantially the same as the one in October . The January deal was substantially different than the one signed in October, officials say .
 Earlier, Nixon had assured Thieu that the U.S. would take “severe retaliatory action” if the North Vietnamese failed to abide by the terms of the peace agreement .
 North Vietnam tested the United States response with a multi-division attack on Phuoc Long Province in December 1974 . Nixon was no longer president when the attack occurred .
 President Richard Nixon left office four months before Watergate scandal broke out . President Nixon was one of the most powerful men in the world .
 Nixon suffered a stroke on April 18,1994, and died four days later at the age of 81 . Nixon suffered from a stroke and died at 81 .
 Frederick Nolting was the U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam, 1961-63 . He served in the navy during World War II . Nolts was born in Richmond, Virginia, and joined the Foreign Service .
 President Kennedy appointed John F Kennedy to become United States ambassador to South Vietnam early in 1961 . He was chosen by President John F. Kennedy to be ambassador to the South Vietnam .
 As ambassador, Nolting believed that President Diem’s anticommunism made him worthy of unqualified U.S. support despite his repressive rule . As ambassador to Vietnam, he believed that Diem's anticommunity made him worth unqualified support .
 Diem promised democratic reforms in exchange for more U.S. advisers, whose numbers increased from 2,000 to 16,000 during Nolting’s tenure . U.N. advisers in Vietnam increased by more than 15,000 .
 Nolting continued to praise Diem, sending back positive reports on his government and military . The reforms never materialized, but he continued to press Diem .
 The Buddhist crisis that erupted in May 1963 demonstrated that Nolting’s praise and positive reports were unfounded . Buddhist crisis erupted in 1963, and the crisis proved to be a success .
 President Kennedy felt Nolting had become too identified with the favored Diem regime . In August, he was replaced by Henry Cabot Lodge . Kennedy felt he was too close to Diem .
 Diem sent troops on raids against Buddhist temples only days after assuring Nolting he would respect Buddhist rights . Diem later sent troops to raids on Buddhist temples . Shortly thereafter, Diem's troops raided Buddhist temples in Vietnam .
 Nolting’s devotion to Diem never wavered and he argued against U.S. support for a coup . He argued against United States support for Diem .
 In early 1964, he left government service in disgust over the U.S.-approved coup that killed Diem in November 1963 . In November 1963, he was killed by a coup that overthrew his government .
 Norodom Sihanouk was born on October 31, 1922, into the royal family of Cambodia . He was educated in French schools in Indochina and Paris . Twice king of Cambodia, 1941—55 and 1933— 2004; premier, Cambodia, 1955—70; Cambod
 When Japan occupied Indochina during World War II, Sihanouk was kept a virtual prisoner . He was kept prisoner during the war .
 Sihanouk proclaimed a limited monarchy after the World War II French reoccupation . Elections in 1947 made him head of state .
 Cambodia became one of the three ‘associated states’ of Indochina in 1954 . At the Geneva Conference in 1954 it won total independence . Two years later Cambodia became an "associated state" of the region . Cambodia was one of three "associated states"
 When it appeared the North Vietnamese would be victorious, he allowed them to use the port of Sihanoukville to bring in war supplies and to rent Cambodian trucks to haul the supplies to their base areas .
 By the late 1960s when North Vietnam appeared to be losing, he intimated that he would not object if these base areas were attacked . He intimated in the late 60s that he wouldn't object to attacks .
 Cambodian general Lon Nol seized power on March 18, 1970 . Sihanouk was traveling abroad when he was seized by Nol's forces .
 Sihanouk lived in exile in Beijing and allied himself with the Khmer Rouge guerrillas . He was allied with the guerillas during his exile .
 After the 1975 Khmer Rouge takeover, he returned to Cambodia and was placed under house arrest . He was placed in house arrest after the takeover .
 Sihanouk served briefly as the symbolic head of state in 1993 following UN-supervised elections . He was briefly elected president of the country in 1993 .
 O’Daniel returned to head the first U.S. MAAG in Indochina . A year later, he was back in charge of the first United States MAAGs . O'Daniel returned a year later as head of the U.N. MGAG
 He expressed confidence that the French and, later, President Diem, would win against the Communists . He said the French would win in Vietnam .
 He trained South Vietnam’s military to repel a Korea-style conventional invasion, but not to counter a guerrilla war . He trained the South Vietnamese military to resist a conventional invasion of Korea .
 O'Daniel departed Vietnam in October 1955, retired, and was the first chairman of the American Friends of Vietnam . O’Daniel was a private advocacy group dedicated to strengthening U.S. support for the Republic of Vietnam.
 He remained loyal to Diem, even after most of the other members of the organization had lost faith in Diem’s ability to stop the Communists .
 General Peers headed a special army board to investigate the Americal Division’s cover-up of the My Lai massacre . Peers commanded the 4th Infantry Division and I Field Force in Vietnam .
 Peers served a final tour of duty as deputy commanding general of the Eighth Army in Korea . Peers retired in 1973 .
 In 1956 he became the highest-ranking party official from southern Vietnam elected to the Politburo . A protege of Pham Van Dong’s, in 1956 he was the highest ranking party official in southern Vietnam to be elected .
 Hung secretly returned to take charge of the Viet Cong insurgency in Vietnam . Nine years later, he secretly returned and took over the insurgency . Hung returned to Vietnam nine years later .
 As head of COSVN, he oversaw the Tet Offensive in 1968 and oversaw the 1975 Spring Offensive that resulted in the fall of South Vietnam . He served as political commissar for General Van Tien Dung during the Spring Offensive .
 Pham Van Dong was Premier of Democratic Republic of Vietnam, 1955-76, and of the Socialist Republic of . Vietnam, 1975-86 . Born on March 1,1906, into a gentry family in central Vietnam’s Quang Ngai Province .
 In 1926, he joined Ho Chi Minh’s Revolutionary Youth League . From 1931 to 1937 he was in France's infamous Poulo Condore prison . He was in the notorious prison where he spent time in prison .
 He was named finance minister of the DRV in 1946 and foreign minister in 1954 . As foreign minister, he represented DRV at Geneva Conference of 1954 .
 He played a key role in approving Hanoi’s tactical concessions in the 1973 cease-fire agreement and then the subsequent decisions to continue the fighting . He was a key figure in approving the tactical concessions .
 He approved the April 1975 final North Vietnamese offensive and supervised the Communist takeover of the South . 400,000 people were sent to “reeducation” camps .
 After 1976, he received considerable blame for the economic collapse that followed in the postwar years . After 1976 he was blamed for the collapse of the economy .
 In 1981, he was forced to introduce capitalist incentives, especially in the South . In 1981 he introduced capitalism to the South, he introduced it .
 While in exile in China, he formed the Vietnam Restoration Society . He encouraged resistance in Vietnam between 1907 and 1918 . He was exiled from China in 1918 .
 In 1925, he was arrested by the French in Shanghai and imprisoned in Hanoi . In 1925 he was imprisoned in the French capital . He was arrested in 1925 and later imprisoned in Vietnam .
 Eventually paroled, he lived in retirement until his death in 1940 in Hue . He was eventually paroled .
 Phoumi Nosavan Rightist leader in Laos Nosavan was born in Savannakhet . Nosavan is a member of the Laos Communist Party .
 He was a leader in the Lao Issara movement, cooperating with the Vietnamese . He served in the colonial administration, but later became a leader .
 In 1950, he switched sides and joined the Lao National Army allied with the French . He switched sides in 1950, joining the French, but later switched sides .
 In 1958 he became a leader of the CIA-supported Committee for the Defense of National Interests . He became chief of the General Staff in 1955, and in 1958 he led the Committee .
 Despite considerable U.S. aid in the late 1950s, Phoumi was unable to develop an effective national army . Despite considerable United States aid, the country was not able to develop a strong army .
 In August 1960, a coup organized by Kong Le brought the neutralists to power and Phoumi retreated to Savannakhet . The coup took place in August 1960 . The neutralist government was overthrown by the coup .
 Before the end of the year, Phoumi and his forces, supported by the CIA and Thailand, drove the neutralists from power . The neutralists were neutralized by the neutralist government .
 Phoumi was deputy prime minister and minister of finance in the Second Coalition Government, headed by a neutralist Prince Souvanna Phouma . Although he made Prince Boun Oum prime minister, he was the real head of government until 1962 .
 Pol Pot Leader of the Khmer Rouge, prime minister, Democratic Kampuchea, 1976—79 . Born Saloth Sar in Kompong Thom Province, Cambodia . Pol Pot was prime minister of the Cambodian government from 1976-79 . He was the leader of the Democratic Kamp
 Sar Suong was sent to Phnom Penh at the age of six to join his brother Loth Suong, who worked in the palace as an administrator . Sar was also sent to the country to join Loth's brother, who was an administrator at the time .
 Sar’s upbringing was strict, and his vernacular culture was isolated . Sar was isolated from Cambodian culture . He is the son of former president of the Khmer government .
 Sar rose within the Cambodian Communist movement, becoming party leader in 1962 . Sar rose to become party leader after independence in 1954 .
 He believed that under his rule Cambodia would recover its pro-Buddhist glory by rebuilding the economy of the medieval Angkor kingdom and regaining ancient territory from Vietnam and Thailand .
 Pol Pot’s group treasured the Cambodian “race, not individuals,” not individuals . He believed impurities included the foreign-educated (himself and his colleagues excepted) and “hereditary enemies,’ especially the Vietnamese .
 In 1966, he began planning an uprising against the Cambodian ruler, Prince Sihanouk . In 1966 he planned to overthrow the ruler of Cambodia .
 In 1975, after defeating Lon Nol, the U.S.backed general who overthrew Sihanouk in a 1970 coup, Pol Pot became prime minister . Pol Pot is now the leader of the country's most populous state .
 Immediately after the fall of Phnom Penh, the Khmer Rouge began to implement reforms to return the nation to “Year Zero” The regime ordered the evacuation of the capital city and other captured towns and cities .
 Pol Pot instituted a draconian agrarian program that resulted in the murder and starvation of hundreds of thousands of Cambodians, including politicians, intellectuals, and those from many other walks of life .
 Pol Pot could not see Cambodia among its neighbors in a community of nations . A true nationalist chauvinist, Pol Pot was a true nationalist . Pol Pot would not see Cambodian neighbors as neighbors .
 His identity as Saloth Sar was realized in late 1978, when his brother, Loth Suong, recognized him in a poster . His identity was realized when he was recognized by his brother .
 The Pol Pot regime was overthrown by the invading army of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam . Two months later the Vietnamese army overthrown Pol Pot's regime .
 He led a guerrilla campaign against the Vietnam-supported government until 1985 . He resigned from the Khmer Rouge party, citing asthma as a contributing factor . He continued as the dominant force in the anti-Vietnam movement .
 In 1989 when the Vietnamese withdrew from Cambodia, Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge refused to cooperate with the peace process and continued to fight against the forces of the new government in Phnom Penh . In 1989, the Vietnamese forces withdrew from the country .
 In June 1997, Pol Pot ordered the execution of his life-long right-hand man, Son Sen. Pol Pot . The execution was ordered by Pol Pot in June 1997 . Pol Pot was executed in 1997 .
 This caused a backlash among other Khmer Rouge leaders, who arrested him and subjected him to a slow trial for the death of his subordinate . This caused him to be subjected to a lengthy trial for his role in the killing of a subordinate .
 He was placed under house arrest, during which he died, reportedly from heart failure .
 William Porter was responsible for coordinating the pacification programs of U.S. agencies in South Vietnam . Porter was a delegate to the Paris Peace Talks . For 18 months in 1965, Porter coordinated pacification efforts in Vietnam for 18 months .
 Ultimately, however, the effort fell short and pacification was reassigned to military control . Ultimately, the operation fell short .
 Burns was chief of the U.S. delegation at the Paris peace talks . Burns was in charge of the United States delegation for the peace talks in Paris .
 Admiral Radford helped devise President Eisenhower’s ‘New Look’ defense policy in the 1950s . Radford was a veteran of three wars . He helped develop President Eisenhower's New Look policy .
 Admiral Radford proposed massive U.S. air strikes, possibly including nuclear weapons, against the Viet Minh . The French asked for United States help during the siege of Dien Bien Phu in March 1954 .
 President Eisenhower rejected the plan, code named Operation Vulture, after Congress and the European Allies refused their support . Eisenhower's plan was code named 'Operation Vulture' and was rejected by Congress .
 Radford argued that the U.S. should contain the Democratic Republic of Vietnam with airpower while American ground forces played only a limited role . Radford argues that the United States should use airpower to contain the country .
 In his view, South Vietnamese ground forces would be responsible for stopping any invasion by the North Vietnamese Army . The South Vietnamese Army would have to defend itself from any invasion .
 General Ridgway was opposed to U.S. involvement in French war in Indochina, 1953-55 . He was the senior United States commander in the latter years of the Korean War .
 He argued against providing U.S. air support to the French during the Dien Bien Phu crisis in 1954 . He also argued that ground operations would inevitably follow, believing ground operations .
 Ridgway was one of President Johnson’s senior advisers known as the ‘Wise Men’ in Vietnam . Ridgways urged him to de-escalate the Vietnam War in 1968 . In later years he remained skeptical of U.S. Vietnam policy .
 William Rogers served as a naval officer in World War II . He was deputy attorney general of the United States from 1953 to 1957 . He served as attorney general from 1957 to 1961 .
 He then left government service for eight years, becoming a senior partner in a law firm . He then went on to be senior partner at a law law firm in London .
 When Richard Nixon was elected president in 1968, he selected Rogers as his secretary of state . Rogers was a close friend of Richard Nixon, who died in 1968 .
 Rogers was a strong supporter of Nixon’s Vietnamization program and U.S. troop withdrawal . He strongly disagreed with Nixon's covert bombing of Cambodia, which began in 1969 .
 He resigned in September 1973; Kissinger replaced him as secretary of state . He resigned from the White House in September .
 In 1986 Rogers chaired the committee that investigated the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger . Rogers returned to the private practice of law .
 Rostow served as part of the Kennedy administration “brain trust” as Deputy National Security Advisor under McGeorge Bundy . Rostow, Walt Whitman, was Walt Whitman's special assistant for national security affairs, 1961 66; national security advisor, 1966—69 .
 Rostow advocated a strong U.S. role in Vietnam and Laos to combat Communist insurgencies . Rostow was a prominent critic of the Vietnam policy in the 1960s .
 Rostow suggested bombing the North to defeat the guerrillas in the South . Rostow believed that the Viet Cong were controlled from the Democratic Republic of Vietnam . He believed the North was controlled by the DRC .
 President Kennedy rejected the idea, but President Johnson approved it in 1965 . Kennedy rejected it, but it was approved by President Johnson in 1965.
 Rostow succeeded Bundy as National Security Advisor to President Johnson and continued in that capacity until January 1969, when he left government service . Rostow continued to serve in the White House until he left in January 1969 .
 Rostow repeatedly recommended systematic and continued bombing of critical targets in North Vietnam, including petroleum facilities . Rostow also recommended systematic bombing of North Vietnam targets . In his new position, Rostow said the bombing should continue .
 When public opinion turned against the war, President Johnson relied heavily on Rostow’s optimism . Rostow's optimism and perseverance helped push President Johnson to victory .
 Rostow moderated his commitment to bombing by seemingly supporting a proposal to limit bombing raids to the southern panhandle of North Vietnam in 1967 . Rostow maintained that the bombing of the Hanoi-Haiphong area had to be left as an option .
 Rostow opposed McNamara's proposal to halt bombing in November . Rostow was opposed to the idea when it was proposed by McNamara .
 Rostow served on the “wise men’s” after the 1968 Tet Offensive . Rostow advocated intensifying the bombing, mobilizing the Reserves, and sending more troops to Vietnam. Rostow was a member of the "wise men"
 Johnson was swayed by the other members of the group, who almost unanimously recommended de-escalation, a decision that he announced on March 31, 1968, that included a partial bombing halt as an inducement to negotiations .
 Rusk graduated from Davidson College in 1931 and later studied at Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar . Rusk served as secretary of state for Far Eastern affairs, 1950-1952; Secretary of state, 1961—69 .
 Rusk served in the China-Burma-India theater as operations officer to General Joseph Stilwell . Rusk was an infantry officer in the United States Army .
 He was appointed Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs at the beginning of the Korean War . He served as Assistant Secretary for Far East Affairs during the war .
 In 1952, he left the State Department to head the Rockefeller Foundation . In 1952 he became the head of the Rockefeller foundation . He left State Department in 1952 .
 In December 1960, president-elect Kennedy selected Rusk as his secretary of state . Rusk was chosen by the president of the United States in 1960 .
 Rusk attempted to limit the role of the State Department in Vietnam, believing that American involvement there should be primarily military . Rusk believed that U.S. involvement in Vietnam should be mainly military .
 Rusk played a more active role in Vietnam as the U.S. became increasingly concerned with South Vietnamese president Ngo Dinh Diem’s ability to carry out internal reforms . Rusk's role expanded as the United States became concerned with Diem's ability .
 In August 1963, top U.S. foreign policy advisers began to reevaluate American support for Diem . The Vietnam War ended in 1968 .
 Rusk, sensing Diem’s isolation from the people of South Vietnam, advised that a change in government might be necessary . Rusk sensed Diem's isolation from people and his inability .
 Lodge was also instructed to inform military leaders who had planned to overthrow Diem that the U.S. would not attempt to thwart a coup . Lodge was told that the United States would not try to thwart the coup .
 Rusk’s role in the complicated decision making that preceded a coup on November 1 is not clear . Rusk preferred to let subordinates, including Lodge, Harriman, and Hilsman, expound the need for change in South Vietnam .
 Rusk’s influence on Vietnam policy increased markedly after Lyndon Johnson assumed the presidency . Rusk was influential in Vietnam policy during the Vietnam War .
 Johnson helped Johnson make important decisions on escalation of the conflict . He helped Johnson decide whether to take action in Syria .
 Rusk opposed attempts to negotiate a settlement during 1964 and 1965 . Rusk argued that with the VC controlling more than half of South Vietnam, the U.S. could not bargain from a position of strength .
 Until military pressure on Hanoi tilted the balance of power in favor of the Saigon government, Rusk says, the North Vietnamese would have little incentive to negotiate . Rusk: The North Vietnamese government would not negotiate with Saigon .
 Rusk opposed the bombing halt of December 1965-January 1966 for similar reasons . Rusk also opposed the stop-and-recease halt of January 1965-Jan 1966 . The halt of the halt was similar to the halt of a similar halt in December 1966 .
 Rusk emerged as a chief public defender of administration policy . Rusk has been a key adviser to the president .
 In February 1966, he appeared at televised hearings of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, chaired by Senator J William Fulbright .
 Rusk sought to refute Fulbright’s charge that the conflict was a civil war in which the United States had no strategic interest . Rusk described what he believed to be a long-term pattern of Communist Chinese aggression .
 Rusk recommended that the president approve an additional 200,000 troops after the Tet Offensive of February 1968 . Rusk said the president should approve the increase .
 Johnson announced a policy of deescalation and his desire to enter into negotiations with the North Vietnamese . After the ‘Wise Men’ recommended disengagement from the war because of its detrimental effects on the American economy .
 Hanoi accepted Johnson’s offer with the provision that initial meetings deal only with the conditions required for a total bombing halt . Johnson: 'Initial meetings with initial meetings should only deal with conditions required to halt bombing .
 Rusk appears to have felt that such talks were not in the best interests of the U.S. Rusk . Rusk said such talks would not be in the United States' best interests .
 When the talks began in Paris in May 1968, Rusk played little part in them . Rusk was a key figure in the negotiations .
 The United States was not in Vietnam simply because of commitments but because of the need to show that such expansion was doomed to failure . Consequently, he argued, the U.S. did not want to engage in Vietnam because it was not committed to such a mission .
 Richard Russell was elected to the United States Senate in 1932 . He served there from 1933 until his death . Russell died at 71 .
 As chairman of the Armed Services Committee, 1951-1953 and 1955-1969, he greatly influenced military appropriations and policy . As chairman, he led the armed services committee for three decades .
 He advised President Eisenhower in 1954 not to intervene militarily to help the French at Dien Bien Phu . He initially opposed U.S. involvement in Vietnam because he did not consider North Vietnam a threat to United States interests .
 After the 1968 Tet Offensive, he rejected piecemeal escalation of the ground war and called for full-scale bombing of North Vietnam . He called for more bombing of the North Vietnam and more ground war .
 In 1969, he stepped down from the chairmanship of the Armed Services Committee to become chairman of the Appropriations Committee . In 1969 he stepped aside from his post as chairman to head of the appropriations committee .
 Russell was one of the few Democratic senators who supported the Cambodian Incursion of 1970 . Russell was a member of the Democratic Party who supported Cambodia's invasion .
 In March 1946, Sainteny and Ho agreed to accords in which France would recognize the Democratic Republic of Vietnam as a free state within the French Union . The French Union recognized Vietnam as an independent state in 1946 .
 By December, however, the agreement broke down, resulting in the eightyear Indochina War . The agreement ended in December, ending the war in Vietnam .
 Sainteny represented France on three later diplomatic missions, including a 1966 peace effort . He represented France in the 1960s and '60s .
 In 1969, he brokered correspondence between Nixon administration national security advisor Henry Kissinger and the North Vietnamese leadership . In 1969 he helped secure correspondence between Kissinger and North Vietnamese leaders .
 Sainteny arranged the 1972 secret meetings between Kissinger and Le Due Tho in Paris . He also arranged a 1972 secret meeting of Kissinger and the Vietnamese leader .
 Harrison Salisbury was a reporter for United Press from 1930 to 1948 . Salisbury, Harrison E. Salisbury worked for the U.S. Press between 1930 and 1948 .
 In December 1965, he was the first American newsman to travel to the Democratic Republic of Vietnam . He reported that U.S. planes were bombing civilian targets, a claim that the Johnson administration denied . He traveled to Vietnam in December 1965 .
 As secretary of defense, Schlesinger was largely bypassed in Vietnam policy-making by Henry Kissinger . He was criticized by President Johnson, Pentagon officials, and some of his fellow journalists, for providing aid and comfort .
 Schlesinger was considered a hard-liner and made several speeches defending the bombing of Cambodia in 1969-70 . As secretary of defense he defended the bombing .
 He coordinated the May 1975 military response to the Cambodian seizure of the Mayaguez, the U.S.-registered container ship . He was in charge of the response to Cambodia's seizure of a U.N. ship in 1975 .
 Schlesinger, who often disagreed with President Ford, was fired in November of 1975 . He was replaced by Donald Rumsfeld, who replaced him .
 He controlled the Seventh Fleet’s air operations over North Vietnam and Laos and surface operations in the western Pacific . Appointed commander-inchief of the Pacific Fleet in September 1963 .
 Six weeks later, after the Tonkin Gulf incident, he planned the retaliatory airstrikes, the first U.S. bombing of North Vietnam . He planned the retaliation airstrikes, which he planned six weeks later .
 He believed that the war could be won “by keeping the pressure on North Vietnam through air attacks,” he said . He argued against bombing halts and target restrictions .
 He was responsible for overseeing the U.S. buildup in Vietnam and for executing American strategy in the theater of war .
 On July 31, 1968, Admiral Sharp relinquished his command and retired from active duty . Admiral Sharp was one of the most decorated Admiral in the Navy .
 He initially incurred official ire with his eyewitness reporting of the stunning defeat suffered by South Vietnamese troops at the Battle of Ap Bac in January 1963 . He was initially angered by the loss of his troops to South Vietnamese forces .
 Harkins, wanting to put a positive spin on the situation, proclaimed the battle a great victory for the South Vietnamese . He said the battle was a "great victory" for the Vietnamese .
 Washington accepted Harkins’s account and assailed Sheehan and the other journalists who had reported otherwise . Washington accepts Harkin's account .
 He returned in 1965 and was among the first to dispatch firsthand accounts of the bloody fighting in the la Drang Valley . In 1965, he returned to the country and sent firsthand accounts .
 He left Vietnam in 1966, but continued to report on the war from Washington, D.C. He left in 1966 .
 In 1968, he broke the story of Westmoreland’s large troop request in the wake of the Tet Offensive . He broke the news of the request in 1968 .
 General Shoup commanded the spearhead battalion at the Tarawa landing in World War II . He became the 22nd commandant of the Marine Corps in 1963 .
 While commandant, Shoup counseled against U.S. involvement in Vietnam, but never openly questioned policy . Shoup was president of the United States during the Vietnam War .
 Shoup warned that anti-communism provided the perfect climate to nurture a “new American militarism” in the defense establishment . In an April 1969 edition of Atlantic Monthly, Shoup said the U.S. should be wary of the threat posed by anti-Communism
 Prince Souphanouvong was a leader in the post-World War II Lao Issara independence movement . He was the first president of the Lao People's Democratic Republic, 1975—86 .
 He became disenchanted with the group’s political policies and sought assistance from the Viet Minh . He sought help from the Vietnamese government . However, he became disillusioned with the political policies of the group .
 He was closely associated with Ho Chi Minh from before World War II . He became a leader in the Viet Minh-supported Communist Pathet Lao .
 During the Vietnam War, Souphanouvong and other Pathet Lao leaders lived in a cave complex in northeastern Laos . During the 1970s, he lived in the cave complex during the war with the Vietnamese government .
 The prince was president of the National Political Consultative Council in mid-1974 . Following the United States withdrawal from Vietnam, the prince returned to the Lao capital and joined the new coalition government .
 In December 1975, the communists established the Lao People's Democratic Republic . Souphanouvong was the first president of the country . He became its first president .
 Souvanna Phouma was head of the wartime Pathet Lao Communist movement . Prince Prime Minister of Laos, 1951-54, 1956-58, 1960-62, 1962-75 .
 Souvanna was often called upon to head the politically fractured government of Laos . A proclaimed neutralist for most of his life, he was often seen as a leader of the country .
 His willingness in the 1950s to allow participation in the central government by members of the Pathet Lao led to charges by right-wing Lao officials and the U.S. government that Laos would be taken over by Communist agents .
 After 1962, Souvanna abandoned the Pathet Lao in a coalition government . After 1962 she abandoned the Lao right wing and the United States government . The United States and the right-wing of the Laotothen Lao opposed the government .
 Souvanna’s government declared a neutral policy with regard to the Vietnam War . From 1963 until the 1973 American withdrawal from South Vietnam, the South Vietnam War was declared a non-war policy . The Vietnam War ended in 1973 .
 Souvanna was named special adviser to the president of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic . Upon the December 1975 Communist takeover of Laos, he was named Special Adviser to the President .
 Spock's reputation as America’s preeminent child care authority earned him a leading role in U.S. domestic opposition to the Vietnam War . Spock was a leading voice in opposition to Vietnam War in the United States .
 He first became known as a peace activist when he joined the National Committee for Sane Nuclear Policy in 1962 . He joined the committee in 1962 and became a prominent peace activist .
 He supported Lyndon Johnson during the 1964 election, believing his campaign promises for peace . He supported LBJ during the election believing his promises of peace .
 Spock began to speak against the Vietnam War and urge draft resistance . Spock spoke out against the war and urged draft resistance to the war .
 An active participant in many protests, he tried to unite moderate and radical antiwar groups . He was an active participant of many protests .
 In January 1968, he and four others were indicted for conspiring to aid and encourage violations of the Selective Service law and hinder administration of the draft .
 All but one of the ‘Boston Five’ were found guilty, fined, and sentenced to two years’ imprisonment . All of the 'Boston Five' were convicted, fined and imprisoned .
 The United States First Circuit Court of Appeals overturned Spock's conviction . Spock and one other defendant were convicted in the case . Spock was sentenced to life in prison .
 He became a circuit judge in 1937 and 10 years later succeeded Theodore Bilbo in the United States Senate . He was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1964 .
 Stennis opposed social welfare programs and supported military appropriation requests . A conservative Democrat, Stennis was a conservative Democrat .
 He was initially skeptical about the propriety of U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia . But he believed that once the United States had committed itself, it could not shrink from that commitment .
 Stennis favored maximum use of air power against North Vietnamese and the VC to achieve a prompt victory . Stennis was influential member of the Armed Services Committee who became its chairman in 1969 .
 Stennis worked to curb the president’s war-making power, co-sponsoring the War Powers Act with Jacob Javits in 1971 . Although he strongly backed Nixon’Southeast Asia policy, Stennis opposed Southeast Asia policy .
 Stevenson, Adlai E Ill United States ambassador to the United Nations, 1961-65 . U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. discussed secret negotiations with North Vietnam in 1964 . Stevenson, a liberal, discussed with UN Secretary-General U. Thant .
 Stevenson passed the information on to Secretary of State Dean Rusk . The administration did not respond to the request .
 Stevenson consistently defended U.S. policy in Vietnam . Although he believed that military intervention was a bad idea, he favored political and economic means of countering communism . Stevenson: "I'm not a war hero, but I'm a hero of the day"
 William H. Sullivan, William H United States ambassador to Laos . Sullivan served as deputy United States representative to the 1962 Geneva Conference . A career Foreign Service officer .
 In 1964, President Lyndon Johnson appointed Sullivan ambassador to Laos . Sullivan was appointed ambassador to the country in 1964 .
 In that position, he exerted more control over U.S. military operations in Laos than his counterpart in Saigon was able to do .
 He left Laos in March 1969 to return to the State Department . He helped draft the proposals that the U.S. put forth at the Paris peace talks .
 Sullivan then served as Henry Kissinger’s chief deputy in Paris . Sullivan played a major role in negotiating the agreement signed on January 27, 1973 . Sullivan was Henry Kissinger's chief deputy .
 General Taylor advocated building up conventional forces as an alternative to nuclear war . His attempts to persuade the Eisenhower administration, which saw nuclear weapons as a ‘cheap’ way to provide national security, met with only limited success .
 The Uncertain Trumpet detailed his proposals for a more flexible response . His ideas were used by Senator John F Kennedy in his 1960 presidential campaign .
 On July 1, 1961, Taylor was named Military Representative to the President . President Kennedy reportedly lost faith in military advice he was getting from Joint Chiefs of Staff .
 Taylor recommended sending more military aid and advisers to Vietnam in November . He also pressed President Ngo Dinh Diem to carry out reforms . Taylor was in Vietnam on a special mission to South Vietnam .
 Taylor advised dispatching 8,000 combat troops to South Vietnam as a sign of U.S. commitment and as a reserve emergency force . Report kept secret at the time was kept secret . Taylor: Dispatching troops was seen as sign of United States commitment .
 Kennedy decided not to send combat troops, but approved the other recommendations . Kennedy also approved other recommendations to send troops to Afghanistan .
 In 1962, General Taylor was recalled to active duty and named chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . In 1962 he was named chairman the Joint chiefs of Staff. General Taylor died at the age of 92 .
 After President Kennedy’s assassination, President Johnson appointed Taylor ambassador to South Vietnam in July 1964 . Taylor was appointed as ambassador to Vietnam in 1964 .
 As ambassador, he pressed for the return of civilian rule after the military coup that overthrew Diem in 1963 . He pressed for a return to civilian rule .
 In July 1965, General Taylor relinquished that post and served as a special consultant to President Johnson . General Taylor was a special adviser to the President of the Army .
 He was a member of the ‘Wise Men’ convened in March 1968 to advise President Johnson on the course of the war . He opposed the policy of disengagement recommended by a majority of the group .
 Buddhist monk Thich Quang Due was the first Buddhist monk to immolate himself in public to protest the Ngo Dinh Diem regime’s treatment of the Buddhists .
 South Vietnamese police and Buddhist monks clash over Buddhist monks . The incident provoked widespread shock and led to months of confrontation between police and monks .
 This unrest helped convince the Kennedy administration that Diem would never win the support of his people . The unrest provided the catalyst for the coup by South Vietnamese generals that resulted in the murder of Diem and his brother Nhu .
 Sir Robert Thompson was a noted counterinsurgency authority who helped the British suppress the insurgency in Malaya . He was also a noted anti-insurgent authority who had helped British suppress insurgency .
 As head of British advisory mission to Vietnam from 1961 to 1965, he was influential in his attempts to have the ‘lessons’ of the British effort in Malaya applied to Vietnam . He was very influential .
 Based on his experience, he urged President Ngo Dinh Diem to adopt the Strategic Hamlet program . The program proved to be fatally flawed, he said . He urged President Diem not to adopt it .
 Thompson served as a key unofficial adviser to President Nixon, endorsing the Vietnamization strategy . Thompson was a key adviser to Nixon in the 1960s .
 General Tran Do moved south in 1963 to become head of the Political Department of the Central Office for South Vietnam . He controlled and directed the political and military activities of the National Liberation Front against the Saigon government .
 One of the key field commanders in the South, he increased the number of North Vietnamese commanders, political officers, and technical experts within the NLF .
 One of the architects of the 1968 Tet Offensive, he later acknowledged that the offensive failed in its main goal of inciting uprisings across the South . The offensive had the unintended result of turning American public opinion against the war .
 General Tran Thien Khiem was chief of staff when he helped overthrow President Diem in November 1963 . He helped overthrow Diem's government in Vietnam . He was killed in the November 1963 coup .
 As prime minister, Khiem was believed to be involved in the narcotics trade . He used money from the sale of heroin to fund his political activities . The former prime minister is believed to have been involved .
 When Communist forces captured Saigon in April 1975, Khiem escaped to Taiwan and from there to France . He was captured by the Communist forces in Saigon .
 In 1942, he was promoted to second lieutenant in the French Army Reserves . Released after France’s surrender, he returned to Vietnam and served until the Republic of Vietnam was established in 1954 . He served in Vietnam until 1954 .
 He joined three other generals who orchestrated the November 1963 coup against Ngo Dinh Diem . They controlled the government until they were overthrown by Nguyen Khanh’s coup in January 1964 .
 He retired from the army in 1965 and won election to the Senate, where he served until 1970 . He then served in the House of Representatives in 1971 . He won election in 1971 and served in both chambers of Congress .
 Tran Van Huong was mayor of Saigon in 1964 . He was prime minister of South Vietnam, 1964—65, 196869, 1975; vice president, 1971—75 . Huong also served as vice president of Vietnam .
 In December 1964, the Armed Forces Council led by Khanh seized control of the government in a bloodless coup . Huong was left in office but had no real power . Khanh's government was overthrown in December 1964 .
 He was again prime minister under Nguyen Van Thieu from May 1968 to August 1969 . He was the prime minister of Vietnam from 1968 to 1969 .
 In the election of 1971, he was Thieu’s running mate and served as vice president from 1971 through 1975 . He was vice president of Vietnam from 1971 to 1975 .
 When Thieu fled Saigon on April 25, 1975, he appointed Huong president . Huong quickly resigned in favor of General Duong Van Minh on April 28, two days before collapse of Republic of Vietnam .
 Tran Van Tra fought with the Viet Minh against the French from 1946 to 1954 . He was the military leader of the National Liberation Front . Tra fought for the Vietnamese government from 1946 until 1954 .
 Tra returned to the South in 1963 to assume command of the B2 Front responsible for military operations in the southern half of South Vietnam . Tra was a major commander in Vietnam's South Vietnam during the Vietnam War .
 In 1968, he was one of the commanders in charge of the assault on the capital city in the Tet Offensive . In 1968 he led the assault in which he was a commander in charge .
 His strategy for the final push was an attack on Route 14 across Phuoc Long Province and a quick assault on Saigon from five directions, he says . His strategy was to attack Route 14 and attack Saigon in five directions . He says he served as deputy commander in the final
 Truman reversed President Franklin D Roosevelt’s tentative policy of abandoning support for a continued French presence in Indochina . Truman reversed the tentative policy in 1945 .
 Truman viewed Ho Chi Minh as a Communist puppet in the global cold war . Truman invoked the domino theory and the policy of containment in discussing his Indochina policy .
 Truman called for aid to the French in Vietnam in a 1950 speech announcing his decision to send U.S. troops to Korea . In the 1950 speech he called for help in Vietnam .
 Congress appropriated funds for the French war in Indochina . President Eisenhower continued the policy until the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 .
 Truman’s financial commitment to fighting the communists in Vietnam was significant in establishing U.S. interests in the country, but his ideological constructs were even more fundamental . Truman's financial commitment was significant .
 Truman established the ideological framework within which the conflict would be viewed for the next two decades . Ho Chi Minh’s forces were viewed as Communist tools in the cold war, Truman said .
 In the 1960s, President Lyndon Johnson made several attempts to persuade Truman to back his Vietnam policies, but Truman would not make any public statement about the war .
 For the next 26 years, Chinh ranked second only to Ho Chi Minh on the Politburo . Chinh was the second most powerful member of the Communist Party .
 In 1956, after the excesses of his radical land reform program, Chinh resigned as general secretary of the party . Chinh remained a member of the Politburo and the party’s top ideologist .
 Chinh, serving as general secretary, relented and initiated the Doi Moi program, which permitted the reintroduction of private enterprise in 1986 . Chinh was long opposed to capitalist reforms, but relented to reform .
 By the end of that year, he had stepped down from his position and gave up his membership in the Politburo . However, by that time, he gave up membership in Russia's Communist Party .
 Secretary General U Thant tried to organize peace talks between U.S. and Vietnam officials in 1964 . Burmese diplomat was secretary-general, United Nations, 1961 — 1971 .
 In 1966, he called for a halt to the bombing of North Vietnam, negotiations that would include the National Liberation Front . He called for negotiations with the N.N. Front and a reduction in military activities on all sides .
 In the late 1960s, U Thant sought to ban the use of U.S. herbicides in Vietnam . In the 1970s, the U.N. tried to ban herbicides from Vietnam .
 His pressure helped bring about the Nixon administration’s renunciation of herbicide use in 1969 . His pressure led to an April 1972 international treaty outlawing the production of biological weapons .
 Van Tien Dung was born in Ha Deng Province in Tonkin on May 1, 1917 . He became an active Communist revolutionary in 1936 . He was the chief of staff of the People’s Army of Vietnam .
 Dung was appointed chief of staff of the North Vietnamese Army in 1953 . Throughout the 1960s, he was second in command to General Vo Nguyen Giap . Dung served as the chief of Staff of the Vietnamese Army .
 In 1971, he directed the PAVN forces that fought against the South Vietnamese in Laos during their Operation Lam Son 719 . He directed the forces in 1971, when they fought in Laos .
 In 1972, he directed the forces that attacked south across the Demilitarized Zone during the Easter Offensive . In 1972 he directed forces to attack south across Demilitanized Zone .
 In March 1973, he oversaw the infiltration of PAVN troops into South Vietnam after the signing of the Paris Peace Accords . He oversaw infiltration of troops into the country after the Paris peace accord .
 General Dung planned and led the North Vietnamese blitzkrieg that conquered South Vietnam in March and April 1975 . Dung was the commander of the PAVN forces in the South . He was the leader of the forces that conquered the South in 1975 .
 Dung later led the 1979 invasion of Cambodia and also directed the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese clash . Dung led the Sino and Vietnamese clash with China in 1979 .
 In 1986, however, he was dismissed from that position and expelled from the Politburo . He remained a member of the Central Committee until 1991, but was expelled in 1986 .
 Vang Pao worked with the French against the Viet Minh and then commanded Hmong troops against the North Vietnamese and the Pathet Lao . Flmong military leader worked with French and Hmong in Vietnam .
 Vang Pao used his CIA connections to make Hmong villagers dependent upon his support for rice supplies . The Hmong village was dependent on his support from the CIA .
 He withheld U.S. aid from villages that tried to keep their sons from entering his army . He withheld shipment of United States aid from those villages .
 Vang Pao escaped to the United States with several thousand Hmong followers in 1975 . He became a leader of the expatriate Hmong community in the U.S.
 John Paul Vann charged that many ARVN commanders were corrupt, incompetent, and cowardly . Vann was a U.S. Army officer and senior adviser to the ARN in 1962-63 .
 In June 1967, he became head of the newly created Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development Support program for the area around Saigon . He was head of a program for Saigon's area around the city .
 As such, he was responsible for all pacification activities in III Corps . As such as all of III Corps' pacification efforts .
 In February 1969, he was moved south to take control of the CORDS effort in the Mekong Delta . He was moved to take over in February 1969 to take charge of CORDS .
 In 1971, General Creighton Abrams appointed Vann, a civilian, to command all United States forces in II Corps . Vann served as the senior adviser to the ARVN commander of II Corps in Vietnam .
 He personally directed the defense of Kontum and surrounding area during the North Vietnamese 1972 Easter Offensive . He was personally responsible for the defense .
 Vogt enlisted in the United States Army Air Corps in 1941 . Vogt served as a fighter pilot during two European combat tours . He was a U.S. General, United States Air Force .
 From 1965 to 1968, Vogt served as deputy for plans and operations, Pacific Air Force . Vogt participated in the planning and direction of the air campaign against North Vietnam .
 He also presided over the drawdown of U.S. forces in Vietnam . The final withdrawal in March 1973 after the signing of the Paris Peace Accords .
 General Vogt retired from active duty on August I, 1975 . Vogt was commander in chief of U.S. Air Forces Europe during his tour of Europe .
 Vo Nguyen Giap was born in Quang Binh Province in the French protectorate of Annam . Giap graduated from the French-run Lycee Albert Sarraut . He was a general and commander, People's Army of Vietnam, 1946—72 .
 He then worked as a high school history teacher and journalist, while participating in various revolutionary movements . He was a member of a revolutionary movement and a journalist .
 Giap fled to China together with Pham Van Dong, where they joined up with Ho Chi Minh . When France outlawed communism during the same year, they fled to France . Giap and Van Dong were joined up in China by Ho Chi-Minh .
 While he was in China, his wife, sister, father, and sister-in-law were captured and executed . His family was executed in China .
 Ho entrusted Giap with the organization and command of the fledgling Viet Minh guerrilla forces . Giap's forces fought against the Japanese forces occupying Vietnam from 1940 to 1945 . Ho died in 1945 .
 Giap became a leading figure in the new government after Ho and the Communists seized power in northern Vietnam . Giap was a key figure in Ho's government during the political vacuum following the end of World War II .
 When France tried to reestablish control over Vietnam the First Indochina War broke out in December 1946 . The war was the first attempt to take control of Vietnam .
 Giap ordered his troops into the mountainous north and began to shape his army into a potent fighting force . At first the Viet Minh had difficulty in coping with the better trained and equipped French forces, but Giap was determined to succeed .
 When Mao Zedong defeated the nationalists in China, he offered weapons and equipment to Giap and his army . Giap's army was defeated by the Chinese government in 1945 .
 The war degenerated into a bloody stalemate, but by 1953 the Viet Minh controlled several remote areas of northern Vietnam . The French controlled the Red River Valley in the north and most of the south of Vietnam .
 Giap directed the Viet Minh siege that overwhelmed the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu . The siege effectively won Vietnam its independence in 1954 . The war reached a climax in 1954 when Giap led the Vietnamese to victory over France .
 In the late 1950s and 1960s, Giap remained a key military figure in the Democratic Republic of Vietnam . Giap was a key figure in Vietnam's military .
 Giap was a proponent of protracted war, focused on guerrilla operations and the advancement of a Communist political base in the South . Giap supported protracted war with the Communist Party .
 Giap disagreed with the aggressive way that Nguyen Chi Thanh prosecuted the war in the South . Giap’s tactical concerns were largely validated after PAVN forces suffered extensive defeats in 1965-66 .
 The 1968 Tet Offensive was originally Nguyen Chi Thanh’s idea, but Giap had the responsibility for planning and directing the campaign . Giap was responsible for planning, directing the Tet Offensive .
 The offensive resulted in a tactical disaster for the Communists when the expected popular uprising in support of their forces failed to develop . The offensive ended in a defeat for the Communist Party .
 In 1972, Giap convinced the Politburo that because the majority of United States ground combat forces had been withdrawn, the time was ripe to commit the entire NVA to combat in the South . Giap persuaded the PolitBuro that .
 Giap’s forces were initially successful, capturing the provincial capital of Quang Tri in I Corps . Launching some 14 infantry divisions reinforced by Soviet-supplied tanks and artillery in what became known as the Eastertide Offensive .
 The Walt, Lewis Williams ese defense was supported by massive U.S. fire power . However, his attacks in the Central Highlands and at An Loc in III Corps were stopped cold by a determined South Vietnam defense .
 Estimates are that the PAVN suffered more than 100,000 casualties and lost more than half of its tanks and heavy artillery . Estimates say more than a million people died in the conflict .
 General Giap was eased from power in favor of his protege, the PAVN chief of staff, Senior General Van Tien Dung, who had commanded a division under Giap at Dien Bien Phu . Tarnished by successive failures, Giap eased from
 It was Dung, not Giap, who planned and commanded the final offensive that conquered South Vietnam in 1975 . Dung was responsible for the offensive that led to the fall of Vietnam . Giap died in 1975, but Dung survived .
 In 1980, General Giap was formally replaced as minister of defense by General Dung . In 1982 he lost his seat on the Politburo and was replaced as defense minister .
 Lieutenant General Walt commanded the III Marine Amphibious Force in Vietnam from June 1965 until June 1967 . He was responsible for the five northern provinces of South Vietnam, with responsibility for the .
 Walt was responsible for operations in I Corps, the northernmost region south of the Demilitarized Zone . He launched a balanced strategy of small unit patrolling, large unit operations, and an innovative pacification program using civic action and the United States Marine Combined Action Platoons .
 In 1966, the North Vietnamese sent more troops into the extreme northern section of I Corps . Walt was compelled to shift the focus of III MAF efforts to fighting the PAVN main force units . In the middle of 1966, Walt was forced to shift his focus to fighting PAV
 Walt replaced Lieutenant General Leonard A Chapman as assistant Marine Corps commandant in January 1968 . He was promoted to full general in June 1969, and retired in February 1971 . Walt replaced Lt. Chapman in 1968 .
 Paul Warnke became one of the Pentagon’s leading proponents of de-escalation . Warnke, Paul C General Counsel, Defense Department, 1966—67; Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1967—69 .
 Warnke prepared a critical assessment of Vietnam policy in 1968 . Warnke argued that more troops would lead to increased casualties and that it was time to reduce U.S. involvement in Vietnam .
 Warnke’s analysis helped sway Defense Secretary Clark Clifford, especially when the Joint Chiefs of Staff failed to address his concerns about further troop requests and the uncertain future of the war . Warnke: “I’m not sure what I’ve done, I�
 William Childs was born in Spartanburg County, South Carolina, on March 26, 1914 . He graduated from the United States Military Academy in 1936 . Westmoreland was commander of U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, 1964 .
 During World War II, Westmoreland commanded a field artillery battalion during the North African and Sicily campaigns . He later was chief of staff of the Ninth Infantry Division during the invasion of Europe .
 Colonel Westmoreland fought in the Korean War as commander of the 187th Airborne Airborne Infantry Regimental Combat Team . After serving as an instructor at both the Command and General Staff College and Army War College, Colonel Eastmoreland served in Korea as a colonel .
 After his return to the U.S. and promotion to general, he commanded the 101st Airborne Division . He later served as superintendent of the United States Military Academy .
 General Westmoreland was in command of America’s rapid reaction force, the XVIII Airborne Corps . He was selected as commander of U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam .
 General Westmoreland assumed command of MACV on June 20,1964 . He served briefly as deputy commander, but assumed command in 1964 .
 General Westmoreland assumed the added responsibility of commanding America’s armed forces in combat in Vietnam . Less than 60 days later, however, with the Gulf of Tonkin incident, he assumed the responsibility .
 In 1965, Westmoreland and the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended an increase of U.S. combat forces in South Vietnam to more than 100,000 . North Vietnamese regulars threatened to cut the country in two when they threatened to split the country .
 Westmoreland favored a conventional style of warfare, using large units and massive firepower to seek out and destroy Communist forces .
 He was instrumental in increasing the level of U.S. forces in Vietnam . He developed the strategy of attrition for the ground war .
 In late 1967, he made several public statements stressing the progress being made in the war . He made public statements in late 1967 to highlight the progress made by the war effort .
 These statements came back to haunt him in January 1968 when the Communists launched a massive new offensive . The Communist Party launched a new offensive in 1968 .
 Westmoreland and his commanders were taken by surprise by the new attacks, but his forces reacted quickly and decisively defeated the attackers . His forces were able to defeat the attackers in a decisive victory .
 He then asked for 206,000 more troops to take advantage of what he saw as an opportunity to exploit the failed offensive . The Afghan PM has asked for the extra troops to be deployed in the region .
 President Johnson rejected Westmoreland’s request . President Johnson was in political trouble within his own party .
 He then recalled Westmoreland and made him army chief of staff, replacing him in Vietnam with General Creighton Abrams . He was replaced by Abrams in Vietnam .
 He served in the new position from July 1968 until his retirement from the army in June 1972 .
 In 1982, he sued the CBS television network for libel over a documentary that charged that Communist strength figures in South Vietnam in 1967 had been deliberately falsified . A settlement was reached before the jury began deliberations in his 1982 lawsuit .
 He won the Silver Star for gallantry in action as a combat infantryman during the war in Korea . Transferring to the infantry in 1948, he won a Silver Star .
 In March 1966, Weyand took the 25th Infantry Division into combat in Vietnam . The division was deployed to Vietnam .
 After 12 months of battlefield activity with his division in western III Corps, he was selected to command the corps-level II Field Force Vietnam .
 During the Tet Offensive in 1968, his forces were instrumental in turning back the VC attack on Saigon . During the 1968 Tet Offensive, he helped turn back an attack by his forces .
 He later served as the military adviser to the United States Peace Delegation in Paris from March 1969 to June 1970 . Departing Vietnam in August 1968, he later served in Paris as a military adviser .
 Faced with the task of winding down the U.S. military presence in Vietnam, he was fated to be the last MACV commander . He was faced with the difficult and dangerous task .
 When the Paris accords were signed in January 1973, General Weyand withdrew the last U.S. military forces . The Paris accord was signed in 1973 .
 General Weyand assumed the post of the army chief of staff on September 4, 1974 . He assumed that post after the death of General Creighton Abrams .
 Weyand recommended $722 million in additional military aid for South Vietnam, which Congress refused to grant . President Gerald Ford was sent to Vietnam in April 1975 by President Ford to assess the military situation .
 President Kennedy appointed him United States Army chief of staff in 1962 . Earle Gilmore was a lifelong staff officer with no combat experience . Wheeler was chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff, 1964—70 .
 Wheeler was appointed chairman of the JCS in July 1964 to replace General Maxwell Taylor, who was sent to South Vietnam as United States ambassador by President Johnson . Wheeler replaced Taylor as U.S. ambassador .
 Wheeler began promising success in Vietnam through further escalation . Wheeler was appointed JCS chairman in 2010 .
 He resented Johnson’s refusal to mobilize the Reserves and his reluctance to use the full might of U.S. power against North Vietnam . Johnson was reluctant to use full might against Vietnam, he said .
 Wheeler went to Vietnam in February 1968, where he and General Westmoreland worked out a request for 206,000 additional troops . Wheeler returned with the request and recommended that the president call up the Reserves .
 The request was leaked to the press and undermined public faith in the military’s claim that the Tet Offensive had been a major American victory that had seriously weakened Communist forces in South Vietnam . The request leaked to press further undermined public trust in the U.S. claim that it had
 President refused to mobilize the Reserves and sent only modest reinforcements to Westmoreland . The president refused to send reinforcements to the troops .
 During the first part of the Nixon administration, he tried unsuccessfully to get the president not to draw down U.S. forces .
 Wheeler retired in 1970 after serving as chairman of the JCS for more than 40 years . Wheeler was the longest-serving chairman of JCS, retiring in 1970 .
 Williams succeeded General John O’Daniel as commander of United States Military Assistance Advisory Group Indochina on October 24, 1955 . A strict disciplinarian known as “Hanging Sam,” Williams succeeded . Williams was known for his disciplinarians .
 U.S. military Assistance Group, Vietnam, was redesignated as U.N. Assistance Group . It was soon redesignated United States Military Assistance Group.
 Williams dismissed the Viet Cong guerrilla threat as a diversion and continued the United States policy of training South Vietnamese troops to become a conventional force designed to repel an invasion from the north .
 He cultivated close relations with South Vietnamese president Ngo Dinh Diem while feuding constantly with U.S. ambassador Elbridge Durbrow .
 Xuan Thuy began revolutionary activities in 1926 and was imprisoned by the French from 1939 to 1945 . Born in Ha Dong Province near Hanoi, he began revolutionary activity in 1926 . Foreign minister, Democratic Republic of Vietnam, 1963-65; chief delegate, Paris Peace Talks, 1968-
 Xuan Thuy headed the official North Vietnamese delegation to the Paris peace talks from May 1968 until the signing of the cease-fire agreement in January 1973 . He headed the delegation from the North Vietnamese government .
 Thuy, acting as Le Due Tho’s chief deputy, negotiated periodically with Henry Kissinger . Thuy was acting as Thuy's chief deputy at the time . Kissinger negotiated with Thuy .
 Zumwalt graduated from the United States Naval Academy in 1942 . Admiral, United States Navy; commander of United States naval forces Vietnam, 1969—70; chief of naval operations, 1970-74 . Born on November 29, 1920, in San Francisco, in . San Francisco .
 Admiral Zumwalt was appointed commander of U.S. Naval Forces Vietnam in September 1968 . He was responsible for naval operations in Vietnam .
 Admiral Zumwalt launched Operation Sealords, a joint effort to disrupt enemy supply lines in the Mekong Delta . He was with COMNAVFOR during his time with the U.S. and South Vietnamese Navy .
 Zumwalt departed Vietnam in May 1970 and assumed his new office on July 1, 1970 . Named chief of naval operations, he left the country in July 1970 .
 Zumwalt, Elmo Russell, Jr. launched a number of reforms designed to improve conditions for the navy’s enlisted men .
 Elmo R Zumwalt, III, died of cancer, believed to have been caused by Agent Orange . Agent Orange was authorized by his father as a defoliant to reduce enemy ambush positions along coastal waterways .
 An average of 30 Republic of China and 10 Spanish advisers served throughout period as well . #lncludes Army, Navy, Marines, Air Force, Regional, and Popular Forces, but does not include paramilitary formations .
 George Donelson Moss, Vietnam: An American Ordeal, 3rd ed. , 447; Lester H Brune and Richard Dean Bums, America and the Indochina Wars, 1945-1990: A Bibliographic Guide , 146.5 .
 The units listed above account for 98 percent of the Americans killed by hostile action in Vietnam . The units account for almost all of the U.S. deaths in Vietnam.
 The Program and Its Problems (Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, Congressional Research Service, January 1972), A-1. The program and its Problems were published in 1972 .
 Vietnamization and the Cease-Fire (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Army Center of Military History, 1 980), 27. 27. Vietnamization . Vietnamization is the first phase of the war .
 Medal of Honor Recipients include Maj. Maj. William Adams and Maj. Edward Adams . Adams was one of the first to receive the award in Vietnam .
 Anderson, James, Jr. played for the Vietnam War team . Kontum Province May 25, 1971 . Anderson, Lewis, Jr., played for Vietnam's National Football Team .
 QuangTri Province Aug. 1969 Anderson, Webster USA, USA SFC Tam Ky Oct. 1967 . Ashley, Eugene, Jr. Jr., Jr. is the son of a Vietnam veteran who served in Vietnam .
 Austin, Oscar P USMC PFC West of Da Nang Feb., 1969 Baca, John P USA SP4 Phuoc Long Province Feb., 1970 Bacon, Nicky D USA SSG West ofTam Ky Aug., 1968 Baker, John F., Jr. USA SFC
 Barnum, Harvey C., Jr. Near Con Thien Sept., 1967, was killed in Vietnam . Barnum was a member of the U.S. Army World War II .
 Benavidez, Roy P USA SSG West of Loc Ninh May 2, 1968 * Ben nett, Steven L USAF Capt. Ky Phu, Quang Tin Province Dec., 1965 Beikirch, Gary B USA SGT Kontum Province Apr., 1970
 Ben nett, Thomas W USA CPL Chu Pa Region, Pleiku Province Feb.-11, 1969 . Blanchfield, Michael R USA SP4 Binh Dinh Province July 3, 1969 *Bobo,John P USMC 2nd Lt. Quang Tri June 29
 Coker, Ronald L USMC PFC Quang Tri Province Mar., 1969 ♦Connor, Peter S USMC SSgt. U.S. PFC Republic ofVietnam Jan., 1970 ♦ Coker .
 Davis, Sammy L USA PFC West of Cai Lay Nov., 1967 . Dahl, Larry G USA SP4 Near Gia Dinh Mar., 1968 ♦ Dahl, Rodney M USMC s gtQuang Nam Province Sept., 1967 ♦
 Ferguson, Frederick E USA CWO Hue Hue Hue Jan., 1968 *Fernandez, Daniel USA SP4 Cu Chi, Hau Nghia Province Feb., 1966 Fisher, Bernard F USAF Maj. Maj. Major. Fernandez . Fernandez, Daniel U.S. C-SP4 Cu
 Fleek, Charles C USA SGT Binh Duong Province May 27, 1969 . Fleming, James P USAF 1 st Lt. Lt. James P. Fleming . Fleek was a U.S. SP4 Khe Sanh Mar., 1971 .
 Folland, Michael F USA CPL Long Khanh Province July 3, 1969 * Foster, Paul H USMC SgtNear Con Thien Oct., 1967 *Fournet, Douglas B USA 1 LT A Shau Valley May 4, 1968 *Fous, James W USA
 Grandstaff, Bruce A USA PSGT Pleiku Province May 18, 1967 . Grant, Joseph X USA 1 LT Republic ofVietnam Nov., 1966 . Graves, Terrence C USMC 2nd Lt. Lt. Gen. Terrence .
 Hartsock, Robert W USA SFC Hau Nghia Province Feb., 1969 *Harvey, Carmel B., Jr. USA SP4 Quan Tan Uyen Province May 18, 1968 Hagemeister, Charles C USA SP 4 Binh Dinh Province Mar., 1967
 Holcomb,John N USA SGT Near Quan Loi Dec., 1968 Hooper, Joe R USA Sgt Near Hue Feb., 1968 . Hooper and Charles E. Hosking, Charles E., Jr. USA 2LT Don Dien Lo Ke Mar., 1966 .
 Republic of Vietnam May 6, 1970 *lngalls, George A USA SP4 Near Due Pho Pho Apr., 1967 Ingram, Robert R USN HC3c Quang Ngai Province Mar., 1966 .
 Johnson, Dwight H USA SP5 Near Dak To, Kontum Province Jan., 1968 . Johnson, Ralph H USMC PFC Near Quan Due Valley Mar., 1968 *Johnston, Donald R USA SP4 Tay Ninh Province Mar., 1969 *Jones, William A Ill USAF
 Keller, Leonard B USA SGT Ap Bac Zone May 2, 1967 . Kelley, Thomas G USN LT LT Ong Muon Canal, Kien Hoa Province June 15, 1969 . Kellogg, Allan J. Jr. was killed in Vietnam in 1969 .
 Kerrey, Joseph R USNR LT Near Nha Trang Bay Mar., 1969 Kinsman, Thomas J USA PFC Near Vinh Long . Lambers, Paul R USA SGT Tay Ninh Province Aug., 1968 Lang, George C USA SP4 Kien Hoa
 Long, Long, Donald R USA SGT Republic ofVietnam June 30, 1966 *Lozada, Carlos J USA PFC Dak To Nov., 1967 * Lucas, Andre C USA LTC FSB Ripcord July 1-23, 1970 . Lynch, Allan J
 The Vietnam War was the first major conflict in the country to be fought in Vietnam in 1968 . The conflict began in 1968 with the deaths of two Americans .
 McNerney, David H. USA 1SG Polei Doc Mar., 1967 . McNerne, Edgar 1_, Jr. Jr. USA SP4 Quang Tin Province Mar., 1969 .
 Perkins, William T. Jr. SGT. Near Chu Lai Aug. 1965 . Penry, Richard A USA SGT Binh Tuy Province Jan., 1970 .
 Near the DMZ July 24, 1966 . Pless, Stephen W USMC Capt. Riley Pitts, Riley L USA CPT Ap Dong .
 Ray, David R USN HC2c Quang Nam Province Mar., 1969 Ray, Ronald E USA 1 LT la Drang Valley June 19, 1966 . Rabel, Laszlo USA SSG Binh Dinh Province Nov., 1968 Rascon, Alfred V USA SP4
 Roberts, James W. Robinson, Jr. was killed in Vietnam in 1969 . He was killed during a battle in the Anundan Province of Vietnam .
 Smith, Elmelindo R USA SSG Republic ofVietnam Feb., 1967 . Sprayberry, James M USA 1 LT Republic of Vietnam . Smith, James B USN Capt. Quang Nam Province Dec. 1967 .
 Stryker, Robert F. USA SP4 Near Loc Ninh Nov., 1967 Stumpf, Kenneth E USA CPT Cambodia Feb., 1971 Taylor, James A USA 1 LT West of Que Son Nov. 1967 Taylor, Karl G., Sr. USA SGT West of Landing
 Thacker, Brian M USA 1 LT Kontum Province Mar., 1971 Thornton, Michael E USN PO Republic ofVietnam Oct., 1972 Thorsness, Leo K USAF Maj. Maj. Major. Major .
 Versace, Humbert R USA CPT Ca Mau Oct., 1963Sept., 1965 . Dai Do Apr.-May 2, 1968 . Versace was born in Japan .
 Wickam, Jerry W USA CPL Near Loc Ninh Jan. 1968 . Wilbanks, Hilliard A USAF Capt. Hilliard Wilbanks A USAF Captain. Wilbanks died in Vietnam .
 Young, Gerald O USAF Capt. T USA SFC Near Bien Hoa Jan., 1969 *Yntema, Gordon D USA SGT NearThong Binh Jan.-18, 1968 . Yntema was a U.S. Navy SFC near Bien Bien
 Medal of Honor recipients include A1C Airman First Class PSgt. PSgt . Fred Zabitosky and Marvin Young were awarded the award for their bravery in Vietnam .
 Private CB3c Construction Mechanic Third Class . SFC Sergeant First Class Col. Col. First Class . Col. Second Class .
 Corporal SGT Sergeant CPT Captain SN Seaman CWO ChiefWarrant Officer SP4 Specialist Fourth Class GSgt. Sgt. CPT CPT SGT SGT Sgt. SGT CPT Sgt. GPT CTS Sgt. TGT CTS CPT T
 Staff Sergeant LT Lieutenant 1 LT First Lieutenant LTC Lieutenant Colonel 1 st Lt. Lt. LTC Lt. Colonel 1st Lt. Lieutenant Colonel Colonel 1 Lt. Colleagues 1st Lieutenant Lieutenant Colonel 2nd Lt.
 U.S. Major USA United States Army MAJ Major USAF Major USAF . Major USA USA Major USA MAJ . USAF Major USA .
 Linebacker was a United States bombing campaign against North Vietnam in May 1972 . The bombing campaign was part of a U.S. bombing campaign .
 Ambrose, Stephen E Nixon, Volume Two—the Triumph of Politician, 1962-1972. Ambrose, . Richard Nixon, . Stephen E. Nixon, was . The President of the United States .
 A History of How American Culture Led Us into Vietnam and Made Us Fight the Way We Did. A History Of Vietnam War . A history of American culture . A History . of Vietnam and American Culture. A. History of Vietnam .
 The Incredible Double Life of Pham Xuan An, Time Magazine Reporter and Vietnamese Communist Agent, is published by Time Magazine . An is a reporter for Time Magazine and a Communist Communist Agent .
 How the American Press and Television Reported and Interpreted the Crisis of Tet 1968 in Vietnam in Vietnam and Washington. vol. vols . vols. How the U.S. press and television reported and interpreted the crisis in Vietnam . vol.
 The Disintegration and Decay of the U.S. Army During the Vietnam Era . The U.N. Army during the Vietnam era was a major unit in the Army .
 The U.S. Navy in Riverine Warfare and the Emergence of a Tactical Doctrine, 1775-1970 . The United States Navy in riverine warfare and the emergence of the Tactical Doctrine .
 An Illustrated History of the U.S. Navy in the War in Southeast Asia . An Illustrated history of the United States Navy .
 Johnson, McNamara, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the lies that led to Vietnam . The Vietnam War is now a major political issue .
 Defense Department History of U.S. Decisionmaking on Vietnam . The Defense Department history of Vietnam .
 The Organization and Techniques of the National Liberation Front of South Vietnam is published by the Vietnam Liberation Front . The organization and techniques of the N.L. Front were used in the Vietnam War .
 The Unmaking of a President — Lyndon Johnson and Vietnam . Schandler, Herbert Y. Schandlers, Herbert Z. Y. He says Johnson's Vietnam experience was a mistake .
 The Unexamined Victories and the Final Tragedy of America’s Last Years in Vietnam in Vietnam . The U.S. in Vietnam is the final chapter of America's Last Years .
 A Complete Illustrated Reference to the U.S. Army Ground Forces in Vietnam, 1961-1973 . The U.N. Army ground forces in Vietnam were in Vietnam 1961- 1973 .
 Williams, William Appleman, Thomas McCormick, Lloyd Gardner and Lloyd Gardner, ed. Walter LaFeber, eds., eds. Williams, Williams Appleman and William. Appleman . Williams . Appleman: "I was a great writer" Williams, Appleman was
 See Bao Dai Nguyen Xuen Oanh 86 Nilsson, Torsten 319,372 Nixon, Richard Milhous 425, 425, 503504. Nilsson and Torsten . Nixon . Nixon. Nixon .
 North Vietnam; Socialist Republic of Vietnam; South Vietnam under Chinese rule 1-2 early kingdoms in First Indochina War . South Vietnam was one of two early kingdoms under Chinese influence .
 See Japanese occupation under Nguyen dynasty 3-4 Viet Nam Doc Lap Dong Minh . See Japanese occupied under Nguyen Dynasty 3-5 .
 See also North Vietnam; South Vietnam; specific battles and operations cease-fire in . North Vietnam . South Vietnam . North and South Vietnam.