 U.S. national security adviser McGeorge Bundy informed President John F Kennedy that a U-2 spy plane flight over Cuba two days earlier had revealed medium-range, nuclear-capable missiles installed by the Soviet Union .
 At the time, Americans believed that the Soviet Union had far more, which had become a major domestic political issue . The Soviets had more than a million Soviet Union members .
 After Kennedy took office, U.S. intelligence discovered that Khrushchev’s arsenal was far smaller than he’d claimed . The United States had a far smaller arsenal than he claimed -far smaller than the United States .
 The “missile gap” issue had permeated Washington, so it was only natural that the capital’s inhabitants continued to view the Cold War through this lens . The ‘Missile Gap’ has permeated D.C. Washington .
 The U.S. had installed missiles in Turkey within range of Moscow . The same logic was applied to Khrushchev's similar-seeming effort in Cuba . It wasn't until 1987 that the world learned that Kennedy and his team had been wrong .
 Soviet-American conference on the crisis’s 25th anniversary held in Moscow . Soviet officials released never-before-seen documents from what they called the “Caribbean crisis” of 1962 . Documents were released at a Soviet-U.S. conference .
 Khrushchev had been seeking to fix the imbalance in offensive nuclear weapons . The West had assumed he was trying to fix this imbalance in weapons . It was not the first time the West had seen this move .
 Khrushchev allowed his ideological romanticism to overrun whatever capacity he had for strategic analysis, Gaddis says . Khrushchev allowed ideological Romanticism to overrule his strategic thinking .
 The crisis ended, famously, when Kennedy privately pledged to remove missiles from Turkey and not invade Cuba . But strategy-obsessed Washington could not possibly fathom that the Soviet Union would edge onto the brink of global nuclear war because of the emotional obsessions of one man .
 The removal of Turkish missiles was the decisive concession, granting Khrushchev greater balance in strategic nuclear weapons . In the U.S. understanding of the crisis, which persisted until 1987, the removal was a decisive concession . The removal was part of the agreement to remove Turkish missiles from the
 Kennedy’s pledge not to invade Cuba was both the easiest for him to make and the most persuasive in convincing Khrushchev to stand down . Kennedy's pledge to not invade Cuba may have been the easiest to make .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev seem to have misread one another’s strategic priorities and personal motivations . Even in ending the near-catastrophic crisis, both men misread each other's strategic priorities . The world is lucky that Kennedy's priorities lined up in the end .
 "It wasn’t until 1987 that the world learned that Kennedy and his team had been wrong," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Khrushchev believed the U.S. was planning an imminent, full-scale military invasion of Cuba; and that, without American meddling, Cuban-style communism would spread naturally throughout Latin America .”"",""type"":""text"","originalIdx":4
 The crisis ended, famously, when Kennedy privately pledged both to remove America’s missiles from Turkey and to not invade Cuba . But strategy-obsessed Washington could not possibly fathom that the Soviet Union would edge onto the brink of global nuclear war because of the emotional obsessions of
 Kennedy and Khrushchev seem to have misread one another’s strategic priorities and personal motivations, ascribing their own worldview to the other .