 It is not clear whether the release of the letters would be simultaneous . It is unclear whether the letters will be released at all .
 The Kennedy letters may contain some clarifications of the agreements Moscow and Washington reached in late October 1962 . A U.S. official said the Kennedy letters could contain clarifications . A United States official said some of the documents may contain clarification .
 No other conflict during the post-World War II era brought the two superpowers closer to nuclear war than the Cuban crisis . The crisis grew out of the Soviet decision to deploy offensive nuclear weapons in Cuba .
 Some of the letters have remained classified because they contain references to Berlin, a major point of U.S.-Soviet contention during that period . One official says some letters have been classified because of their references to the city .
 Officials said the government's decision to release the Kennedy letters is linked to a long-planned conference on the missile crisis . The Cuban government is holding a conference on missile crisis in Havana starting next Thursday .
 U.S., Soviet and Cuban officials who participated in the crisis are scheduled to attend the memorial service . The memorial service will be held in Washington, DC .
 Fidel Castro was outraged by Khrushchev's decision to withdraw missiles without consulting him first . Fidel Castro is expected to take part in the talks .
 With the Cold War over, Americans for the first time in decades live without the fear of nuclear war . Americans live without fear of a nuclear war for first time since Cold War ended .
 The war of wills between the U.S. and the former Soviet Union over Soviet middle-range nuclear missiles placed in Cuba still offers some important lessons .
 President Barack Obama has a long list of things to do with the U.S. to do in the Middle East . It includes setting clear goals and allowing diplomacy to work, he says .
 As is true with many historically significant events, a debate still rages about how the crisis was handled . The crisis was a major event in the United States .
 Some assert Khrushchev made virtually unconditional concessions to Soviet leader . Some assert he did not make any concessions . Others say he made no concessions to the Soviets .
 While the solution favored the United States, it was in fact a compromise . The solution favored both the U.S. and the United Kingdom .
 Events might not have turned out so favorably if senior U.S. officials had prevailed in early discussions about how to respond to the missile launch .
 If that action and a followup invasion had happened, say critics, the world might have been spared three decades of Cuban troublemaking . Critics say that action could have saved the world from the Cuban crisis .
 A sobering tidbit that was revealed just this year was revealed this year . Also, it's worth recalling that it was revealed that this year's President Barack Obama was the president .
 In addition to the missiles, tactical nuclear weapons were hidden in Cuba . The U.S. government also hid tactical weapons in the country .
 Even though the U.S. boasted nuclear superiority over the Soviets in the early 1960s, it was likely that in a nuclear exchange perhaps 30 or more of Moscow's weapons would have hit United States cities . The United States boasted that it had a nuclear superiority to the Soviets .
 Mr Kennedy managed to maintain a delicate balance of acting tough without carrying out the crisis beyond the point of no return .
 The Soviets backed down Mr. Kennedy, having achieved his primary goal, properly made no additional demands . Mr Kennedy made no further demands .
 The crisis ended as quickly as it started, leaving a model of skillful leadership . That allowed the crisis to end as suddenly as well as the start, leaving the crisis without a lasting legacy .
 ARTHUR the communist phoned a few months back, suggesting I might assist some friends of his from Cuba . He suggested I might help some of his friends from Cuba, but I'm not interested .
 A few days later, I found myself hosting a small unofficial meeting of the Australia Cuba Friendship Society . It was the first time I had been to Cuba in Australia since the country's first visit to Cuba .
 They reckoned it was pretending to be Cuban by sponsoring The Buena Vista Social Club, that smashing Ry Cooder movie about Cuban music, and even sponsoring the Festival de Cuba at Darling Harbor . They said they thought the club was pretending it was Cuban .
 The story of rum is as miserable and wretched a yarn as you can find in the history of drinks . Not surprising, thought I thought. Not surprising .
 Hugh Thomas's abysmally depressing The Slave Trade is the best way to learn about the slave trade . The slave trade is the most important trade in the world .
 Rum is the very simple spirit made by distilling brewed sugar, or molasses . Rum is a simple spirit distilled by distilling brewed sugar .
 The Muslims, Roman Catholics, the Jews and the Protestants shared the business, and to avoid any inconvenient foreign cash transactions, rum . Rum, that most fluent of currencies, perfectly fitted the bill .
 Old World practitioners called the Golden Triangle was really a kind of perpetual-motion wealth machine . The eternal slave route which Old World . practitioners called . the Golden . Triangle was called the . Golden Triangle .
 Reverend John Newton would drive his vessel against the coast of Africa, drawn in by signalling smoke on the shore . A slaver such a slaver would be drawn in from the shore of Africa .
 Newton wrote great hymns to please his cargo, such as Amazing Grace, or How Sweet the Name . Newton also wrote great songs to please the cargo .
 Imagine lying there, in chains, listening to the dogs above rasping out; How sweet the name of Jesus sounds; In a believer's ear, It soothes his sorrows, heals his wounds; And drives away his fear . Imagine lying . in chains .
 Traders would carry their humans to the Caribbean, where they were swapped for molasses . Madeira traders would pick up a few hogsheads of verdelho, just for the captain's entertainments .
 Off they went in chains to the cane fields, making more molasses for the next trader . The men were chained up to their chains and made their way to the sugar fields .
 The rum then went back to Africa, where it was swapped for more humans, and so on, so forth . The rum was then swapped for humans in Africa, and then swapped with more humans .
 Arechabalas family had been making Havana Club rum in Cuba since the 19th century . Fidel Castro and his brother Raoul led the revolution in Cuba in 1959 .
 Cuban literature says the company was virtually bankrupt but that's contentious . Some Cuban literature has disputed that . Some say the company is now virtually bankrupt .
 It is made in various countries, such as Mexico, Puerto Rico and the Bahamas .
 Arechabalas family decided to make Bacardi the designated successor to the Havana Club name . Bacardi is Bacardi's designated successor, and all hell broke loose with the name .
 Bacardi began selling its Bahamas rum as Havana Club in the U.S. Bacardi has been selling its rum in the United States since 2004 . Bacardi's rum is sold in the Bahamas at Havana Club .
 In 1993, Castro made a deal with Pernod Ricard, setting up a joint-venture company to distribute the Cuban Havana Club .
 Since Gorbachev pulled the plug on the USSR, that committed market for communist rum frizzled . Cuba needed help. Cuba needed it .
 Cuban Havana Club sells more than a million cases a year . Havana Club is No 4 in the world's rum market, selling more than one million cases per year .
 The French-Cuban alliance went to war in the courts with Bacardi . Bacardi went on to win over the Cuban trade embargo against the U.S. Bacardi won't be allowed to compete in Cuba .
 The United States says trademarks which have been pinched by revolutionaries who do not pay for them should not be honored there . At the moment the whole thing is bogged in the courts, although it seems the anti-communists have kicked the most recent goal .
 Bacardi's use of the Havana Club brand in the U.S. is not just the way Bacardi continues to feign Cuban heritage . What peeves Arthur the communist and my friends at the Australia Cuba Friendship Society are not just Bacardi . It's not the use of Havana
 Bacardi has worked extremely hard to present a popular Cuban image . The real Cuban Havana Havana Club began making its presence felt internationally . Bacardi's Havana Club has been in the forefront of Cuba's image .
 Its slogan in Australia is ''Cuban rums since 1862'', although no ingredient comes from Cuba . Its slogan is 'Cuban rum since 1862', although it is not Cuba .
 Fidel Castro has suggested that in retaliation, Cuba should begin using US trademarks without approval . Castro: "We should not complain if we start using any North American brand to produce ... products''
 The bigger worry for many Americans is the possibility of a trade barrier with the European Union . The EU has officially complained about the U.S. action damaging one of Europe's prized liquor companies .
 Bacardi opened the door for the boom in Bacardi in the 1960s . It was that revilement which led to a boom in the brand's popularity .
 The moment Mr Gorbachev opened Russia, Stolichnaya became the white spirit on everyone's lips, and Bacardi suffered . Bacardi suffers from a lack of vodka .
 Bacardi is so keen to feign Cubanness that it could well be seen to be a communist product . Bacardi has been accused of distancing itself from Cuba . The rum rumoured to have been a rumoured communist party .
 The Havana Club's more boisterous and macho, and gives mixers such a much more hefty rum flavor . Mixers such as lime juice or Coke give the rum flavor much more of the rum .
 Kennedy demanded the removal of Soviet bombers from the island, calling them ""offensive weapons" Khrushchev sought a formal promise that the United States never would invade Cuba .
 The letters began Oct. 2, two days after Khrushchev gave the allimportant order to begin dismantling the missiles . The missiles were capable of reaching targets up to 2,000 miles away . The letters were sent by the Soviet Union in the fall .
 The threat of Cuba launching Soviet missiles during a 13day international crisis ended this day 40 years ago . The fear then was of nuclear warfare, with the threat of Cuban missiles .
 After leaving central Texas, the troop train traveled across Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama to Fort Stewart, Ga., near Savannah, where the Army invasion of Cuba was to have been organized .
 "We were in a STRAC unit, or Strategic Army Command, all members of the 1st Armored Division," she says . "We're in a unit, all of us were in STRAC," she said .
 Throughout the Cold War time, we were constantly on mock alerts and engaged in huge peacetime maneuvers, war games in the South called Swift Strikes . We were constantly engaged in mock alerts .
 Right from the start, this movement to the Atlantic coast seemed vastly different, especially looking out train windows at railroad sidings with miles of flat cars loaded with tanks, armored personnel carriers and artillery pieces .
 A good many of us back then were 1961 draftees, conscripted after college when the Berlin Wall went up . We were conscripts after college in 1961 when Berlin Wall was down .
 There were at least 40 nuclear missiles in communist Cuba, put there by the Soviet Union . The missiles were pointed toward America, pointed toward the United States .
 The missiles were capable of ranging over much of the U.S. and the Western Hemisphere . The missiles are capable of range over much parts of the United States .
 Historian T Michael Ruddy said the missile crisis was the 20th century's scariest moment . Historian said it was the most terrifying moment in the history .
 Historians have called it the most dangerous period of recorded time . Other historians have said it was the most deadly period in recorded history .
 A possible war with Iraq and ongoing terrorists attacks are what haunts us . Now, a possible war and ongoing terror attacks are the main concerns, the government says .
 October 1962 was a time of real nail-biting anxiety, thoughts of a horizon filled with mushroom clouds, nuclear warfare of the sort that no one back then liked to think about . Still, October 1962 is a time when the world was gripped by nuclear warfare .
 "We knew very little about how perilous this all was, that we were being prepared for an invasion of Cuba," says President Obama . "It was very difficult to understand how perilous it was," says Obama .
 Standing near the tracks were several older men looking at us in a rather bemused way . The trainmen were not amused by the sight of the trainmen looking at them .
 It became clear that this was a world-threatening situation when a few of us were ordered to burn a cluster of see-through map cover sheets showing colored arrows where various division brigades would have hit the Cuban shoreline .
 Rams general manager Charley Armey was caught up in these scary times . Of course, there are others from here who were caught up .
 Armey was aboard the Greenwood, a destroyer escort that was part of the Naval blockade . The Greenwood almost had to ram a Russian freighter, almost ramming the freighter .
 No one in the 1st Armored faced anything like that, although there were units that traveled to Florida and practiced amphibious assault landings .
 The Lincoln Continental convertible Kennedy rode in that day at Fort Stewart was the same vehicle he was in four days short of a year later, when he was shot and killed in Dallas . Kennedy was killed that day in Dallas, Texas, four days before his death .
 'Many FEARED the world DIDN'T HAVE EVEN 40 MORE DAYS TO EXIST', St.Dispatch Post-Dispatch says . 'Many feared the world didn't have even 40 more days to live'
 Prime minister Sean Lemass personally gave U.S. go-ahead for inspections and data handover . Lemass says he personally gave neutral Ireland's goahead to United States ambassador Mathew McCloskey .
 Information handed over included details of cargo and its weight and passengers and their nationalities, the National Archives material says .
 The Cuban missile crisis erupted after Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev vowed to support Fidel Castro's regime by arming it with nuclear missiles capable of striking targets in the United States . The crisis erupted in the Soviet Union's support of Castro's Cuban regime .
 In October 1962, U.S. president John F Kennedy imposed a naval blockade on the island nation . The blockade was imposed in response to a request from President Kennedy . In 1962, President Kennedy imposed the blockade .
 The standoff led to the biggest crisis of the Cold War . It brought the world the closest it had come to a nuclear conflict . The standoff was the biggest Cold War crisis .
 As the crisis unfolded, a United States embassy counsellor in Dublin visited the Department of External Affairs . Washington was seeking information about planes stopping over in Shannon on Prague-Havana flights .
 The diplomat, referred to only as Sweeney, spoke about the data the U.S. administration was anxious to have"", according to a memo from the Irish ministry's top civil servant, Cornelius Cremin .
 Irish premier tells U.S. ambassador that Dublin will supply data on future flights . A coded telex to the United States embassy also agreed to help if ships on their way to Cuba stopped at Irish ports .
 In 1964 Ireland sought to end inspections, but Washington was keen for them to continue .
 Sorensen spent 11 years as a policy and legal advisor to Kennedy . He also wrote speeches for Kennedy during his years as an senator and president .
 He spoke of the important decisions which need to be made by any leader facing a crisis . He also spoke of how important decisions must be made when faced with crisis .
 President Kennedy made the first of these decisions by selecting a team of advisors to help sort out the problem, Sorensen said . President Kennedy also made the decision by selecting his own advisors .
 Many members of this team were not government officials, but instead were citizens with specific expertise . The team includes citizens who have specific expertise in specific areas of expertise .
 One of the citizens was the leading expert on the Soviet Union at the time .
 Sorensen expressed the importance of deciding on a course of action, especially when war is a possible outcome of that decision . He said it is important to decide on a decision, especially in a decision to go to war .
 The Kennedy letters may contain clarifications of the agreements Moscow and Washington reached in October 1962 . The official says the Kennedy letters could contain some clarifications . Moscow-Washington agreements were reached when the crisis was resolved .
 Officials said the government's decision to release the letters is linked to a long-planned conference on the missile crisis the Cuban government is holding in Havana starting Thursday . The conference is scheduled to take place in Cuba on Thursday .
 If Soviet bombers shot overhead, it would be the responsibility of a 17-year-old U.S. Army private to activate the launch sequence for a barrage of radar-targeted Nike Hercules interceptor missiles .
 If he fired his Nikes, he was under orders to grab his rifle and run out of the bunker to defend U.S. shores from any invading force . He was also ordered to fire his rifle if he fires his Nike sneakers .
 The Everglades Nike installation will be entered into the National Register of Historic Places today . It is because of Carter that the Everglade Nike installation is being entered in the historic place . The installation is part of a ceremony at the site .
 One commemorative plaque will be affixed to a cinder-block building that holds some of the park's science offices and a cafeteria for park workers . The park will also have a cafeteria and science offices .
 It used to be the operations center where the men of 2nd Missile Battalion 52nd Air Defense Artillery bunked . The men took mess and received orders at the base .
 Another plaque will be affixed to a shed that was used to hold equipment and boats during hurricanes . The shed will be used as a storage shed for maintenance equipment .
 This was once the missile-assembly building, where nuclear warheads were attached . The building was once a missile- assembly building, with warheads attached .
 He retired from the U.S. Army as a staff sergeant in 1965 . He showed up for a Friday tour of the installation in a dress uniform that displayed his medals .
 He keeps a collection of memorabilia from that time his battalion's flag, his Geiger counter, some evacuation center signs . He did not do much with them until a few years ago .
 He says he had an epiphany watching the president on television . He says it was like watching him watch the president's inauguration .
 He prepared a history of the installation for the 2002 Conference of Military Historians . He made a presentation to the United States National Park Service, which sought the historic listing . The park service agreed to pay for the upkeep .
 The bunker where Carter used to sit is structurally sound but very, very dirty, full of rats and wasps . The bunker was full of wasps and rats, but it's very dirty and full of people .
 The control console is gone but in the missile shelter nearby, there is still a phone . It is still possible to use the phone in a missile shelter .
 Installation has not been used since 1979, after the Soviet Union's preferred method of payload delivery shifted from bombers to high-flying Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles .
 A more sophisticated interceptor, the Nike Zeus, was developed, but that too became useless when more sophisticated ICBMs came into vogue . The Nike Zeus interceptor was developed in the 1980s, but it was later abandoned .
 He was covered in mosquitoes that seemed to be attracted to his uniform . He was walking out of the bunker covered in mosquito bites .
 The U.S. aided a military task force to overthrow Castro, which landed south of Havana at the Bay of Pigs, in 1961 . Desperate to beat back the 'cancer' of socialism from its doorstep, the United States aided a task force .
 The rebels were easily put down by a well-armed Cuban army that had strong links with the Soviet Union . The Cuban army was well armed and had strong ties with the USSR .
 The United States remained watchful of the Kremlin's relationship with Castro . Knowing that the Soviets were eager to prop up fellow communist regimes, the U.S. was wary of the relationship .
 In 1962, U.S. spy planes provided evidence that Soviet missiles were being shipped to Cuba . The Cuban missile crisis was the height of tensions between the two countries .
 President Kennedy warned U.S. citizens they might once again have to pay ""the price for freedom" President John F Kennedy said conflict with the Soviet Union could not be ruled out .
 Washington's hawkish stance did not receive the backing from her allies that Kennedy had hoped for . Support eventually came, notable from the British government .
 Kennedy pulled back from initial plan to invade Cuba, deciding instead to enforce a ""quarantine" or blockade, on Cuba . U.S. navy ships, including aircraft carriers, were deployed to enforce the blockade .
 Khrushchev sent Kennedy a message that Soviet missiles would be taken back . Days later, the deadly game of nuclear brinkmanship between the two nations ended .
 Kennedy also promised to withdraw United States nuclear-armed missiles located in Turkey . Kennedy also secretly promised to pull the missiles from Turkey .
 Cuba's Fidel Castro was left frustrated by the Soviets' retreat . He realised he was effectively excluded from the negotiations . Cuba's Castro was frustrated but realised he had been effectively excluded .
 With a catastrophic war averted, the U.S. and Soviet Union was set up to prevent such a crisis happening again . A hotline between the United States and the Soviet Union has been set up since the Cold War .
 The world trembled on the edge of the nuclear abyss over the issue of Soviet missile launchers based in Cuba in October 1962 . Canadians were very much involved in the tense days of October 1962, when the world was on the brink of nuclear war .
 Kennedy and his closest advisers were divided on what to do when they discovered the missile sites . The missile sites were discovered by U.S. reconnaissance planes in October, 1962 .
 Some hawks spoke of invasion and air strikes; calmer heads called for negotiations . The U.S. has been in talks with the Syrian regime .
 Kennedy ordered the U.S. navy to impose a blockade on Cuba . Kennedy told the public of the existence of the weapons on Oct. 31, 1962 .
 Warships put to sea to head off Soviet freighters carrying more missiles and components . Warships head off freighters bringing more missiles, components .
 One of the big concerns was a potential confrontation with Soviet submarines lurking in the Atlantic . The U.S. Navy feared a confrontation with the Soviet Union .
 As American ships concentrated close to Cuba and along the southeastern coast of the U.S. they looked to the Royal Canadian Navy for help .
 The East Coast fleet sailed from Halifax to sea to cover the northern flank of the operation .
 It was done without orders from Ottawa, under the guise of an exercise . The Canadian government has not ordered it to take part in the exercise, it has said .
 The entire East Coast fleet put to sea on a massive sub hunt . Basically, the entire East Co. fleet put out to sea to find a sub .
 Prime Minister John Diefenbaker disliked Kennedy and was suspicious of U.S. motives . Prime Minister was suspicious about Kennedy .
 Diefenbaker was at odds with his defence minister, Douglas Harkness, who favoured putting the military on full alert and offering all possible help to the Americans .
 Harry Rayner, the chief of the naval staff, had no direction from their political masters . The chief of naval staff was no longer expected to be in charge of the British Navy .
 Rayner said nothing, a reply which, in the ways of the navy, spoke volumes . Rayner replied: "Yes, yes."
 HMCS Bonaventure and her escorts from the voyage to Britain were assigned to the East Coast watch . Rayner recalled the aircraft carrier from the ship's voyage .
 Argus tracking planes sent tracking planes on constant patrols over the Atlantic . Argus was sent to the Canadian air force to keep tabs on the situation .
 Bonaventure and her 28 planes, 22 destroyers, two submarines, 12 land-based Trackers and 32 Arguses were involved in the search .
 The Canadians freed up American ships to tighten their blockade and intensify anti-sub patrols in southern waters . The U.S. ships were freed up from the blockade .
 The Russians probably had a dozen submarines on the east side of the Atlantic, Haydon says . Haydon: The Russians are likely to have a dozen sub-suspects in the Atlantic .
 Many were found, some were tracked and a few were actually hunted to the point where they were forced to surface . Many of the animals were actually found and some were actually tracked . Some were tracked, others were found and others were hunted .
 Conventional submarines in those days had limited underwater endurance . Conventional submarine submarines were built in the 1930s and 1940s . Submarine submarines were designed to be able to survive underwater .
 Soviet leader Nikita Krushchev agreed to dismantle the missiles in Cuba . The missiles were dismantled by the Soviet Union in 1959 .
 Russian subs continued to prowl off the coast of Canada for two weeks . Canadian and American navies kept pressure on for another two weeks to keep pressure on .
 Each carried a nuclear warhead with an explosive force up to half as powerful as the bomb that leveled Hiroshima . The bombs were carried by each of Japan's nukes .
 Soviet commanders in Cuba had the authority to launch missiles at U.S. forces if Americans had invaded . The missiles would have been launched if Americans invaded, according to Soviet officials .
 Nearly 30 years after the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, there comes a chill in realizing how narrowly the U.S. and the Soviet Union managed to avert a nuclear war . Even now, nearly 30 years later, the world has a chill .
 President Kennedy was infuriated by the taunting presence of Fidel Castro's Communist regime in Cuba . President Kennedy, facing tough midterm elections, had set in play a secret operation aimed at destabilizing Castro's rule .
 Castro and Nikita Khrushchev had grown convinced that a U.S. invasion was inevitable . Castro and his Soviet mentor had grown concerned about the invasion .
 Soviet officers in Cuba held authorization without approval from Moscow to launch short-range nuclear weapons at U.S. forces if an invasion should occur . Retired Soviet general tells Havana meeting of scholars and former officials from all three governments .
 Kennedy had quarantined Soviet shipping and secured Khrushchev's pledge to withdraw weapons . Kennedy had learned that longer-range Soviet missiles were being installed in the Soviet Union . Kennedy was able to quarantine Soviet shipping from Soviet shipping .
 As part of the deal, Kennedy promised there would be no U.S. invasion . Kennedy promised no invasion of Iraq .
 Key Kennedy advisers had urged an immediate U.S. air strike to destroy Soviet missile installations . Several key Kennedy advisers called for an immediate air strike .
 New research has shown that the crisis carried three governments to a level of risk previously unimagined . But new research shows that three governments were at risk at a level previously unimaginable . The crisis has left three governments at risk, according to research .
 Former U.S. and Cuban officials have recalled their actions during those tense days in 1962 . The Havana meeting was the climax of an unusual five-year study . It was the discovery of a Soviet readiness to authorize a nuclear attack against the United States forces .
 Studies have reinforced how badly each of the three governments misread each other's intentions, Blight says . Blight: Each government misread the others' intentions in the 1962 crisis .
 The Soviets had sought to extend their power in the Western Hemisphere . They did not imagine that Ken-nedy, still largely untested, would respond to their missiles .
 The Cubans did not imagine their ardent Soviet sponsors would let them down in a pinch . The Cuban government did not think they would be able to rely on their Soviet sponsors .
 Khrushchev introduced nuclear weapons onto an island only 90 miles from Florida . The Americans, for their part, could not imagine Khrushvic would be so reckless as to introduce nuclear weapons .
 The lessons of the Cuban scare can be studied to useful effect . In planning for future foreign emergencies, the lessons can be learned to useful use .
 Intelligence information must be sound, operational decisions should be unhurried and taken only after thorough evaluation of all possible dangers . Operational decisions should not be rushed and should be considered carefully . Intelligence information should be sound .
 ABC, which will broadcast the interview today, made the transcript public Wednesday . The transcript is made public .
 Former members of the Kennedy administration are heading to the Cuba conference to revisit that earlier standoff . The current U.S. president seeks support to oust Iraqi President Saddam Hussein .
 The crisis was defused when Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba . The crisis in Cuba was ended when the missiles were removed from the country .
 The China adventure is a reminder that like bad pork balls, history has a nasty habit of repeating . The China trip was a reminder of the history of the country .
 JFK and Nikita Khrushchev went knuckle-to-knuckle during the Cuban crisis . JFK famously spoke of the 13-day stand-off between the U.S. and Soviet Union in October 1962 .
 The fascination of this political chiller comes in how a conclusion was reached . While the ending is known, the fascination of the film is in how it ended up .
 The result is an intriguing movie about presidential leadership in action . The film is about the president and the country's first lady .
 Joint chiefs-of-staff want an invasion of Cuba . The Soviets are stocking Cuba with enough missiles to fry North America . North America needs to be prepared for invasion .
 Even when Cold War warrior Dean Acheson (Len Cariou) advises a sneak attack, the president decides to wait until he sees the whites of their eyes . The film is based on a novel by George Clooney .
 Kevin Costner as O'Donnell is in OK form, apart from attempting an accent that would have him lynched in Boston . The film is set in Boston, Massachusetts, and opens in New York City .
 He should have run for the president's role, he says . But if he wanted this amount of attention he should have been running for the role .
 Old-time director Roger Donaldson teams with young screenwriter David Self to fashion a sweaty trigger-finger glimpse of a time when the world teetered on the brink of catastrophe . Donaldson is no stranger to Washington intrigue with his fine '87 political thriller No Way Out .
 "It is just a shame when so much history is received from films that this movie bends the truth and seeks to mostly blame the military," says Tom Charity . "It's a shame that it's not a great film, but it's a great movie," she says .
 Russia blinked on Cuba simply because the Kremlin realised it did not have the military muscle to match its mouth . Russia blinked because it realised it didn't have the power to match it mouth .
 Khrushchev was later to pay the price for his barefaced cheek and strategic blunder . The former Soviet Union leader was forced to resign from his post .
 Documents declassified this year show that the time-honored notion was incorrect . But declassified documents declassified show that it was incorrect.
 A series of letters exchanged between John Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev reveals that the 1962 crisis lasted at least through the end of November . The letters reveal that the crisis lasted as late as November 1962 .
 Americans returned to their routines after Oct. 31, but days of tense negotiations followed .
 Kennedy wasn't satisfied with just the withdrawal of the missiles and pressed for the removal of other weapons . The Soviets wanted to formalize the U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba; the Cubans balked at on-site verification of the missile withdrawal .
 On Halloween 30 years ago, negotiations for on-site inspections were stalled . 30 years later, negotiations were stalled for inspections of the site .
 With the Cubans still refusing on-site verification, The Soviets proposed at-sea inspections . With the Cuban government refusing verification, the Soviets proposed inspections at sea inspections .
 The Soviets wanted the blockade lifted and a formal pledge that the U.S. wouldn't invade Cuba . In exchange, the Soviets also wanted the United States would lift the blockade . The blockade was lifted in exchange for a formal promise that the United. States wouldn't.
 Khrushchev said that the U.S. was not living up to its part of the bargain by ending the blockade, stopping overflights and formalizing its non-invasion pledge . On Nov. 1962, Khrushchevitch said the United States did not live up to
 Kennedy left one loose end untied the formal guarantee not to invade Cuba . Kennedy left a loose end left untied .
 He said such conditions as assurances against reintroduction of strategic weapons weren't met . Such conditions were not met, he said .
 Henry Kissinger reaffirmed the non-invasion understanding with no strings attached in 1970 . Kissinger was then-National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger . Kissinger: "No strings attached"