 Vietnam War was a war driven by myth, hubris, political calculation and ignorance . Vietnam is now a distant memory for most Americans .
 More than 58,000 of Americans born after 1975 paid the ultimate price for a mistake . It’s no memory at all for Americans born in 1975, even if our history books remind us .
 America’s role in Vietnam directly bedeviled and haunted five presidents, ultimately driving two – Johnson and Nixon – from office . The Vietnam War was a major source of controversy for American presidents .
 Every president since, whether they admit it or not, lives with the Vietnam legacy . "Every president since Vietnam has lived with the legacy of that legacy. Every president has to live with that legacy," he says .
 Lyndon Johnson was a product of a vast, injurious and phony debate over ‘who lost Red China’ to Communism in the 1950’s. The debate was over who lost Red Red China to Communism was a phony debate .
 Johnson won a landslide election in 1964 against Barry Goldwater, who spoke casually of using nuclear weapons to win a jungle war in Southeast Asia .
 After that election, Johnson began the long and tragic slog to make the Vietnamese war, that had once been a French war, into an American war . The war was once French, but now an American, and Johnson began to make it an American .
 Lyndon Johnson’s presidency – and legacy – were and are haunted by the American war in Vietnam . The complicated, crass, brilliant Texan oozed cornpone, but he lived and breathed what he called ‘that bitch of a war’
 The great economist John Kenneth Galbraith once remarked that a friend told him that had it not been for Vietnam, Johnson would be considered a great president . Johnson would have been considered a "great president"
 Most Americans would say that Nixon was forced from the White House by the crimes of Watergate, which, of course, is correct . But that's not true . Most Americans still believe that Watergate crimes forced Nixon to resign from the presidency .
 Nixon ordered his political spies to break into Ellsberg’s psychiatrist office in search of dirt . The leaker – the leaker - was the president of the United States .
 The seeds of the Watergate break-in are planted, the fate of Nixon cast . Nixon's fate of the Nixon administration is now in doubt .
 Wise voices warning of U.S. folly in Vietnam were everywhere to be found in the 1950’s and 1960s . In the 1950s and 60s, the voices of American leaders were everywhere warning of folly .
 Montana Senator Mike Mansfield foresaw that only the Vietnamese could create a stable, democratic government . Millions of Vietnamese thought the United States was merely a colonial substitute for the French, who retreated after their own dismal Vietnam failure .
 Others like Frank Church, Mark Hatfield and George McGovern saw clearly where American hubris was headed . Others like Idaho’s Frank Church saw clearly what was wrong .
 Kennan testified before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in 1966 . Kennan: The U.S. had legitimate national security interests in Vietnam .
 We have a new reckoning with the curious American belief that our arms and money and good intentions can shape a country far away for a people who have very different ideas . Now, a generation and more on, we have to .
 Our longest war – another U.S. war of hubris – is winding down in Afghanistan . If history is not precisely repeating it is certainly rhyming, it's rhyming .
 Helicopters carrying U.S. soldiers from the 1-320 Field Artillery Regiment, 101st Airborne Division, take off from Combat Outpost Terra Nova as the soldiers head home following a 10-month deployment .
 Washington Post reported this week on a new secret account of the Afghan War .
 The document reeks of fabrication and dishonesty that marks the U.S. experience in Vietnam . It reeks the same stench of fabricated and dishonestness that marks American experience in the Vietnam .
 Details of a heretofore unknown suicide bomber attack aimed at then vice-president Dick Cheney . Among the revelations are details of the attack on Cheney .
 “The United States military sank deeper into a pattern of deceiving the public about many facets of the war, from discrete events to the big picture.” “In the wake of this lying came more lying,” the U.S. military wrote .
 To Joe Biden’s credit, he made the tough call to end a war that America should not have fought and could not win . Joe Biden's decision to end the war was a tough call for the U.S.
 Now, there will be an awful reckoning on the ground in Afghanistan, the graveyard of empires . Now, it will be a terrible reckoning in the country, the Afghan capital .
 The murderous Taliban will control most of the country, thousands of lives, many of them American, and billions in U.S. treasure will have been squandered . Thousands of lives will be lost and billions of dollars in American treasure will also be squashed .
 We think we can bomb and purchase our way to democracy in a country that has never had democracy and may not be capable of creating it . We think it can be bought and purchased in a way to create democracy, they say . We can't buy democracy in the country that hasn't
 How The Pandemic Now Ends is a must read from The Atlantic’s Ed Yong . How The pandemic now ends is how The Atlantic's Ed Yong explains how the disease ended .
 Scott Galloway is the author of a new book, "Scott Galloway" Galloway's first book, The Washington Post, is published by CNN iReporters.com/Heroes .
 How a trail in rural Oregon became a target for far-right extremists . High Country News' Leah Sottile reports on how a trail has divided an Oregon community .
 The best political job I ever had was as press secretary to candidate and then Idaho Governor Cecil D Andrus . Just Don't Call Her Nice .
 The job, at least with the right boss, puts one daily in the midst of big events . The job is a great opportunity to be in the middle of a big event .
 I’ve made an informal study of people who have been or are press secretaries . I've made a list of those who have worked as press secretaries.
 I'm convinced that Jan Psaki, the current White House press secretary, is one of the very best to ever hold the position . I’m convinced that she is a great journalist .
 Jan Psaki is the White House's first female press secretary . She will be sworn in in January 2021 .
 Journalist Jackie Calmes has a new book that revisits the story of Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh . Calmes' book, Brett Kavanaugh Without Tears, is out now .
 You might have thought you knew everything there was to know about him – of perhaps everything you wanted to know . You might think you know everything you want to know. You might also know everything else about him .
 Ken Starr was appointed independent counsel to investigate the Clintons and an Arkansas real estate investment called Whitewater . Kavanaugh worked for the Solicitor General who worked for Starr .
 In 1994, Starr invited Kavanaugh to join him for what he promised would be a short gig . Starr invited the former White House chief to Starr's office in 1994 .
 Dieter Kurtenbach writes in the San Jose Mercury News what I’ve been thinking, but can’t bring myself to say out loud . He says he’s been thinking but can't bring himself to say it out loud.
 Buster Posey, the catcher, is the heart of a pretty amazing team I kind of checked out of following the great game last summer, but this San Francisco Giants team has been something else . Posey is the catcher for the Giants and is the team's heart .
 Mark Rylance as Soviet spy Rudolf Abel and Tom Hanks as his attorney James B Donovan . The movie is a classic big screen thriller with adequate action and suspense .
 It’s a finely tuned period piece complete with old cars, vintage billboards, and “duck and cover” filmstrips . The film is set in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Bridge of Spies is also an actor’s movie with superb performances by Tom Hanks and Mark Rylance . Hanks is perhaps the world's most acclaimed stage actor, and perhaps the most acclaimed .
 Spielberg's film is also an American history lesson . The film is about American history lessons .
 The key figures in the prisoner swap – again all true – were the young American Air Force lieutenant Francis Gary Powers, who is appropriated to fly spy planes for the CIA, and the notorious Soviet spy, Colonel Rudolf Abel .
 Powers became a Soviet prisoner in May 1960 when his U-2 spy plane was shot down in the Ural Mountain region of the Soviet Union during a photography run . Powers was released from a Soviet jail in 1962 .
 The Eisenhower Administration tried to pass off the incident as a wayward weather aircraft . The Soviets produced wreckage of the super-secret U-2 and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev reaped an international propaganda windfall .
 A summit meeting in Berlin was cancelled and efforts to improve U.S.-Soviet relations were temporarily derailed . The summit meeting was cancelled in Berlin, and efforts were also derailed .
 A young American with a head full of secrets about U.S. spy activities sat in a Russian jail . It was a major international incident that also had the human dimension of a human dimension .
 In 1957, the FBI and Immigration and Naturalization Service identified Colonel Abel as a Soviet spy . Abel was a spy who had been operating in the United States for some time . He was identified in 1957 .
 The film mangles some of the timeline and a few things are invented out of whole cloth . The real power of the story is in the courtroom scenes where Abel is first convicted and then loses an appeal before the U.S. Supreme Court .
 U.S. tried a man thought to be a Soviet spy during the height of the Cold War . After seeing and completely enjoying the film, I got to wondering what really happened in the United States .
 The film compresses a good deal of the story, which played out over several years, but makes some powerful and important points in the telling .
 "I immediately thought about the private attorneys who continue to represent Guantanamo detained terror suspects," he said . "We're not going to be able to go to Guantanamo," he added .
 The film makes us confront whether it is merely enough to give Abel a defense that goes through the motions of due process . Abel deserves a no-holds-barred defense, including appeals on grounds that his hotel room and apartment were improperly searched . Abel is the real Rudolf Abel
 CIA operative shadows Donovan in order to question him about what his client has been saying . Donovan's lawyer says the CIA operative shadowed Donovan in the wake of the incident .
 Donovan, in one of the film’s best moments, tells the CIA fellow that he won’t – indeed can – talk about what his client is telling him since it is protected by attorney-client privilege . Donovan: "I’m not sure what I�
 Donovan: There are rules, most importantly, that make our system different than that of Gary Powers . Donovan: The Constitution is different than the system that is detaining Gary Powers. Donovan says.
 Abel’s case, both in the film and real life, eventually reaches the Supreme Court over the question of the lack of a proper warrant that specifically authorizes a search the defendant's rooms . Abel's case is eventually settled over the issue of a warrant .
 Spielberg corrects the Supreme Court courtroom correct . He even gets the courtroom correct.
 Abel’s case was argued, actually twice, in 1959 and the courtroom has since been remodeled . Abel's case was actually argued twice in 1959 . Abel was sentenced to life in prison .
 Abel was actually arrested by the immigration service after being detained and questioned by the FBI . The case turned on a complex question about whether a warrant for an “administrative arrest” was issued . Abel was arrested and allowed the subsequent FBI search of his rooms . Abel's case turned
 The celebrated Justice Felix Frankfurter wrote the rather technical 5-4-majority opinion upholding the legality of the search and Abel’s conviction stood . Abel was found guilty of sexual assault in a federal court .
 Dissents in such cases make for better reading and offer more insight into the workings of our justice system . This is a notorious case, with a notorious defendant… As is often the case, the dissents make for . better reading . The dissents in this case make for good reading
 Justice William O Douglas wrote one of the dissents in the Abel case . Justice William J Brennan wrote another dissented in the case .
 Mr Justice Douglas wrote in his dissent, joined by Justice Hugo Black . “Cases of notorious criminals—like cases of small, miserable ones—are apt to make bad law,” Douglas wrote .
 "That practice, in certain periods of our history and in certain courts, has lowered our standards of law administration," says President Obama . That practice has been used in the courts, he says .
 The practices generated by the precedent have far-reaching consequences that are harmful and injurious beyond measurement . The practice has far-ranging consequences that can be harmful or injurious, beyond measurement.
 Douglas was saying sure this Abel is a Soviet spy – a notorious criminal – but the rules apply to him just as they apply to ‘small, miserable” law breakers . Douglas was . sure this . is a . notorious criminal . But he said sure this was sure this
 The administrative officer can give a warrant good for unlimited search . It can also be given a warrant to search the home of a person .
 We must take care to enforce the Constitution without regard to the nature of the crime or the criminal . Yet we must take note that the Constitution is not just a matter of law enforcement .
 The court case and the film also make the point that Abel, not a U.S. citizen, still enjoyed the full protections of the country’s justice system . This right is a basic one of all the people, without exception…” Real American Exceptionalism…
 Donovan-brokered exchange took place on a bridge dividing East and West Berlin . Donovan also negotiated the return of Bay of Pigs captives Rudolf Abel .
 The film is already getting some Oscar buzz – it is certainly worthy – if only for its deft storytelling and the great performances . The film will be nominated for best actress and actress .
 As good as the movie is as entertainment here’s hoping a few enterprising teachers use the film in class to make the more important points about our justice system and our history .
 The hero in the film is, of course, attorney Donovan, a man mostly lost to history . Donovan's role in Abel’s trial and in the spy swap may now finally enjoy some long overdue recognition .
 Most Republicans disliked the idea even before negotiations commenced in earnest . Most Republicans did not like the idea .
 A good deal is based on both a concern about the deal’s impact on Israel and a desire to curry favor with the Israeli-American lobby . Much of the opposition is purely partisan . Some is based – a minor consideration – on the belief that a better deal could be had
 Republican skepticism about foreign policy agreements dates back to the Treaty of Versailles . The current visceral NO seems in an altogether new category of opposition .
 Almost total Republican opposition to a deal to prevent Iran developing nuclear weapons is a distinct outlier . The deal is designed to prevent, or at the very least substantially delay, Iranian development of a nuclear weapons, is a major outlier in post-war history .
 It is difficult to find an historic parallel to the level of partisan disdain for major foreign policy initiatives of any president, Republican or Democrat . The level of bipartisan disdain for foreign policy is unprecedented .
 It took the administrations of Eisenhower and Kennedy more than eight years to negotiate a test ban treaty with the Soviet Union . It took Dwight Eisenhower and John Kennedy eight years for the treaty to be reached .
 Kennedy doggedly pursued the negotiations – Great Britain was also a party to the talks – and finally signed the treaty in August 1963 . Great Britain also was part of the talks .
 The treaty came about in the wake of the Cuban missile crisis . It was hardly a moment in 20th Century history when trust in the Russians was at a high point . The treaty was signed by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 The same could be said for Richard Nixon’s effort to craft the first strategic arms limitation treaty . Ronald Reagan's later efforts to strike a grand disarmament bargain with the Soviets would eliminate nuclear weapons .
 Jimmy Carter’s effort to sign and ratify the Panama Canal treaties arguably contributed to his defeat in 1980, as well as the defeat of several Senate liberals . Several Senate liberals – including Idaho's Frank Church – courageously supported the effort to ensure stability around the vital canal by relinqu
 Senators from both parties supported the treaties or they never would have been ratified . The treaties were ratified by both sides of the aisle .
 In each of these cases there was substantial political opposition to presidential action, but it is nearly impossible when looking closely at this history not to conclude that each of the ‘deals’ were beneficial to long-term U.S. security .
 Presidents of both parties act, if not always perfectly, always with desire to produce outcome that is in nation's best interest . An underlying assumption in each of these historic agreements is that presidents of both sides act, even if imperfect .
 Few reasonable people would suggest that Eisenhower or Kennedy, Nixon or Carter set out to make a deal that was not ultimately in the country’s best interest .
 Republican critics of President Obama’s agreement with Iran are saying it is illegal . Yet, that is precisely what critics of the agreement are saying .
 Representative Trent Franks, an Arizona Republican, called it “an absolute disgrace” that this president has sacrificed the security and stability” of Israel in order to reach a deal . Rep. Trent Franks called it an ‘absolute disgrace’
 Franks is the same guy who introduced a resolution authorizing war with Iran back in 2013 . Franks introduced the resolution authorizing a war against Iran . Franks is also the same man who introduced an anti-Iran resolution in 2013. Franks is a former congressman for the Senate .
 Senator Lindsey Graham, a GOP presidential candidate, said “This is the most dangerous, irresponsible step I have ever seen in the history of watching the Mideast.” Graham said. “I have never seen a more dangerous step in this way,” he said
 Graham admitted on national television that he had not read the agreement, which was announced just an hour before the senator pronounced his judgment . Graham admitted that he didn't read the deal .
 Republicans come dangerously close to suggesting that Obama and Kerry have consciously sold out Israel, made an already explosive Middle East more so and weakened U.S. national security all in the name of just naively making a deal .
 There are legitimate questions about the best way to contain Iran in any quest for the ability to produce nuclear weapons . Iran is the only country in the world that has the right to have nuclear arms .
 "That would be a real debate over effectiveness, a principled discussion over means and ends," he says . The debate would be over effectiveness and not effectiveness, he adds .
 There are two men in Washington to watch closely as this “debate’s” reaches the end game .
 Sen. Bob Corker, the chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, has railed against the agreement . Corker is a thoughtful, fair-minded voice on foreign policy deals .
 The other is Energy Secretary Ernest Moniz, one of the key members of the U.S. team that worked out the deal with Iran who all seem to agree actually knows something about the subject of nuclear weapons development .
 Moniz offered a full-throated defense of the agreement in a recent NPR interview . Moniz: "It's a good thing for the nation's health care system"
 While Congressional Republicans work to overturn the administration’s Iran deal, much of the rest of the world has moved on . Mario Rubio has pledged to undo the deal on his first day in office .
 Pope Francis has endorsed the deal and will speak to Congress just days before the vote . Pope Francis is the most impressive leader on the current world stage, endorsing the deal .
 Germany’s Angela Merkel, a politician who displays more grit and gumption than the entire U.S. Senate, strongly backs the deal . Germany's Angela Merkel is a strong supporter of the deal, but the deal is unlikely to pass .
 Great Britain has re-opened its long shuttled embassy in Tehran . French officials have spoken of a ‘new era’ in its relations with Iran . Great Britain is re-opening its embassy in Iran .
 Rejecting the deal will serve only to strengthen the hand of the Iranian hardliners, Vladimir Putin of Russia . Putin is party to the agreement, and Iran is the other hardliner in the deal .
 Perhaps the Europeans recognize what some U.S. politicians fail to grasp . Perhaps it's time for the Europeans to understand what some Americans don't grasp .
 A fifteen year, highly monitored deal to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons is about as good as it gets in the modern Middle East . The deal will be monitored for 15 years .
 The critics who wonder what happens after fifteen years are missing the fact that the interval provides a window for young and more worldly Iranians to assert themselves as the country tiptoes back into the world community . Iran is now in the midst of a 15-year transition period .
 Obama’s agreement isn’t perfect, but this deal gives the west leverage to influence and control the Iranian nuclear threat for a number of years into the future .
 Some folks casually invoke the “bomb, bomb Iran’s option, but cooler heads know it would very likely mean a general war in a region where the United States’ ability to turn its military might into political change has been a dismal failure . The U.S.
 Failure to live up to the terms of the nuclear deal would create the context and rationale for taking military action to end the threat of a nuclear Iran . Ironically, as the administration has now started saying, it would actually create the rationale for military action .
 The international community will never support unilateral U.S. military action, but could be made to support air strikes if Iranians cheat on the agreement . Air strikes could be possible, but the international community never supports unilateral action .
 The president, I believe, will ultimately prevail on the Iran deal and we’ll quickly return full attention to the political circus running up to another election. The president’s election will be a distraction for the next year, he says .
 Given the wreckage his brother left him – and us – it’s a balancing act worthy of the Flying Wallenda Family .
 George W and Jeb Bush’s stumbling attempts to get his arms around the issues, however, points out how dangerous things can be on that high wire . George W. and Jeb . Bush's stumbling attempt to get around the issue points out that .
 Jeb will be forced to regularly and publicly struggle with brother George W’s legacy in the Middle East, while always trying to tip toe around the smoldering wreckage .
 Bush tried mightily this week to avoid talking about the family mistakes and pin the continuing mess in Iraq and Syria on the current president and the former secretary of state .
 Bush’s major foreign policy speech was equal parts reinventing recent history and continuing the proclivity of many American politicians to work very hard to avoid confronting obvious, if difficult truths . The speech was delivered at the Reagan Library in California .
 This summer marked the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II and the centenary of the Great War that did not end all wars . Grappling with the Facts and Lessons on History…
 British school children have taken field trips to the Somme and Passchendaele . British schoolchildren have visited the sites of the carnage in 1916 and 1917 .
 The commemoration of the Great War and the end of the second war is, of course, entirely appropriate, but remembering the conflicts is not nearly enough . Remembering the conflicts not enough is not enough, writes David Perry .
 Some politicians – Japan’s prime minister, for example, would just prefer to move along, thinking; been there, done that . And some politicians, including the Japanese Prime Minister, would rather than move along .
 The anniversary of the Great War, for example, is only being quietly marked in Germany . The French continue to ignore the their own troubled history during the second war .
 Failing to heed the lessons from such vastly important events has consequences, including repeating of old mistakes, says historian Sir Max Hastings . Failing heed to the lessons has consequences including repeating old mistakes .
 We must probe and question, debate and discuss the meaning, the causes and the consequences of our wars . We must, as the respected British military historian Sir Max Hastings said recently, probe the meaning of the wars .
 Hastings argued in a 2014 interview with Euronews that it is a serious mistake to simply mark the horror of the Great War without grappling with the issues and reasons behind the fighting . Hastings argued that it was a mistake to mark the WWI without a serious grappling with its reasons and reasons
 Hastings’ lessons about that war and about the importance of teaching its lessons to new generations is worthwhile viewing . Hastings' lessons about the war are worthwhile viewing, Hastings says .
 One wishes the current crop of candidates took the time to listen and think about such big questions, particularly as they rush to define their foreign policy platforms .
 In terms of understanding issues like the U.S. role in Iraq and the rise of ISIL there is always a simple, concise explanation that is wrong, which leads to the allegedly “smarter” Bush – Jeb – Jeb .
 Former Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki: Iraq was ‘secure’ in 2009 following the ‘surge’ of American troops that was instituted by his brother .
 Former Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri al-Malicki's regime propped up the regime . That strategy, temporarily at least, helped prop up the perfectly awful regime . But it was too soon to be a success in Iraq .
 President Obama with the support of Hillary Clinton let it all go to hell with the premature removal of American combat troops from Iraq, Bush says . Then, at least in Bush’s telling, President Obama let it go all go a hell .
 Bush’s analysis if, of course, mostly aimed at Clinton and is simple, concise and mostly wrong . Bush's analysis is simple and concise, but mostly wrong, he says .
 The fundamental problem was U.S. policy of supporting and strengthening Maliki at all costs, author says . "The fundamental problem is American policy," he says .
 Maliki was a militant sectarian his whole life, and the U.S. should not have been surprised when he continued to act that way once he became Prime Minister . Maliki is not surprised that he acted that way when he became PM .
 When Americans helped install him, in 2006, he was a colorless mediocrity with deeply sectarian views . When the Americans helped him up in 2006 he was colorless . He was a deeply sectarian leader .
 By 2011, he was an unrivalled strongman with control over a vast military and security apparatus . By 2011 he had control over the country's vast military, security and security .
 Filkins’ answer to the enabling question is that George W Bush, Obama and Clinton all had a hand in creating the mess, but he also notes a fact that Jeb ignores – it was his brother who established the timeline for the troop withdrawal, a timeline that Obama was only too
 Bush said “everyone thought’s thought would happen,” but it was contingent on Iraq agreeing to U.S. troops remaining . Amending that agreement was entirely contingent on the Iraqi government agreeing to United States remaining .
 Changing the Bush agreement was never going to happen, given the internal strife in the country . Iraqi parliament refused to consider modifications of the troop withdrawal timeline .
 Jeb Bush, as well as other Republicans, continue to believe, against all evidence, that the U.S. could bend the internal politics of Iraq in a way that we might like, says Paul Waldman .
 "They display absolutely no grasp of the internal politics of Iraq, now or in the past," says Nasser . Nasser: They display 'absolutely no grasp' of Iraq's internal politics, now and in past .
 Jeb Bush’s brother, Jeb Bush, oversaw the disastrously managed war itself . The war was overseen by Jeb Bush's brother . And that was preceded by the disastrous war itself, the Bush administration .
 Bush’s brother made the decision to go to war in the first place, on trumped-up intelligence, which was also made by Bush's brother . And that was preceded by the war in Iraq, he says. And that .
 Or would it be too much to just ask that Bush – other candidates, as well – grapple with the grubby details of the mess in the Middle East? Let the Debate Continue…
 It is a convenient sound bite to say that Obama and Clinton “allowed” the Islamic State to emerge amid sectarian violence that we could never have successfully controlled . Even had we committed to U.S. boots on the ground for the next 50 years, it would have been impossible
 Such thinking does little – nothing really – to help explain what has really happened in Iraq and why . It does little to explain what happened in the country and why.
 The sober and informed piece should be required reading for every candidate as a cautionary tale about how American policy, beginning with George W Bush, has been a tragic failure . The sober, informed piece is a warning tale of how U.S. policy has been tragic failure.
 It is a stark reminder of the real limits of what our military power can accomplish . It is also a stark warning of what can be achieved by military power .
 ISIS has imposed slavery on ISIS fighters in Iraq and Syria, says ISIS leader . ISIS has already imposed slavery in Syria and elsewhere in the Middle East .
 None of our analysts, soldiers, diplomats, diplomats and politicians, or journalists has yet produced an explanation rich enough to have predicted the movement’s rise . None of these analysts, journalists, or politicians, has yet been able to predict the rise of ISIS .
 "We will not remedy this simply through the accumulation of more facts," says President Obama . "We are not going to solve this simply by accumulating more facts. And we will ... not remedy it simply through ... more facts"
 Jeb Bush's quest for the White House will mean that the American legacy in Iraq will continue to be debated . If there is any good news amid the re-writing of our recent and often disastrous history in the Middle East it may be contained in the fact that Jeb Bush’s
 Smart politics might have dictated that Jeb leave the sleeping dogs of W’s policies lie, but that was never an option . Jeb was never the option. Smart politics may have dictated he would leave them lying .
 The mess his brother made is still too raw and too important not to demand ongoing discussion, particularly from another Bush . Bush's brother made a mess that needs ongoing discussion .
 History will assign the blame for U.S. policy in the Middle East to blame . "I’m pretty confident how that will shake out. I'm pretty sure how that’s going to shake out"
 American voters should welcome the discussion that Jeb Bush’s speech has prompted . American voters, even given our short attention span and penchant to accept over simplification of enormously complex issues, should welcome a discussion .
 Republican skepticism about an Obama initiative certainly isn’t surprising . The president has seen something approaching universal disdain for virtually anything he has proposed since 2009 .
 Republicans are inclined to oppose a deal with Iran shouldn’t be much of a surprise . That Republicans are opposed to a deal should be no surprise . Republicans are also opposed to an Iran deal .
 In the post-World War II era, conservative Republicans in Congress have rarely embraced any major deal – including nuclear agreements – with foreign governments .
 Before they were the party of NO on all things Obama, the GOP has long said “No” to foreign deals . The GOP has said 'No' on international agreements – everything from the Treaty of Versailles at the end of World War I to the Panama Canal Treat
 Most conservative Republicans gave the idea thumbs down and were happy when it fell apart . Even when Ronald Reagan attempted a truly unprecedented deal in 1986 with Mikhail Gorbachev to actually eliminate vast numbers of nuclear weapons – the famous Reykjavik Summit .
 Reagan pushed for a treaty limiting intermediate nuclear weapons . Some conservatives thought Reagan, then and now the great hero of the conservative right, was crazy .
 Obama administration is so eager for a deal with Iran that it is willing to imperil U.S. and Israeli security, the hard right says . Much of the criticism of Reagan in the late 1980s sounds eerily like the current critique of Obama .
 Idaho’s McClure, among the most conservative GOP senators of his day, warned about the deal with Gorbachev in 1988 . ‘We’ve had leaders who got into a personal relationship and have gotten soft – I’m thinking of Roosevelt and Stalin,
 Helms actually said Reagan’s negotiations with Gorbachev put U.S. allies in harms way . Rubio, Cruz and Walker say today Obama is putting Israel at risk . Helms said Reagan's negotiations put allies in harm way .
 Walker: Iran deal leaves problems for Israel, Saudis, Jordanians and others . Never mind that the whole point of the Iranian effort is to prevent a nuclear arms race across the Middle East . Walker was 20 years old when he was preaching apocalypse .
 Historically, conservative Republicans have opposed almost all presidential deal making to FDR's meeting with Stalin at Yalta in 1945 . FDR’s critics, mostly Republicans, contended he sold out eastern Europe to the Reds . Date the GOP No Response to FDR and YaltA…
 By the time of the Yalta summit, Red Army troops had “liberated” or were in place to occupy Poland and much of central Europe . Roosevelt knew the United States and Great Britain could do little to stop the Red Army .
 The alternative to accommodation with Stalin at Yalta, as Chait says, was making war on Stalin’s army . Chait: The alternative was to make war on the Russian army .
 Roosevelt’s true objective at Yalta was to keep Stalin in the fold to ensure Soviet cooperation with the establishment of the United Nations . But the ‘facts on the ground” in Europe provided a great storyline for generations of conservatives to lament the “sellout�
 Many conservatives contended that “negotiations” equaled “appeasement” and would inevitably lead American presidents to mimic Neville Chamberlain at Munich in 1938 . Many conservatives argued that ‘negotiation’ equaled appeasing . Neville Chamberlain’s victory
 Illinois Senator Mark Kirk dusted off that old chestnut last week when he said, “Neville Chamberlain got a better deal from Adolf Hitler,” than Obama did from the Iranians .
 Eisenhower opposed Bricker’s effort certain that his control over foreign policy, and that of subsequent presidents, would be fatally compromised . Dwight Eisenhower opposed the effort . Eisenhower was certain that he would not be able to control foreign policy .
 When Bricker first proposed his amendment forty-five of forty-eight Senate Republicans supported it . Bricker had been the Republican candidate for vice president in 1948 and was a pillar of Midwestern Republicanism .
 Eisenhower had to use every trick in the presidential playbook, including working closely with Senate Majority Leader Lyndon Johnson, to defeat Bricker .
 A logical extension of McCarthy’s position in the early 1950s was Barry Goldwater's opposition to a nuclear test ban treaty . President John Kennedy ultimately successful efforts to put in place a treaty outlawing atmospheric or underwater nuclear tests . Goldwater opposed the treaty in the 1960s .
 In Senate debate Goldwater demanded proof of the Soviet’s “good faith” and argued that a treaty would make the world more dangerous . Goldwater: Treaty would make world more rather than less dangerous .
 The treaty was approved overwhelmingly and has remained a cornerstone of the entire idea of arms control . The treaty has been a cornerstone in arms control since it was approved in 1945 .
 The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty was designed to prevent the expansion of nuclear weapons . Over the objections of conservatives, the U.S. approved the treaty in the 1960s .
 The idea was denounced at the time with William Buckley’s National Review saying it was “immoral, foolish…and impractical,” a “nuclear Yalta” that threatened our friends and helped our enemies .
 When Richard Nixon negotiated the SALT I agreement, conservatives worried that the U.S. was being out foxed by the Kremlin . Nixon’s focus on “détente” with the Soviet Union was simply playing into naïve Communist propaganda .
 Congressional neo-cons in both parties insisted that any future arms control deal with the Soviets be presented to the Senate for ratification . Washington state Democrat Henry Jackson, a Democrat, insisted on the deal .
 The GOP’s DNA dates back to Woodrow Wilson . The most effective and eloquent opponent of that agreement was Idaho Republican Senator William E Borah . Borah brought tears to the eyes of Senator Henry Cabot Lodge .
 Borah: "Your treaty does not mean peace – far, very far, from it" Borah said in a speech to Wilson, “Your treaty doesn’t mean peace,” he said .
 It is one of history’s great ‘what ifs’ to ponder what American leadership in a League of Nations in the 1920s and 1930s might have meant to the prevention of the war that William Borah correctly predicted, but arguably for the wrong reason . William
 Many Congressional Republicans have spent months – or even years – chastising Obama for failing to provide American leadership on the world stage . Obama deserves a good deal of criticism for what at times has been a timid and uncertain foreign policy .
 Ted Cruz and other Republican critics may not know it, but they are dusting off their party’s very old attack lines . Ted Cruz, other Republicans may not even know what they are doing, but it's old .
 Barry Goldwater seems to be more the father of this kind of contemporary GOP thinking than Ronald Reagan . Ronald Reagan is the sainted Ronald Reagan, but Goldwater is the real father .
 Presidents of both parties have made careful, prudent deals with foreign adversaries that have stood the test of time . No deal is perfect, and doubtless some down through the ages have been less than they might have been, but history shows .
 As applied today, President Obama will leave office in January 2017, while most of us will remain in office well beyond that . Most of us are likely to be in office for decades, perhaps decades, as applied today .
 Can’t We Just Agree on This…? The one issue that would lend itself to a modicum of bipartisanship would be preventing Iran from developing a nuclear weapon .
 In the hands of a regime that since 1979 has proclaimed the United States as its great enemy, a nuclear weapon would represent an existential threat to the U.S. and the Mideast . A nuclear weapon is a threat not only to the US, but also to the continually troubled
 Bush did what he did when Saddam Hussein invaded Kuwait in 1990 – build an international coalition to confront the threat . Bush did the same thing when he faced the threat of Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait .
 The U.S. has joined forces with France, Great Britain, Germany, China and Russia, but the United States has clearly taken the lead in the talks . The United States is leading the negotiations in Iran .
 Republican critics of Obama’s foreign policy often criticize the president for “leading from behind,” in the case of Iran the U.S. is clearly pushing hard for a diplomatic agreement .
 GOP criticism of Obama’s foreign policy might argue for Republican cooperation and encouragement that could foster true bipartisanship . That fact alone may argue for GOP cooperation .
 In a different political world, Republicans and Democrats might cheer each other on Iran's nuclear weapon issue . In fact, the circumstances of the coalition seems like the epitome of a foreign policy issue that would be good for the country and the world .
 Stop Iran from having nuclear weapons seems like a fundamental strategic goal that every American could embrace . Politics is always about fighting over the details .
 Arkansas sends Tom Cotton to the United States Senate . Tom Cotton is a conservative Republican who has served as a Democrat in Arkansas . Cotton is the latest candidate to be elected to the Senate .
 Cotton is the architect of the now infamous letter to the Iranian ayatollahs . Cotton's letter has undercut Obama’s international diplomacy, while revealing the depths of blind partisanship in Washington . Cotton is one of the architects of the letter to Iran's leaders .
 Senate Republicans are so dismissive of Obama’s presidency that they are willing to risk blowing up the nuclear talks with Iran . They are happy to completely jettison any hint of bipartisanship .
 GOP experts also set themselves up to take the blame if the Iranian talks do come apart . Ironically, the GOP experts are setting themselves up for the blame .
 The GOP’s approach also centers on dismantling a long tradition of bipartisanship regarding Israel . The current Israeli prime minister is fighting for his political life . The GOP's approach also gives encouragement to Israel's current prime minister to take action against Iran .
 The GOP is trying to de-legitimize Obama and show how petty our politics have become . That is a prescription for World War III, but that seems to pale in the face of the GOP compulsion to do so .
 47 Republican senators wrote an open letter to Iran's leadership this week . The letter is an unprecedented letter to the leadership of Iran . Iran has been involved in the Middle East since 1979 .
 The letter, signed by senators, has become controversial and may mark a new low point in failure of responsibility and leadership by senators who signed it .
 Franklin Roosevelt was about to set off for an historic meeting at Yalta with Josef Stalin and Winston Churchill . In January 1945, with the end of the Second World War in sight, the two leaders met .
 The critical subject at that conference was the formation of a post-war organization that might have a chance to prevent another world conflict . The group was formed in the aftermath of World War II .
 Many senators in both parties distrusted Roosevelt believing him too secretive in dealings with other world leaders and too dismissive of Congress . Then as now, many senators believed Roosevelt too secretive and dismissive .
 Arthur Vandenberg, a Republican Senator from Michigan, had long been a skeptic of FDR’s approach to foreign policy . The rapidly evolving world order – a powerful Soviet state, a diminished British Empire, a hugely powerful United States – changed his thinking .
 The result of that re-thinking was one of the greatest speeches in the history of the Senate, Sen. John McCain said .
 Vandenberg re-defined, literally in a single speech, the shape of American foreign policy in the post-war world . Famously declaring that, “politics stops at the water’s edge,” Vandenberg .
 Vandenberg worked closely with Harry Truman to flesh out the creation of the United Nations and implement the Marshall Plan to help Europe recover from the ravages of war . Vandenberg sought the presidency as much in his day as Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz or Rand Paul do now .
 It was a remarkable example of bipartisan leadership from a man who, had he wanted to do so, might have created political havoc both domestically and internationally . Had he wanted it, it might have caused political havoc .
 Arthur Vandenberg, a member of the Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate, knew that an American president must have the ability to deal directly and decisively with foreign leaders . Vandenberg: President must be able to deal decisively with world leaders .
 The president – any president – is entitled to a to be free of the constant undertow of partisan politics on the home front, particularly when the stakes are so very high .
 The Constitution requires the Senate to “advise and consent” on treaties and appointment of ambassadors . Vandenberg also knew that the U.S. Senate has a particular ability to shape foreign policy .
 Imagine for a moment a Senate populated by senators like Arthur Vandenberg . Vandenberg: "Imagine for a . moment a . Senate populated with senators like Vandenberg. imagine for a Senate .
 Republican leaders might go to the White House regularly for private and candid talks with the president . They might well express profound concerns about a potential agreement with Iran . Republicans might also express concerns about the agreement .
 They might make speeches on the Senate floor about what kind of agreement they expect . They might even make speeches about the deal .
 The Foreign Relations Committee might conduct hearings on the challenges and opportunities contained in an agreement .
 The Committee might invite former secretaries of state or national security advisors from both parties to testify . The Committee may invite ex-secretaries of state to testify, including national security advisers .
 Foreign Relations Committee haunted by ghosts of great senators like J William Fulbright, Mike Mansfield, Frank Church and Howard Baker . Committee might hear presentations from and ask questions from academics and foreign policy experts .
 They might actually undertake a bipartisan effort to understand the nature and timing of a threat from Iran . The U.S. might actually try to understand Iran's threat from the Middle East .
 Republicans are making the question of “who can be tougher on Iran” their foreign policy litmus test . The hyper-partisan needs and far right wing tilt of the coming presidential campaign are driving the question . The question is driven by the hyper-partisan needs and the far
 Obama would literally sell out the country – and Israel – in a potential deal with Iran . The inability to embrace even a hint of bipartisanship seems rooted in the stunning belief that Obama would sell out America .
 The debate over the now infamous Republican letter to Iran will no doubt continue . Time will tell whether it provides Iran an out to abandon any agreement . But at least one aspect of the letter deserves consideration in the context of the history of the Senate .
 The letter was the brainchild of the Senate’s youngest member, a senator who ranks 93rd in seniority . It was written by the senator who took office less than three months ago .
 Freshman Arkansas Senator Tom Cotton is an Iraq and Afghanistan war veteran . Cotton is frequently described as a strong advocate for greater defense spending and a darling of the party's farthest right wing .
 The Senate historian says there is no precedent for such a letter . After researching the history, the Senate historian said there was no precedent . The letter was sent to the president of the United States .
 The Cotton letter “undercuts” the idea of American foreign policy, experts say . Alan Hendrikson, who teaches at the Fletcher School of International Relations, says the letter .
 Cotton's letter should have been written, but no such letter was ever written, Cotton's should not have been . Cotton should have written a letter to the White House, but it should never have been, Cotton says .
 Republican Senator Bob Corker of Tennessee did not sign the letter and may yet help his party lead rather than posture . Corker is chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee .
 Perhaps Corker can channel Arthur Vandenberg, a staunch Republican and a frequent critic of Democratic presidents, who could still put his country above his party . The U.S. Senate has become an increasingly partisan wasteland .
 Most of the world is rightly celebrating the life and lessons of Nelson Mandela . Britain, Foreign Policy, John Kennedy, Mandela, Reagan, and us .
 Mandela will go down as a pivotal figure in the last decades of the 20th Century . He will no doubt remain the gold standard for the difficult, seemingly impossible politics of racial reconciliation . Mandela will be remembered for his role in racial reconciliation in South Africa .
 The Reagan Administration contended in the 1980s that the Reagan Administration was head of a terrorist organization, a designation that was not formally changed until 2008 . Still it’s fascinating to see the broad and deep bipartisan out pouring of respect for a man that Reagan administration contended in 1980s was
 There is some reason to believe the CIA tipped off South Africa’s whites-only government to Mandela's whereabouts in 1962 . The tip that ultimately led to his trial and lengthy incarceration in South Africa led to a lengthy incarceration .
 I'm reminded of the intense debates in the early 1980s over whether Ronald Reagan could be pressured to impose economic sanctions on the apartheid government of South Africa . I’m reminded of debates over whether Reagan should impose sanctions on apartheid government .
 Then-Congressman Dick Cheney voted in 1985 against a resolution that called for Mandela’s release from jail . Commentators from George Will to William F Buckley defended the white South African government and condemned Mandela as just a pawn of the Soviet Union .
 Congress voted to impose economic sanctions on apartheid government of South Africa in 1986 . After much debate the Congress in 1986 voted to do what the Reagan Administration wouldn’t and impose sanctions .
 Reagan knew he held a weak hand in the face of growing public outcry over the continued oppression of blacks in South Africa . Reagan pulled out all the stops in order to sustain his veto .
 Northwest delegation in 1986 was entirely Republican . For the record, the Northwest delegation was all Republicans .
 Oregon's senators – Mark Hatfield and Bob Packwood – and Washington’s senators – Dan Evans and Slade Gorton – voted for the sanctions against South Africa and to override Reagan's veto .
 The United States was late in adopting a policy of isolating South Africa in part because leaders spent so much of the post-war world viewing every event in every corner of the world through the narrow prism of the Cold War . The U.S. was actually quite late to adopt a
 Time and again in the post-war world the U.S. misread, from Vietnam to South Africa and even on to Iraq, the nature of national struggles over self-determination . The larger lesson here is simply that time and again the United States misread .
 Successive State Departments and CIA wise guys framed nearly every issue as a struggle pitting the democratic West versus the Evil Empire . Often, as Nelson Mandela showed us, the great twilight struggles of the last half of the 20th Century were typically about more basic and more enduring things .
 We too often lacked the imagination that might have allowed us envision that a man imprisoned for 27 years might walk out of his prison cell, Gandhi or King-like, and embrace a type of political and racial reconciliation that would usher in a peaceful revolution .
 For most of his too short life, we must recall, his own government spied on him . Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was a revolutionary . He was a member of the U.S. government .
 As the world – and almost every American politician – rushes to get right with Mandela, we would do well to remember at least two things . Mandela, Mandela, is not Mandela, but Mandela is a man who has a long history of racial injustice .
 Mandela was not a saint, but rather a remarkably pragmatic politician and a damn good one too . Mandela was a much better politician than some of the Americans who for so long failed to understand his motivations and talents . Mandela's legacy will be remembered as a much more pragmatic politician .
 Mandela made transition from advocate of armed struggle to champion of constitutional democracy . Mandela was a revolutionary who, fortunately for his country and the world, made the transition from armed struggle . The second is that Mandela was revolutionary .
 For too long his movement and the man were seen in the United States through the foggy lens of what some call American exceptionalism . The idea that our system and our approach is automatically superior to every other system or approach is .
 This notion, that political legitimacy can only come about as the result of a fully baked western-style democracy, has driven American foreign policy since at least Woodrow Wilson . It has often left us blind to the real motivations of nationalist or anti-colonial movements from Vietnam to Soweto
 Dr. Gandhi's name fits in the same sentence with Gandhi and Dr. Dr. Martin Luther Luther King Jr. So, by all means, celebrate the life of a man who now belongs to the ages .
 Dr. King was assassinated in 1968 in Memphis, Mississippi . He was the first black president of the United States . The nation's first black leader was assassinated by a White House assassination .
 The reporter who literally wrote the first draft of history wrote 50 years ago .
 Tom Wicker was a southern liberal, born and educated in North Carolina . He was passionate about civil rights and civil liberties . Wicker is a Southern liberal .
 He just happened to be assigned to the Kennedy motorcade in Dallas on November 22, 1963 . He also developed the ability to write eloquent, piercing, streamlined prose .
 It fell to him to write a story about an event that is still making news . CNN.com's John Sutter writes about the events that still make news .
 Wicker called the copy desk at a downtown Dallas pay phone from a downtown pay phone . He dictated his most famous story from notes scribbled on a copy of the official White House schedule for that fateful Friday .
 Every reporter wonders if they’ll be up to the task of describing a tragedy and a few find out . Every reporter wondered if they'll be able to cope with a tragedy .
 President John Fitzgerald Kennedy was shot and killed by an assassin today . President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 In fact four of the first five graphs of Wicker’s story was but a sentence long . Four of the five graphs were just a short story .
 He died of a wound in the brain caused by a rifle bullet that was fired at him as he was riding through downtown Dallas in a motorcade . The Dallas mayor was shot in the head by a sniper sniper .
 Vice President Lyndon Baines Johnson was sworn in as the 36th President of the United States 99 minutes after Mr Kennedy’s death . Vice President was riding in the third car behind Mr Kennedy's .
 Lee H Oswald, who once defected to the Soviet Union, was arrested by the Dallas police shortly after the assassination . Oswald was active in the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, which has been active in Cuba .
 In those five, sparse paragraphs, you really have the complete essence of what we remember from Dallas half a century ago . In that five-spoke words, you can find the essence of the story .
 With so much drama and tragedy and with so little time it would have been easy to overwrite, but Wicker didn’t succumb . Wicker’s death was a tragedy, but he refused to give up .
 "That first draft of history from Dallas is simply a first-class piece of reporting created under the most awful and demanding circumstances," says CNN's John Sutter .
 Tom Wicker went on to become one of the most respected and important journalists of the post-war period . Wicker became one of Britain's most important journalists .
 Wicker came to Idaho in the late 1970’s as a guest of the Idaho Press Club . Wicker was a member of the Press Club in Idaho .
 I was an officer in the organization all those years ago, had a drink with him, talked shop, had him sign a couple of books . I was too shy to ask him about the Dallas story .
 "Only later did I realize what a masterpiece he crafted was that awful day," he said .
 Tom Wicker’s first draft remains hauntingly moving and overflowing with sadness . With all we know about that day, with all the pictures and books, the conspiracy theories and the what-might-have-beens, it's hauntingly .
 The speech Mr Kennedy never delivered at the Merchandise Mart luncheon contained a passage commenting on a recent preoccupation of his, and a subject of much interest in this city, where right-wing conservatism is the rule rather than exception .
 At a time when we are steadily reducing the number of Federal employees serving every thousand citizens, they fear those supposed hordes of civil servants far more than the actual hordes of opposing armies . They fear civil servants more than actual armies .
 50th anniversary of John Kennedy’s murder in Dallas, Texas on November 22, 1963 . John Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 Put a man on the moon in the decade of the 1960’s and return him safely to Earth – no problem . Put man on moon in 1960s and safely returning him to Earth is no problem. Put man there in the 1960s .
 Create a Peace Corps and send idealistic young Americans to the world's poorest nations to deal with hunger, disease and ignorance – done .
 Reach real arms control agreements that dramatically reduce the threat of nuclear war – possible and likely . Reach real weapons control agreements, reduce the risk of war, say experts .
 Larry Sabato is correct, as his new book The Kennedy Half Century makes clear, that the martyred young president – his style, rhetoric and easy optimism – has had more impact on American politics since his death than anyone else .
 There is little in JFK’s abbreviated first term to suggest real presidential greatness . Yet many Americans regard him as the best president since Franklin Roosevelt . His deft handling of the Cuban missile crisis notwithstanding, there is little real greatness .
 A brilliant Washington Post essay by Harvard president and Civil War historian Drew Gilpin Faust recently asked if our government “by the people and for the people” is truly alive and well in the U.S. Faust asks if government by the people is truly live and well .
 Faust: “Another fearful year and a half of war lay ahead, with yet again as many deaths to come” Faust wrote . Faust: Another fearful year of war lies ahead, ‘with yet more as many as many death to come,” he wrote .
 It was the obligations of freedom and nationhood as well as those of war that he urged upon his audience . It was freedom and national security as important as war, he urged .
 Lincoln knew that the awful war had to result in something better, something greater or else all the blood and treasure lost and never recovered would surely condemn the still youthful American experiment to failure . Lincoln knew he had to end the war with a greater purpose .
 Lincoln used the rhetoric of his presidency to summon the country to something greater, something bigger than mere partisan politics . Lincoln used his rhetoric, as John Kennedy did a century leter, to summon a greater nation . Lincoln’s rhetoric was used to summon something greater than mere partisanship
 Kennedy called on Congress to pass civil rights legislation in June 1963 speech . Kennedy made the issue bigger than partisanship or even politics .
 In a time of domestic crisis men of good will and generosity should be able to unite regardless of party or politics . We are confronted primarily with a moral issue. In this time of crisis men should unite, regardless of political or political parties .
 Near the end of his nationally televised civil rights speech Kennedy began remarkably to ad lib . In doing so his words became even more urgent, summoning images that still haunt America 50 years later . Kennedy's words still haunt the nation .
 Kennedy was calling the country in 1963 to live out its potential and to not merely be content to act as though it were fulfilling its highest moral and legal obligations . As he had had in his first speech as president, Kennedy called on the country to live its potential .
 Lincoln repeatedly did the same during the Civil War reminding Americans that in their country they did possess the “best hope” on Earth for a better way to live . Lincoln repeatedly reminded Americans of the ‘best hope on Earth’
 After shutting down the government, we are far from modeling to the world why our democracy should be viewed as the ‘best hope’ for humankind, says Julian Zelizer .
 The Politics of the Short-Term… Where indeed is the high public purpose in the politics of today's major political parties? Parties that are almost entirely focused on short-term tactical approaches designed only to address the next election cycle .
 President Obama is bogged down in health care problems largely of his own making . So far in his second term, he has failed to call the country to sustained action of anything .
 House Majority Leader Eric Cantor “wants to take us in a new direction, which is good.” Cantor, a Republican aide says . Cantor wants to take the House in a “new direction,” the aide said . Cantor is the House majority leader of the
 We remember our martyred presidents not just because awful fate took them at the zenith of their power, but because they seemed able to give meaning to a greater cause, while urging a nation and its people to a higher calling . We remember them as able to urge a nation
 Aspiration and a call to greatness are largely missing from public life today . It is little wonder so many Americans long for leadership – the leadership of a Lincoln or Kennedy – that is able to give real meaning to our politics .
 The 50th anniversary of the murder of John F Kennedy in Dallas in 1963 is November 13 .
 Anyone alive then – I was ten years old – holds their own searing memories of that fateful Friday in November and the awful days that followed . Anyone alive that day - anyone alive then - remembers that Friday, November 11 .
 Walter Cronkite’s announcement of the death on live television on CBS, the riderless horse, the funeral, Jackie and the children and the eternal flame . The alleged lone gunman Lee Harvey Oswald shot and killed on live TV .
 The images replay as if they are impressed on a hard drive in the brain . The images are then replayed on the brain's hard drive .
 Some individuals tend to see the world more through a conspiratorial lens than others . For reasons we mostly attribute to socialization, socialization is behind socialization .
 We can think of this predisposition as a strong bias against powerful disliked actors . It's not caused by partisanship, stupidity or psychopathology, it says .
 Uscinski and Parent note that Kennedy conspiracies are different, principally because so many people disbelieve the Warren Commission’s findings . Still, they say, they believe that Kennedy conspiracy theories are different from those of the past .
 The distinguishing feature of a successful conspiracy theory is power, and the Kennedy assassination has that in spades . The Kennedy assassination is a case of a conspiracy theory with power, the author says .
 The victim was an American president and the potential villains include actors of immense reach and influence . The potential villains in the case include those who have influence .
 There are so many accused conspirators that anyone, regardless of political affiliation, can find a detested powerful actor to blame . Anyone can blame anyone for anything, including the president, for anything .
 For those on the right there is Lyndon Johnson, Fidel Castro and the Soviet Union . For the left there is LBJ, defense contractors and the military . For those right, the left is the left, the right .
 Oliver Stone's 1991 film JFK is truly the conspiracy film of all conspiracy films . On the far left is filmmaker Oliver Stone, who has a reputation for his role in the film .
 New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison is the subject of a new documentary about the assassination of JFK . Garrison was a New Orleans prosecutor in the 1960s and '60s . Garrison is credited with helping to uncover the truth behind the assassination .
 Stone says he believes the president was assassinated by a vast conspiracy to kill him . Stone says it's not clear who Stone believes is involved in the conspiracy to assassinate him .
 Garrison thought right wing elements in the CIA were responsible . Garrison thought the CIA was responsible for the CIA's actions . Garrison believed the CIA had infiltrated the CIA . Garrison said the CIA is responsible .
 Oliver Stone strikes me as right out of central casting as the chief proponent of a conspiracy . Stone is very articulate, with a wide command of facts, at least his facts, and the ability to tease out one little bit of information and weave it into a vast garment of unthinkable conspiracy .
 Just Google ‘JFK murder theories’ and you’ll generate more than 700,000 hits . The JFK murder theories have been linked to JFK's assassination .
 Former Chief Justice of the United States Earl Warren, future president Gerald Ford, a fine and respected Congressman Hale Boggs and two U.S. Senators – Richard Russell and John Sherman Cooper – simply could not have cooked up a massive cover-up .
 Oswald seems to fit well into the American gallery of losers who have historically perpetrated, or attempted, political murder . Oswald also fits well into a gallery of Americans who have tried to kill themselves, or not .
 He is of a type with the outcasts and malcontents who killed Lincoln, Garfield and McKinley and tried to assassinate Teddy Roosevelt, FDR and FDR, FDR, Gerald Ford and Ronald Reagan . He is a type of malcontented outcasts who tried to kill Teddy Roosevelt and
 To accept that an act of random violence by an obscure malcontent could bring down a president of the U.S. is to acknowledge a chaotic, disorderly world that frightens most Americans . The world is chaotic and chaotic, and most Americans are frightened .
 The Kennedy tragedy is, of course, the senseless murder of a young and promising man in the prime of his life, a young man with big plans . But our collective tragedy is also the 50 years of what might have been .
 These are the imponderable questions we still ponder after half a century . These are still questions after 50 years of silence .
 In an odd way, given the imponderables, a conspiracy seems a more satisfying explanation for such a tragedy rather than placing blame for all the lost possibility at the feet of the little man who grandly told Dallas police he wasn’t just a Communist, but a Marxist .
 If John Kennedy had to die in such a way, it must have been part of some grand and ugly plot, not the lonely, awful work of a loser like Lee Oswald . Lee Oswald's death was not the work of Lee Oswald, but of some of the world's most famous