 The Turks, after all, were nearly beaten at Gallipoli in 1915, a fact unknown to the Allied leaders . Allied leaders failed to press their advantage, failing to press the advantage .
 The Israelis swept through the Sinai in a dazzling campaign in 1956 . The Suez War was a disaster for the British and French .
 The Bay of Pigs expedition in 1961 was uniquely inept . Simply as a military operation, law and morality aside, the operation was inept . The operation was an attempt to topple the Cuban government .
 Despite heavy investment in the outcome, the invasion force was decimated in 36 hours . It was based on the grossest intelligence miscalculations (even the presence of coral reefs was somehow ignored)
 As Theodore Draper once remarked, the Cuban invasion was that rare thing in history— a perfect failure . The Cuban invasion failed, but it was a failure, he says .
 The Soviet leadership secretly shipped nuclear weapons to Cuba, bringing on the missile crisis of 1962 . Persuaded that the Kennedy administration was talking loudly but carrying a small stick .
 The Central Intelligence Agency was tarnished by the Bay of Pigs . It added to its disrepute by its clumsy sponsorship of assassination plots against Fidel Castro .
 Some of the same operatives bungled the Cuban invasion years later bungled Watergate break-in, leading to the fall of Richard M Nixon, the godfather of the Bay of Pigs plan .
 Peter Wyden, a publisher and a former Newsweek correspondent, offers the most thorough autopsy to date . Wyden: "This is the first time we've seen this kind of autopsy in the past"
 Wyden has chosen to tell the story in the you-are-there tradition of Cornelius Ryan, thus giving us anecdote at the expense of meaning . The pity is that Wyden chose to tell us anecdote, rather than meaning .
 The latest retelling provides devastating testimony about U.S. incompetence in covert “dirty tricks” operations . What is impressive is the devastating testimony it provides about American incompetence in .
 The CIA is very much the product of its Anglophile founders who learned their craft as admiring disciples of the British during World War . But by comparison with England, the United States is a heterogeneous society governed by a sprawling federal bureaucracy and an aggressively indiscreet press .
 There is in Britain a clublike complicity among spies, press, and government that has no parallel in America . The British government is accused of being complicit in espionage in the U.S.
 The Bay of Pigs was the product of cando activism, inter-agency feuding, and bureaucratic doubletalk . Viewed in this perspective, the Bay was a characteristic American foul-up, the author says .
 The best that can be said about the Cuban invasion is that President Kennedy, with some courage, allowed it to fail, sparing us a Caribbean Vietnam . The best thing to say is that Kennedy allowed the invasion to fail. The best is that he let it fail .
 The original idea was to recruit anti-Castro exiles into a guerrilla force for multiple infiltrations . The idea was originally to recruit exiles to be part of the guerrilla force . The original plan was to use them as a force to infiltrate the government .
 Bissell, like most of the Americans in charge of Cuba, had little special knowledge of Cuba or Latin America . Bissell: "Bissell's Cuba was a very small part of America's Latin America"
 The Americans tended to see the operation as a logistic problem, a repetition of the “Guatemala scenario” in which a handful of CIA-backed exiles had overthrown the left-wing Arbenz regime in 1954 . The Americans tend to see it as a
 At the camp, American “advisors” were given the best housing and an exclusive bar . American "advisors" shrugged off political squabbles among the Cubans as a nuisance .
 President Eisenhower left the miniature army to his successor . Richard Helms, a future CIA director, declined to sign on . Vice-President Nixon favored using the Cuban brigade, even though he favored using it .
 Press accounts of the CIA operation had already surfaced, and the Guatemalan government was threatening to close down the training camp . Guatemala was already threatening to shut it down .
 If the president cancelled the operation, it would seem as if he had turned tail and in effect was protecting Castro from the anti-Communist exiles . If the operation were cancelled, the president would seem to have turned tail .
 The untried administration could have been spared the Cuban debacle if the CIA plan had been realistically appraised by the military . Still, the untried Administration could have avoided the debacle if it were more realistic .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff had been asked by Kennedy to give a hard-headed opinion of the operation’s feasibility . The president had specifically ruled out any overt U.S. assistance . The “missing” air cover of subsequent myth was never envisioned; it was supposed
 David W Gray, was named by the Joint Chiefs as head of a committee to study the CIA scheme .
 Gray was highly dubious about the plan, which involved a dawn landing at a shore city in southern Cuba . After examining what was called “the Trinidad plan,” Gray was skeptical .
 Those figures were omitted from the formal report submitted by the Joint Chiefs to the White House on February 3, 1961 .
 Joint Chiefs gave their approval to the Bay of Pigs as the eventual invasion site . Joint Chiefs accepted successive White House modifications intended to lessen the political risks of overt U.S. intervention .
 On the basis of Wyden’s detailed account, one may justifiably surmise that the Joint Chiefs saw the risky invasion as a pretext and prelude for full-scale U.S. intervention . Wyden: The Joint Chiefs may have seen the dangerous invasion as
 “The Bay of Pigs attests that we court disaster and ridicule when we betray our own values and ineptly stoop to deceive.’* was employing their kind of coded doubletalk in which foul means fair.”
 If the president was shaken by the disingenuousness of his military advisers, he was appalled by the crudeness and incompetence of the operation’s . CIA commandants .
 A Cuban Revolujujunctary Council, which was ostensibly in charge, was held in custody during the invasion . Madison Avenue publicist issued “war communiques” in its name .
 The anti-Castro underground in Cuba was never informed of the invasion date, and its leaders had no chance of aiding the exile army .
 First frogman ashore was Gray Lynch, a CIA agent . Despite presidential orders to the contrary, American personnel took a direct part in the invasion .
 Four U.S. fliers were killed at the Bay of Pigs . President Kennedy finally learned that American pilots, acting on Bissell’s authority, had participated in combat . Only two, years later, President Kennedy .
 It is conceivable that the president would have approved naval intervention if the Cuban brigade had established a beachhead . The Cuban brigade could have established an effective beachhead in Cuba .
 The CIA had stored the entire ammunition supply for the rebels in a single vessel in the seven-ship flotilla .
 When the supply ship Houston was bombed and sunk by one of Castro’s * Sea Furies, the Bay of Pigs tragi-comedy was over . The supply ship was bombed by Castro, Cuba, and sunk .
 By D-day plus 3, or April 20, the invaders had had been cleared from the swamps of Playa Larga and Giron .
 Castro wound up with 1,189 prisoners, who were freed two years later . The United States paid a privately-raised ransom of trucks and medical supplies . In all, Castro had more than 1,000 prisoners .
 The underlying arrogance of the Bay of Pigs operation was rooted in what he bluntly calls ‘the gook syndrome,” the CIA and the military to take supposedly “lesser breeds” seriously seriously .
 Few foresaw that Castro could so swiftly mobilize his militia for a counterstrike, or that his pi,■ lots— equipped with obsolete Sea Furies and jet trainers— would devastate the beachhead . At the lowest level, this led to a grotesque underestimation of Cuban military capability
 Castro was the allure of a nationalist demigod . Castro's elan was the elan that gripped Cuba and gave Castro an allure to the nation . Castro was a nationalistic nationalist figure in Cuba .
 Our guerrilla wars are fought in the bureaucracy, the weapons are slick briefings, save-your-rear memoranda, and technocratic jargon . Our guerrilla war is fought in bureaucracy, with the weapons being slick briefings and memoranda .
 Every American president must struggle for a plain answer to an honest question from an officialdom more concerned with turf than truth .
 The easy intimacy that prevailed during World War II at Bletchley Park, the British ‘dirty tricks’ factory, is unimaginable in Washington . Washington.com .
 President Kennedy’s insistence, during the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, on coherence of command and clarity in communications, was one positive result of the Bay of Pigs .
 Kennedy ordered a risky naval blockade to compel the Soviet Union to withdraw missiles from Cuba . In the absence of the ad hoc ExCom, events might have taken a disastrous direction when Kennedy ordered the blockade .
 The Brink is written by a young academic who has drawn on the Kennedy archives for additional details . The whole story is competently retold in the Brink .
 It may be finally remarked that the president’s conduct of the missile crisis was in striking contrast to the Bay of Pigs . President's conduct of missile crisis in contrast to that of Bay of . Pigs .
 The American case was presented and backed up by persuasive evidence, and at Kennedy’s behest leeway was left for a rational compromise .
 In the missile crisis, above all, the onus for deception lay with the Soviet Union, not with us, says George W. Bush . The onus was for deception, he says .
 From Cuba to the Congo, from Southeast Asia to South America, we have a limited national talent for clandestine subversion . Surely the evidence of three decades is by now overwhelming, the evidence by now is overwhelming .
 The Bay of Pigs attests that we court disaster and ridicule when we betray our own values and ineptly stoop to deceive . We court disaster when we are inept and inept, we stoke to deceive, writes Julian Zelizer .