 Millions more fled the communist dictator's repressive police state, leaving behind their possessions, their families, the island they loved and often their very lives . Millions of people were forced to flee the island, including millions of people who fled .
 It's part of the paradox of Castro that many people belonged to both groups . Castro was a leader of both sides of the political divide .
 Few national leaders have inspired such intense loyalty — or such a wrenching feeling of betrayal . Few of the country's leaders inspire such loyalty or such an intense loyalty . President Barack Obama has been accused of betraying himself .
 Few fired the hearts of the world's restless youth as Castro did when he was young, and few seemed so irrelevant as he was old . Castro was the last Communist, railing on the empty, decrepit street corner that Cuba became under his rule . Few seemed so relevant as Castro when
 His personality, his decades in power, his profound effect on his own country and his provocative role in international affairs . But none combined his dynamic personality and his decades-in-power with his provocative .
 South Florida is now the northernmost point of Latin America . It was the southernmost tip of the U.S. from the tip of Cuba .
 The suffering of the refugees he sent pouring into Miami eventually turned to triumph as they forged economic and political success . The Cuban refugees are now a model of success for the city .
 His tall and powerful build was matched by an outsized ego, boundless energy and extraordinary luck that carried him to victory as a guerrilla leader in 1959 . He survived countless plots hatched by his countless enemies .
 He ended American domination of the island's economy, swept away the old political system and the traditional army . He also nationalized large and small land holdings and brought reforms in education and healthcare .
 He reneged on his promise of free elections, executed thousands of opponents, imprisoned tens of thousands, installed a Communist regime and made his island a pawn in the Cold War . He also was a ruthless dictator, the Maximum Leader .
 His alliance with the Soviet Union brought the world to the brink of nuclear war in 1962 . The world was on the verge of a nuclear war when he joined forces with Russia .
 At age 12, Castro wrote to Franklin Delano Roosevelt, congratulating him on his third inauguration as president and asking for a dollar . Castro was 12 when he wrote to Roosevelt, asking him to pay a dollar for his inauguration . Castro has been president of Cuba since 1961 .
 By the time he was 35, two American presidents had devoted a considerable amount of time and effort to killing him . Two American presidents tried to kill him, but he died at the age of 35 .
 Castro enraged his great enemy to the north — and often threw it into domestic disarray as well . Over and over, whether by arming Latin American revolutionaries or sheltering fugitives from U.S. justice or unleashing great waves of refugees, Castro enraged the United States . Castro enraged
 Political controversies that followed the 1980 Mariel boatlift and the 2000 custody battle over Elián González played a large role in costing first Jimmy Carter and then Al Gore the presidency . The Mariel Boatlift, the custody battle and the custody dispute over Gonzázález were
 Castro turned the island into a fortress guarded by one of the region's most powerful military machines . The U.S. sponsored an invasion by Cuban exiles in 1961 and relentlessly plotted his assassination . Castro was the Cuban leader of Cuba .
 He created a repressive state that rigidly controlled the arts, the press, the airwaves, the arts and the media, he says . He says it was a state of repression that he created in order to silence dissenters .
 An efficient secret police force was aided by neighborhood spies and pro-government mobs that attacked those who dared to call for democratic change . Pro-government mobs attacked people who called for change .
 Castro was imprisoning gays and long-haired young people in work camps in the 1970s . Cultural enemies were vulnerable, too, too .
 Castro bragged that he would free his island of economic dependence on the U.S. He did, but only by becoming even more dependent on another foreign power . Castro's island is now 6,000 miles from the United States .
 Cuba ran up billions of dollars in debt for weapons, oil, machinery, food and other supplies . Cuba is now in a state of emergency emergency . Cuba has been in the throes of a humanitarian crisis .
 The Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, bringing new hardships to a population that already had suffered decades under his mismanagement . Cuba's crippled economy imploded when the USSR collapsed, bringing more hardships .
 The exodus began early with the powerful and affluent and continued with former comrades . Former comrades who found themselves in opposition to his rule .
 Next to go were the middle class and professionals and, finally, just about anyone who had the courage to grab a boat or cobble together a raft for the perilous crossing of the Florida Straits .
 Castro, although always controversial, once seemed to embody a fresh, youthful approach to his island's conflicts . Castro was always controversial . Castro, however, once had a fresh approach to the conflicts .
 Few moments in Cuban history rival the euphoria of Jan., 1959, when the black-bearded comandante rode a tank into Havana with his swaggering rebel fighters .
 Castro offered a vision of liberation, morality and enlightenment to his followers . To his followers — and admirers — around the world, Castro offered his vision of freedom, morality . Castro's legacy will continue to be as long as possible .
 Many believed his promise of a ""humanistic"" revolution was based on nationalism . Many believed it would be a 'humanistic' revolution based on nationalist — not communism .
 For millions of Cubans, hope turned to bitter feelings of betrayal . Castro quickly pushed aside former comrades in arms, jailed those who protested . Castro converted Cuba to a one-party Communist state and Soviet satellite .
 Castro's open embrace of communism made him a pariah not only to Washington but to many of his own countrymen . Castro nonetheless became an icon to young leftists around the world disillusioned with the Soviet Union .
 Hundreds of thousands would give their lives in fruitless guerrilla movements he inspired in places like El Salvador, Nicaragua, Guatemala, Colombia, Colombia and Chile . He inspired hundreds of thousands of people to give up their lives .
 Without a text, but with a crowd of supporters cheering him on in Havana's Plaza de la Revolución, Castro could hold forth for hours . Castro could talk for hours without a text or a text .
 His record, in 1968, was a meandering discourse that lasted nearly 12 hours . His record was the longest of a 12-hour discourse .
 A Castro speech might start as a friendly chat, then morph into a dry report on sugar production statistics or a scholarly lecture on the benefits of hygiene . Castro has a history of speaking to the world's most famous people, including the former president .
 As the pace picked up, the voice would dip to a hoarse whisper or launch a series of ringing questions that drew shouted responses from the multitude .
 Warming to a theme — perhaps the supposed threat of a Yanqui invasion — would grow to a roar and then a rhythmic wave of shouts . Repeated key phrases like a tent-revival evangelist reaching out to save souls .
 In later years, as the former Soviet bloc nations moved toward open societies and capitalism, he was virtually alone as a hard-line Communist . His tag line changed to a defiant Socialismo o muerte — socialism or death . The tag line has since become a defiant Socialisto o
 Castro was born Aug., 1926, near the village of Birán on Cuba's northeastern coast . Castro was a privileged childhood . He was born in 1926 .
 Angel Castro, a native of Galicia, Spain, started out laboring in sugar fields for the U.S.-owned United Fruit Co. He worked his way up until he owned a 10,000-acre farm with hundreds of workers . Castro's father, Angel Castro started out
 One of Angel's servants, Lina Ruz, was the mother of Fidel and his six siblings . Raúl assumed power on July 31, 2006, after Fidel fell ill . Angel was Angel's servant .
 Fidel Castro was not legally recognized as a Castro until he was 17 . Angel and Lina Castro were married several years after Fidel was born . Angel Castro was born in 1961 .
 Fidel mostly enjoyed the privileged, outdoor childhood of a land baron's son, climbing hills, swimming in rivers, hunting with a shotgun . Despite the household's rocky domestic issues, Fidel most enjoyed a privileged childhood . Fidel was the son of a wealthy and successful businessman .
 Fidel Castro's father sent him to Colegio Belén in Havana, an exclusive Jesuit prep school for rich boys . Fidel was 15, in 1941, when he was sent to the elite school . Fidel's father was Cuban president of Cuba in 1961 .
 Castro was a star of the basketball and baseball teams at Belén . Castro was remembered as a good-natured, talented student and talented student .
 He maintained an interest in sports in later life, making Cuba a regional power in amateur athletics . He maintained a interest in sport in his posthumous death .
 He never tried out for the United States major leagues . But, contrary to a report widely circulated in the U.S. press, he never played in the major league .
 His love for baseball would last a lifetime and rival politics . Baseball is perhaps the only one of his interests to rival politics. Baseball is the only thing that rivales politics.
 He immediately plunged into student politics at a time of gangsterismo — battles between armed rival gangs . He was a student leader at the time . He became a national leader in student politics in the 1980s .
 Castro carried a pistol and was accused, though never convicted, of involvement in two murders and another attempt . Castro was never convicted of murder or attempted murder .
 There were Communist groups at the university, but Castro didn't join them . Castro joined the Communist groups, but not the Communist Party .
 He remained independent for a time, then aligned himself with the Ortodoxos, a party led by liberal reformer Eduardo Chibás . In 1947, he aligned himself to the party, which led to the death of his wife .
 Castro served as a top aide until Chibás fatally shot himself in 1951 . He was attempting to awaken Cubans to what he called social injustice . Castro was Castro's top aide .
 As a student, Castro became enmeshed in violent international incidents that marked his developing obsession for revolutionary politics . Castro twice became embroiled in violent incidents that made him focus on revolutionary politics as a student .
 In 1947, he joined a group plotting to overthrow the dictatorship of Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic . He joined the group in 1947 . He was a member of the group that plotted to overthrow Trujillillo's dictatorship .
 Castro escaped by swimming across a bay in Cuba . Cuban police crushed the expedition before it could leave the island . Castro was killed by Cuban police .
 In April 1948, Castro and other young Cubans traveled to Bogotá to help organize a student anti-imperialist movement . Castro and others traveled there as diplomats gathered to found the Organization of American States . Castro was the leader of a student movement against the U.S.
 Colombian politician Jorge Eliécer Gaitán was assassinated on the street in Bogotazo, Colombia . The killing set off two days of rioting later known as the 'Bogotazo'
 Castro seized a rifle at a police station that had been stormed by a mob . Castro, then 21, joined in the street fighting, seizing a rifle . Castro was then 21 when he seized the rifle at the police station .
 Castro's activities in Bogotá prompted a cable to Washington from the United States Embassy in Havana on April 26, 1948 . The cable was the first of what eventually would be hundreds of thousands of official U.S. documents pondering Castro's intentions . Castro's actions in Bogota
 On Oct. 1948, while still in law school, Castro married Mirta Díaz-Balart, a philosophy student . On Oct., 1948, Castro was married to another student . Castro was known for his mysterious personal life .
 The couple honeymooned in the United States, and a son, Fidelito, was born the next year . Fidelito was born in the U.S.
 Castro's frenetic political activity and his voracious appetite for women, the marriage was doomed . But owing to his frenetic politics and his appetite for sex, it was doomed for Castro's marriage .
 The estrangement, both social and political, extended to the rest of the Díaz-Balart family . Most of them moved to Miami, where several Castro nephews eventually would become powerful politicians .
 It was only then that it was publicly acknowledged in Cuba that he had been living since the 1960s with a schoolteacher named Dalia Soto del Valle, from the city of Trinidad on the south .
 In all, Castro is known to have fathered as many as 11 children by four different women . Castro has fathered up to 11 children from four women, according to reports .
 His only daughter, Alina Fernández, aligned herself with Cuba's dissident movement . She tried for years to leave the island before she escaped in 1993 with a false passport . Alina's only daughter Alina was born in Havana .
 She became his personal secretary, never far from his side . Eight years older than Castro, she became his secretary . Castro was Castro's secretary .
 Castro never talked about his feelings for her, but it was clear that she was the one who brought order to his chaotic life . Though Castro never discussed his feelings, she was one of his favorite women .
 After law school, Castro became a lawyer-politician, representing poor clients and investigating government corruption . Castro graduated from law school in 1950, becoming a lawyer and politician . Castro: "I'm not a politician, I'm a lawyer, I want to make a difference"
 In 1951, he launched a vigorous campaign for a seat in Cuba's congress . In 1951 he ran for a place in the Cuban congress .
 Batista's dreams of traditional politics ended abruptly in 1952, when he seized the government in a coup and canceled the election . Batista was a one-time populist reformer who had grown fond of power .
 Castro, 25, declared personal war on the new dictatorship in Cuba . Castro, who was born in 1961, has been in charge of the government since then . Castro is the youngest member of the Castro family to be in charge .
 The idea was to seize weapons, take control of a strategic portion of Cuba and call for a nationwide uprising . The idea of seizing weapons, taking control of Cuba's strategic portion, was to take over a strategic part of Cuba . The plan was to call for an uprising .
 Shooting started prematurely, only three rebels actually fought their way into the base . Castro's fighters made a disorderly retreat, leaving the base empty .
 Sixty-nine rebels were killed — most of them tortured to death or executed after capture . Most of them were tortured, executed or tortured after capture.
 The Moncada attack was a military disaster, but it made Castro the top anti-Batista leader overnight . Castro was Castro's first leader in Cuba after the attack .
 He turned his trial in Santiago into an indictment of the dictatorship . The former president turned his case into a trial of his own .
 In prison, Castro wrote furiously, converting his trial speech into a formal document smuggled out for publication . Castro's trial speech was smuggled out of prison, smuggled out to be published in Cuba .
 Batista released Castro on May 15, 1955, as part of a general amnesty, 18 months into his sentence . Castro was released in 1955 . Batista had been serving a sentence of 18 months .
 Castro traveled briefly to Miami, where he spoke at the old Flagler movie theater downtown, asking supporters for funds . Castro traveled to the old movie theater in Miami to raise funds .
 He rebuilt his tiny revolutionary band and organized an invasion of Mexico . Then he went to Mexico, where he rebuilt his small revolutionary band . He then went back to Mexico .
 Castro recruited Ernesto ""Che ""Che"" Guevara, a 27-year-old Argentine physician with Marxist ideas . He had been expelled from Guatemala after a CIA-backed coup there the previous year .
 Castro, Guevara and 80 followers reached the shore of Cuba's Oriente province in a battered American cabin cruiser, the Granma . The Granma was wretchedly seasick after a seven-day voyage to Cuba . Castro and his followers reached Cuba's shore in the Gran
 The men leaped into hip-deep mud and struggled through a mangrove swamp to reach land . The men struggled through the mud to get to land in the mud .
 There they began a guerrilla campaign to oust Batista, who was backed by a 40,000-strong security force . Batista's security force was equipped with tanks, artillery and U.S.-supplied planes .
 He recruited peasants as guerrilla fighters and organized intellectuals and middle-class followers into an urban underground railroad of funds and supplies . He recruited intellectuals and intellectuals into a network of underground railroad .
 His recruiting was aided immeasurably by his skills at propaganda and psychological warfare . He recruited recruits in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Castro marched the same group past Matthews several times and also staged the arrival of ""messengers"" reporting the movement of other units . Though the rebels had barely 20 bedraggled men, Castro marched them past Matthews .
 A wave of favorable coverage followed in the foreign press, and with it, international support . The government has been in touch with the U.S. with the Obama administration .
 After Batista's ouster, Castro installed a government with a democratic cast . President Manuel Urrutia, a former judge, and PM José Miró Cardona, a leading lawyer .
 Within weeks, Castro had taken Miró Cardona's place as prime minister . Castro took over from Cardona, who had been in charge of the government .
 On July 17, Urrutia resigned, accusing Castro of leading Cuba toward communism . He resigned from the post on July 17 . On July 18, he said Castro was leading Cuba to communism .
 Castro cut rents, lowered telephone rates, reformed the income tax system . Land reform law nationalized estates larger than 1,000 acres, benefiting thousands of peasants .
 In 1961, the government launched a campaign aimed at ending illiteracy . Critics said the campaign had more to do with political indoctrination than reading and writing .
 44 pilots, bombardiers and mechanics from Batista's air force were put on trial in 1959 . Even more disturbing was the March 1959 trial of 44 pilots and mechanics .
 A revolutionary tribunal acquitted them of crimes against Castro's guerrillas . They were acquitted by a revolutionary tribunal . The tribunal was set up by the Castro government in 1959 .
 Operation Pedro Pan was a Catholic Church-backed initiative that turned into the largest exodus of unaccompanied children in the history of the Western Hemisphere . From Dec., 1960, to Oct., 1962, more than 14,000 children between the ages of 6 and 18 were flown to the United States in
 By the end of the century, an estimated three million of Cuba's citizens would be living outside the country . More than a fifth of the population would be in Cuba, according to the Cuban government .
 Castro's radical domestic policies appeared likely to sour Cuba's relations with the United States, but he didn't wait to find out . Confronting Washington was Castro's first step to confront the U.S. in Cuba .
 He moved almost immediately to confront Washington, while courting surprised Soviet leaders . He faced Washington, then courted the Soviet Union .
 He brushed aside United States offers of economic aid . He refused to discuss compensation for U.S.-owned estates confiscated under agrarian reform .
 Castro signed a trade pact with the Soviet Union in February 1960 . Three months later, Castro established full diplomatic relations with the USSR . Castro signed trade pact and established diplomatic ties with Russia .
 Eisenhower secretly ordered the CIA to begin training Cuban exiles in Guatemala for an invasion . Eisenhower also explored the possibility of assassinating Castro .
 Eisenhower responded by slapping an embargo on all U.S. exports to Cuba and slashing Cuba's sugar quota to zero . Eisenhower responded to the embargo by slapping all United States exports to the island .
 Before leaving office in 1961, Eisenhower broke diplomatic relations with South Korea .
 In April 1961, about 1,400 CIA-trained exiles invaded Cuba at the Bay of Pigs on the southern coast . The invasion was three months into John F Kennedy's presidency .
 Castro turned the greatest threat to his political career into his greatest success . Castro turned his greatest threat of political success into a greatest success. Castro turned it into a national embarrassment .
 He marshaled his army to defeat the outgunned, outmanned invasion force in three days . The battle was fought in the Battle of the Nile in 1777 .
 President Kennedy and his brother Robert, the attorney general, redoubled their efforts against Castro . Enraged at their humiliation on the world stage, the Kennedy brothers redoupled their efforts . The Castro family was humiliated by their humiliation .
 CIA officials would complain later that from 1961 to 1963, they were under constant pressure to come up with new ways to destabilize Castro . CIA officials say they were constantly under pressure to kill Castro or destabilize him .
 The CIA considered everything from poisoned scuba-diving suits to exploding seashells . Eventually the CIA even turned to the Mafia to get the job done; all to no avail .
 Castro made an unusual appearance at a routine diplomatic reception held at the Brazilian Embassy in Havana in 1963 . Castro attended the event at the then-presidential ceremony .
 President Kennedy was killed in Dallas by a sniper's bullet fired by a young American admirer of Castro named Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald had recently visited the Cuban Embassy in Mexico City seeking a visa . Oswald killed Kennedy in Dallas, Texas, ten weeks later .
 Oswald's action was either inspired — or, more sinisterly, ordered — by Castro . Over the years, several assassination investigators have suggested that Oswald's actions were either inspired or ordered .
 In his past, there was no clear evidence to suggest it, although his brother Raúl and Che Guevara were both Marxists . In the past there has been little evidence that he was a Marxist .
 Some have argued that political thought was irrelevant to Castro, that his only real interest was in wielding power . Castro was fascinated by European fascists in his student years, some said .
 Castro himself always said there were no clues to his Marxism because he carefully concealed it, especially during the war against Batista . Castro himself said there was no clue to his Marxist ideology .
 Before Castro, the world's Communist parties were fairly conservative, arguing that revolutions first required years of political organizing . Castro was the leader of the Communist Party in Cuba, Cuba's first major party .
 Castro argued armed struggle itself was the best way to create the proper conditions for revolution . Castro was backed by the force of his own victory over Batista, he argued .
 Guerrilla movements are answered by nascent guerrilla movements everywhere from Argentina to Zaire . That call was answered by fledgling guerrilla movements around the world .
 Front lines of the confrontation between communism and the West shifted from Europe to the jungles of the Third World . Front lines shifted to the jungle of the jungle .
 Cold War would turn into peasant skirmishes in villages in Nicaragua and Angola . Cold War began with tanks facing off in the streets of Berlin, Berlin .
 Between July and September 1962, the Soviet Union began to ship medium-range and tactical missiles, IL-28 bombers capable of carrying nuclear bombs and MiG-21 jet fighters to Cuba . The missile crisis began in July 1962 .
 Without consulting Castro, he worked out an agreement with Kennedy to withdraw missiles . Without consulting, he agreed to withdraw the missiles .
 The deal barred the Soviets from establishing a naval base in Cuba and included a U.S. commitment not to invade the island . The deal also included a United States commitment to not invade Cuba .
 Castro was furious about being left out of the decision-making . He later admitted he had urged Khrushchev to fire missiles in the event of an American invasion of Cuba .
 Moscow poured tens of billions of dollars in direct aid into the island and countless more through a tangled web of subsidized commercial transactions . The island has been hit hard by a wave of anti-Russian sanctions since 2001 .
 Castro was able to purchase below-cost Soviet oil and resell it at a profit to other Latin American countries . Moscow bought Cuban sugar at premium prices . Moscow also purchased Cuban oil and sugar .
 For all the Soviet largess, Cuba's economy rolled steadily downhill . The Cuban economy has been steadily declining since the Soviet era .
 Castro's attempts to bend the laws of economics to his personal will generally ended in disaster . Castro's attempt to bend economic laws to his own will failed to live up to his standards .
 The Cuban government diverted nearly all its resources into the harvest, doubling the cutting season . The army, college students, government bureaucrats and anyone who had applied for an exit visa were sent into the fields .
 Vast sectors of the Cuban economy were paralyzed by the herculean effort . The harvest still fell short by 1.1 million tons .
 The distortions Castro induced into the economy reverberated for years . Castro's distortions in Cuba's economy reverberate for years, but they were never fully realized .
 Six Cubans broke into the grounds of the Peruvian Embassy and promptly were granted political asylum . They were granted asylum in April 1980, when they were granted it .
 Castro ordered all guards removed from the embassy, only to see nearly 11,000 asylum-seekers crowd into the compound in 28 hours . Enraged, Castro ordered the guards removed, but the asylum seekers continued to flood the compound .
 Castro then announced that anyone who wanted to leave Cuba could go . Whether in embarrassment or calculation, it was never clear which . Castro then made the announcement that anyone wanted to go could leave Cuba .
 A flotilla of yachts and fishing boats shuttled back and forth between Key West and the port of Mariel . That launched the astonishing Mariel boatlift, which launched the boatlift .
 When Castro closed it down five months later, more than 120,000 Cubans had fled . More than 100,000 people fled the island .
 The direct face-off between Castro and Washington eased after the Kennedy administration . Castro and D.C. relations eased after JFK administration .
 CIA continued to support sporadic raids and sabotage inside Cuba until 1965 . The battle was increasingly conducted through proxies . The CIA continued its support of Cuba in the 1960s .
 In El Salvador and Guatemala, Castro supported Marxist guerrilla movements against U.S.-backed governments . In Angola and Nicaragua, things were reversed, with Castro backing the governments and the United States siding with the guerrillas .
 Only once in Castro's 47-year rule did Cuban and American troops face one another on a battlefield . U.S. invaded Grenada in 1983 after a Castro-backed government there dissolved into murderous anarchy .
 Castro's soldiers retreated so ignominiously that Cubans joked that a running shoe should be named after their commanding officer . Castro's troops retreated so quickly that Cuban citizens joked that running shoes should have been named after his commanding officer.
 Military tensions eased further after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 eliminated the financial backing for any further Castro adventures overseas . The collapse of Soviet Union also eased the military tensions .
 The temperature dropped a couple of degrees between Washington and Havana, it blew out the end of the thermometer between Miami and Castro . But if the temperature dropped two degrees between the two cities, it would blow out the temperature of the temperature .
 Cuban exiles, taking up where the CIA had left off 30 years earlier, launched several botched attempts to assassinate Castro . Castro was assassinated by the CIA 30 years ago in Cuba .
 Castro sent a detachment of spies to South Florida with instructions to infiltrate U.S. military installations and worm their way inside exile politics . Castro, for his part, sent spies to the area with instructions not only to infiltrate United States military installations but to worm their .
 Thousands of pages of decoded communications between Havana and the agents were decoded . They were tasked with spreading disinformation about exile leaders, fomenting dissent within their groups and sabotaging their planes .
 One spy also was convicted of a murder conspiracy charge after the jury decided he had helped lure two Brothers to the Rescue planes into a 1996 ambush by Cuban MiGs that ended with the death of four pilots . The jury also convicted him of a conspiracy charge of murder .
 The incident led to one of the most memorable exchanges between Washington and Havana during Castro's rule . The incident occurred during the Castro era .
 Madeleine Albright released a declassified intelligence transcript of cockpit chatter among MiG pilots . The pilots congratulated one another on their ""cojones,"" or testicles .
 Elián González washed up in South Florida in November 1999 after his mother and 10 others died while fleeing Cuba on a raft . The little boy washed up after he and his mother died in the crash of a raft in Cuba .
 The custody battle over the boy turned into a political death struggle between some exiles and Castro . Some exiles say the boy should be returned to his father in Cuba .
 Castro referred to the exiles as ""the Miami mafiosi"" and accused them of ""kidnapping"" the boy . Returning Elián to Cuba would be like sending a runaway slave back to the plantation, Castro said .
 Millions of Cubans joined demonstrations demanding Elián's return . He closed factories and schools so that millions could join demonstrations . Some of them were transported hundreds of miles by bus .
 State radio, TV stations devoted at least four hours a day to the case . State radio and TV stations spent four hours each day on the case of the missing woman .
 Castro spent, by his own admission, $2 million on T-shirts, posters and billboards to promote the protest . He even built an amphitheater in front of the United States diplomatic mission in Havana .
 Outside Miami, American public opinion swung in favor of returning the child to Cuba . The Clinton administration did just that, and the child was returned .
 The Elián affair was one of the few after the Soviet bloc began to crumble in 1989 . Castro's government was weakened by the collapse of the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 The loss of $4 billion a year in aid from Moscow touched off an economic holocaust in Cuba . By 1993, Cuba's economy had shrunk nearly 40 percent . Cuba's loss of aid from Russia touched off a devastating economic recession .
 Castro warned Cubans that they were entering a harsh new ""special period,"" with even more stringent rationing . Castro also warned that rationing will be even worse for Cubans in the new period .
 By 1994, Castro's government was in its most perilous state since the days of the Bay of Pigs . Castro was in the most dangerous state of his government in the country's history . Castro died at the age of 50 .
 Thousands of Cubans hurled themselves lemming-like into the sea on flimsy rafts of plywood and inner tubes, praying to catch a lucky current to Miami . Several small riots erupted, and thousands hurled themselves .
 Cuban government ships spotted a tugboat full of refugees headed for Florida on July 13, 1994 . They blasted it to pieces with high-pressure fire hoses . The tugboat was headed to Florida .
 For the first time, he tried to develop a tourist industry, opening several luxury hotels in joint ventures with foreign partners . The first time he has opened a luxury hotel, he opened several joint ventures .
 Small businesses like mom-and-pop restaurants were permitted, and possession of U.S. dollars was legalized .
 Castro even welcomed the large-scale return of prostitution, which he had called a ""social illness"" in the early days of the revolution . In a sign of just how close to the brink the Cuban economy really was, Castro welcomed the return of prostitutes . Castro called prostitution a 'social
 In a 1992 speech to the National Assembly, he bragged that the army of freelance hookers who swarmed through Havana's streets every night in search of tourists were the most cultured in the world . He bragged about the 'cultures' of the city, Havana, in
 Cuba's tourist industry has helped ease pressure on Castro's government . A steady flow of subsidized oil from Venezuela's Hugo Chávez has also eased pressure on the Castro government .
 By the turn of the millennium, it was apparent that it also had brought the revolution full circle . But by the time of the 2000s, it had brought it back to the beginning of the century .
 The dream of a Marxist society without social or economic distinctions was gone . The dream was gone, the dream of an economic society without any social or social distinctions . "The dream of the Marxist society is gone," the author says .
 Doctors, lawyers and even nuclear engineers were abandoning their professions in droves to drive taxis or work as tour guides in Cuba . Anything to get their hands on dollars instead of nearly worthless Cuban pesos .
 Tenants in Havana's low-cost colonial tenements watched fearfully as their neighbors were evicted . The buildings were torn down to make room for new tourist hotels and restaurants .
 Havana is one of the world's top sex-tourism spots, with thousands of pretty women available for the price of a cheap dinner . The Internet bristled with endorsements of Havana as one of world's best sex tourism spots .
 Roundups of dissidents continued regularly through the final years of Castro's rule . Roundups continued regularly throughout the last years of the Castro era .
 He might ease the pressure occasionally for public-relations purposes . Several hundred prisoners were released in advance of Pope John Paul II's visit to the island in 1998 .
 The beleaguered Cuban population's response was a retreat into sullen despair . The Cuban people's response to the crisis was to retreat into despair . Cuban President Obama has been accused of being a dictator in Cuba .
 By the 1990s, the island's suicide rate had trippled from pre-revolutionary levels, and one of every three pregnancies ended in abortion .
 By the time Castro left the Cuban presidency in early 2008, the country's aging population was the second-oldest in Latin America . Cuba's rapidly aging population is the second oldest in the Latin American region .
 A fifth of the country had hit retirement age, and the percentage was steadily rising . The country's retirement age is steadily rising, with a fifth hitting retirement age age .
 Its industrial underpinning of ancient Soviet factories and machinery was crumbling . Soviet factories were crumbling in the 1980s .
 In 2007, production of 14 of Cuba's 20 key products was lower than in 1989 . Production of 14 key products has been lower since 1989 . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by an economic downturn .
 He churned out a stream of essays and op-ed pieces for the Cuban press in his final years . His final years were markedly devoid of regrets or even introspection .
 Castro's letter to his brother ends a process that began in August 2006 when he said an abdominal illness would require surgery . Castro said he was placing the reins of government in the hands of his brother Raúl .
 The illness was never precisely identified, though it was widely speculated to be some form of gastrointestinal cancer . It was never exactly identified but it was thought to be a form of cancer .
 Castro was rarely seen again in public for the rest of his life, though he occasionally appeared in photos or videos released by the government . Castro was a slow and shaky man, but still capable of needling enemies to the north .
 Cuba's oil money was used to prop up Cuba's economy with billions of dollars of aid . He occasionally met or spoke by phone with the new generation of leftist leaders popping up around Latin America .
 The chats with Chávez only served as a reminder that Castro had slipped from the headlines into history . But the chats with the new icon of the Latin American left, only served to be a reminder of Castro's rise .
 Even the rambling columns Castro published after his official retirement dwindled to disjointed notes of a couple paragraphs each, cryptic haikus about ancient communist feuds .
 The most conclusive evidence that age or illness had reduced Castro to irrelevance came in December 2014, when President Obama and Raúl Castro jointly announced that the two nations had agreed to swap captured spies .
 Obam called the developments the ""most significant changes"" in America's Cuba policy in more than 50 years . He said they were negotiated in a series of secret meetings that lasted 18 months and ended with an hour-long phone call between the president and Raúl Castro .
 Fidel was neither seen nor heard of at the ceremonies hailing the new agreement . And in Havana, at the various ceremonies, he was not there .
 His revolution made undeniable gains in education and health care, raising literacy and slashing infant mortality . His revolution also raised literacy and slashed infant mortality, cutting infant mortality in part .
 Critics note that other Latin American nations like Costa Rica made improvements without sacrificing their economies or civil liberties . But critics note that Costa Rica's improvements were made without sacrificing civil liberties or economies .
 Even Cuba scholars who think that Castro made significant achievements in the early years of the revolution believe that his insistence on clinging to power seriously damaged the country . Cuba scholars say that even Cuba scholars believe that he made significant gains in the revolution .
 "It is almost as if he had a self-destructive streak for his last twenty years in office,"" said Harvard political scientist Jorge Domínguez .
 Castro warned him that his government was in danger before Salvador Allende was toppled in a 1973 military coup . Castro was in power in Chile when Allende's government was overthrown in a coup .
 In his final years, Castro seemed curiously unconcerned with his image . Castro seemed at times lurching dangerously close to self-parody . Castro's final years were in a state of crisis .
 Castro delivered a three-hour speech on Che Guevara's application of dialectics to 6-year-olds in 1991 . Miami Herald columnist Andres Oppenheimer described the speech in his book Castro's Final Hour . Castro delivered the speech to a crowd of six-year
 Castro allowed his photo to be used in advertisements for the Benetton shops . Soon after, Castro allowed the photo to appear in ads for the company .
 The ember-eyed young man who vowed to destroy bourgeois decadence and the conspicuous consumption of capitalism had become one of its throw-away poster boys . He was one of the poster boys of the era .
 Perhaps it was the only way the world's last, lonely Communist could get anyone's attention . Perhaps it's only way to get anyone else's attention.
 Miami Herald staff writers Mimi Whitefield and Sue Mullin contributed to this story . Former Herald staffers Jane Bussey, Elaine De Valle, Martin McReynolds and Elisabeth Donovan also used reporting .
 A la espera de un giro Prosigue la celebrante la celebración en Miami One Family . The event was marred by the celebration of José Martí .