 Khrushchev was born in April 1894 in Kalinovka near Russia’s southwestern border with Ukraine . He was born near Russia's southwestern border .
 Due to near-impossible economic conditions in the rural area, the family moved to the industrialzed city of Yuzovka, Ukraine, in 1908 .
 The energetic young man became active in trying to establish trade unions . He joined the Red Army following the Bolshevik revolution in 1917 .
 Khrushchev fought in the Russian civil war and gained favor with his superiors . Up the ranks he fought for his country in the civil war .
 In 1925, he was graduated from a workers’ school that provided higher education for young adults to prepare them for management positions . He graduated from the school in 1925 .
 Stalin Industrial Academy, which produced factory management personnel, was founded in Stalin's first term . The academy was also known as a factory management training school .
 Joseph Stalin caught the eye of Joseph Stalin, the Soviet dictator . Joseph Stalin was the first secretary of the Moscow party . He became a member of the Communist Party in Russia .
 Russia managed to stay out of World War II until June 1941 when Germany invaded Ukraine . Khrushchev’s involvement in the war ended in June 1941 . The war started in 1939 but ended in 1941 .
 Khrushchev was a top military advisor with a rank of lieutenant general . He oversaw evacuation of industrial equipment from Kiev before it was overrun by the Germans . Khrushchev was a lieutenant general in charge of the evacuation .
 Khrushchev helped get war-ravaged farms, coal mines, and steel mills back into production . In 1944, Russia pushed the Germans out of Ukraine and helped get it back to production . Russia pushed out the Germans in 1944 and pushed back into Ukraine .
 When Stalin died in March 1953, Georgi Malenkov became premier . After Stalin's death, he became prime minister .
 Leery of Khrushchev’s growing power, such rivals as Lavrenti Beria, Lazar Kaganovich, and Vyacheslav Molotov, banded together to plot against him . The plot was a plot to overthrow the Soviet government .
 In 1955, Malenkov resigned as premier, to be succeeded by Nikolai Bulganin .
 Pictures and monuments of the former dictator were destroyed . That triggered a period of ""destalinization"" in which pictures and monuments were destroyed.
 Towns and cities renamed themselves to be rid of any reference to Stalin . Town and city renamed themselves after the dictator .
 Khrushchev circumvented his rivals' plans by removing them from leadership positions within the party . Khrushvic circumvented rivals' efforts to oust him from party leadership positions .
 In March 1958, Khrushchev promoted himself to head of the Soviet government . Then in March 1958 he promoted himself as head of Soviet government.
 In May 1955, Khrushchev helped push through the Treaty on Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance, or Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact was formed in the wake of the fall of the Cold War .
 By attacking Stalin, Khrushchev caused a great rift in the communist world . However, by attacking Stalin in the 1950s, the rift in communist world was not resolved .
 The Hungarian Revolution was crushed by Khrushchev by sending tanks and Soviet troops into the country . The Hungarian revolution was defeated by the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 What developed was an agreement to let the sovereignty of Eastern European nations take a greater role in self governing . The agreement was agreed to allow Eastern European countries to self-govern themselves .
 Khrushchev’s domestic policies to raise living standards for his people worked for a time . But they failed to achieve the results of those policies .
 A great deal of effort went into trying to increase grain and other produce production in Siberia . The region's grain production has been hit hard by drought .
 His government also tried to encourage the production of housing , clothing, household appliances, and furniture .
 The Soviet Union and the U.S. were deeply involved in putting a man into space and eventually on the moon . The space race began in the 1960s and '90s .
 Russia launched Sputnik, the first artificial satellite to orbit the earth, in 1957 . It was a source of national pride for Russians when, in October 1957, it was launched by the Soviet Union . Russia's first satellite was launched in 1957 by Soviet Union in a Soviet rocket .
 On May 1, 1960, an American U-2 reconnaissance plane, piloted by Francis Gary Powers, was shot down deep inside Russian territory . The incident occurred in May 1960 .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower disavowed any knowledge of the U-2 program . Eisenhower refused to apologize for the program and refused to apologise . President Eisenhower was president of the United States .
 When the Soviets produced film and parts of the wreckage, the U.S. had to revise its earlier statements . The United States was forced to revise earlier statements about the crash .
 Khrushchev again demanded an apology on May 16, at the previously scheduled Paris Summit peace conference . On May 16 at the Paris summit peace conference, he again demanded a apology .
 Eisenhower agreed to suspend overflights but refused to apologize once again . Khrushchev withdrew from the conference, effectively ending any peace negotiations . Eisenhower agreed that the overflights would be suspended, but refused again .
 Sumulong had questioned Khrushchev about his stance on western imperialism when the Soviets had, themselves, swallowed all of Eastern Europe . The Soviets had swallowed Eastern Europe when they had swallowed it .
 Khrushchev urged East Berlin officials to build a brick wall around West Berlin . The wall cut off all contact between citizens of the East and West Berlin citizens . The Berlin Wall was built in 1961 .
 Kennedy declared a quarantine of ships, especially Russian vessels, attempting to unload any cargo at Cuban docks . On October 22, Kennedy declared the quarantine .
 The United States fleet consisted of 56 warships, including eight aircraft carriers . The U.S. fleet was the largest in the world .
 A compromise was reached on October 28, with the United States agreeing to pull its missiles out of Turkey and the Soviets agreeing to dismantle its offensive firepower in Cuba . The U.S. and the Soviet Union agreed to pull their missiles from Turkey .
 On October 14, 1964, the Central Committee formally deposed the 70-year-old leader .
 He was placed under house arrest in a small dacha near Moscow, where he died on September 11, 1971 .