 We then discuss some common interpretations of the crisis and its aftermath . We also discuss some of the ways to deal with the crisis .
 Cuba defied the Monroe Doctrine by successfully resisting repeated attempts to get rid of its leader . The small island nation under Fidel Castro had begun to turn to the Soviets .
 The whole Cuban thing began on July 26, 1953 when a young nationalist lawyer by the name Castro led an armed assault on the corrupt regime of Fulgencio Batista . Castro led the armed assault against the Batista regime .
 He got jailed but managed to escape, went to Mexico and came back with a small revolutionary force in 1956 . He was jailed but escaped and went back to Mexico in the 1950s . He returned to the U.S. in 1956 and went on to become a revolutionary leader .
 Castro barely escaped with his life and 10 survivors . Batista had no difficulty neutralizing him again . Castro barely survived with the life and ten survivors .
 Batista was not what you’d call a constitutionally elected leader beloved by the people . He overthrown the elected government in 1952 and all that. Now Batista is not the same thing .
 U.S. owned 80% of Cuba’s utilities, 40% of its sugar, and 90% of mining wealth . Despite its colonial influence, the United States did not foresee Castro's return . The United States didn't foresee Castro’re return .
 Cuban communists nearly missed joining the movement as he seized power on New Year’s Day in 1959 . Neither did the Cuban communists who nearly joined his movement when he took power in Cuba .
 The United States could control Cuba by manipulating the amount of Cuban sugar al2 lowed into the American market . Cuba's export dependence and near exclusive reliance on sales to the U.S. could control its export dependence .
 Another major goal of his was wealth redistribution . The maneuver would cause serious opposition by those whose wealth would be distributed away .
 Castro’s trip to Washington did not produce anything . The U.S. was unwilling to cooperate and was, in fact, secretly working to “force the revolutionaries to their sense” or at least hoping that “moderates” would replace Castro .
 By the summer of 1959, Castro’s power was unquestioned, his agrarian reforms had alienated the Americans, and by the end of the year anticommunists began leaving Cuba . However, by the year of 1959 the anti-Castro regime had been un
 In February 1960, the Russians moved in to fill the power vacuum by signing a trade agreement to exchange Cuban sugar for Soviet oil and machinery . The deal was signed by the Soviet Union in February 1960 .
 Trade with the Soviet bloc shot up from 2% in 1960 to 80% by the end of 1961 . Trade between the two blocs shot up to 2% .
 In July 1960, Washington cut the Cuban sugar quota for the United States market . The U.S. also landed marines in Central America to quell rumored Cuban invasions, and began training an anti-Castro army .
 On March 3, 1961, President Kennedy announced the Alliance for Progress . The alliance was meant to provide assistance for the economic development of Latin America . Kennedy: "Alliance for Progress"
 The AFP provided for a 10-year commitment of $20 billion of U.S. money . Latin America pledged $80 billion of investment over that period plus various land and tax reforms . The AFP also provided for the 10 years of investment in Latin America .
 Kennedy hoped that the Alliance would produce a 5.5% increase in Latin America’s growth rate . Kennedy hopes that the alliance will produce a growth rate of 5.3% . Kennedy said that Latin America's growth rate would be 5% .
 This was an attempt to reduce the ‘demand’ for Castro-style revolutions throughout Latin America . This was a failed attempt to “reduce the “demand” for such a revolution in Latin America,’s president says .
 If working conditions improved and inequalities were made more tolerable, fewer people would support populist or communist challenges to the regime . This would reduce the likelihood of revolutions, reducing the chances of revolutions .
 The Cuban leader had become so intolerable by refusing to go away that the United States decided to help him disappear . The U.S. helped him disappear on April 17, 1961 .
 On this date, a group of Cuban exiles, trained and supported by the US, landed at the Bay of Pigs to mount an invasion of Cuba . The group of exiles landed in Cuba on this date in 1961 .
 JFK had promised air cover for the landing, but when the 1,500-strong force arrived, it discovered that no such support was forthcoming . A key air-strike was canceled because of clouds, and other naval and air units were immobilized by Castro’s small air force
 The beachhead was indefensible and the would-be counter-revolutionaries surrendered . "The beachhead is indefensible," the British soldier says .
 It was a major embarrassment for the US, whose involvement was widely known . The US was involved in the bombing, but its involvement was not publicised .
 U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson was caught lying about the United States involvement in the war . Stevenson lied about the U.N. involvement .
 Congress passed a joint resolution authorizing the use of force in Cuba if American interests were threatened . The resolution was passed by Congress in 1953 .
 U.S. activities in Cuba convinced Castro that the United States would not rest until he was gone . Castro believed that the U.K. would never rest until Castro was gone.
 He fears the U.S. might be tempted to take more drastic measures, perhaps even a ground invasion to topple his regime . And since the limited attempts were not succeeding, he began to fear that the United States might take a more drastic step .
 They probably estimated that an invasion is a serious possibility, and perhaps a probability in the future . They probably estimate an invasion of the U.S. could be serious possibility .
 Kennedy had been humiliated after the Bay of Pigs, and the Soviets immediately attempted to capitalize on that in Vienna and then in Berlin, where the wall had gone up on August 13, 1961 .
 On the other hand, Khrushchev had not solved the Berlin problem completely . The Berlin crisis was not solved completely, but it was not completely .
 In fact, he had issued yet another of his Berlin ultimata and was facing a major diplomatic defeat . He had withdrawn it after being promised negotiations, and negotiations were stalled and on the verge of collapse .
 This was precisely what had happened the two times he had tried this before, and he was convinced that the American intransigence was coming from their position of military superiority . This was exactly what he had done two times before, he said .
 In October 1961, the United States let the Soviets know that the U.S. was aware that the Soviets did not have the nuclear capabilities they had been claiming to have . The United States told the Soviets in October 1961 that they had no nuclear capabilities .
 This revealed that the Soviet ICBM threat was a sham, and this now became common knowledge . This now became a common knowledge, and it was common knowledge.
 The Russians realized that the Americans would be even tougher bargainers than before . It also drastically reduced the expectation of a favorable outcome in Berlin for the Russians .
 The reasons for the Soviets placing missiles in Cuba are so many that their decision to do so seems overdetermined after the fact . The reasons behind the decision to put missiles there seem overdetermined .
 The astounding thing is that it was unanticipated by the U.S. administration, says President Obama . Obama administration has been criticized for its handling of the situation .
 The Americans had been monitoring the buildup in Cuba and were worried about the possibility of the Russians doing more than securing the defense of the island against an invasion .
 After Castro’s initial request for help, the Soviets agreed to send weapons and build up Cuban air defenses . After Castro asked for help from the Soviets, the Soviet Union agreed to provide weapons .
 The Americans asked that the Soviets promise not to install any nuclear weapons in Cuba . Once shipments began, the Americans got jittery about what was happening . The Americans were worried about what would happen .
 In September Kennedy publicly stated that the U.S. would not permit any nuclear weapons to be installed there . After ascertaining that the Russians did not intend to put nukes in Cuba, Kennedy said that the United States would not allow them .
 This was an attempt to assuage fears in the U.S. by essentially ratifying what the Russians had told him they were willing to do . This was not attempt to deter the Russians— they had assured Kennedy that they were not going to do it, it was attempt to
 Kennedy committed to confrontational response once it became known that they had lied . Unfortunately, the Russians were lying and this public statement committed Kennedy to confronting the Russians .
 Of course, it was not Kennedy’s fault that the Russians had misled him . Of course it was his fault that he was misled by the Russians .
 When the president draws the line, it would be very difficult to back down . Perhaps they didn't understand that when the president publicly draws the . line, perhaps they did not understand .
 Khrushchev did not understand that Kennedy’s position was very fragile and that the president might be tempted to stand firm for political as much as strategic reasons, says historian .
 The Soviets failed to realize that the Americans might misperceive the reasons for that action . But perhaps the Soviets misunderstood how their action would appear to the Americans, perhaps .
 If the Soviets wanted to defend Cuba under their assumption that the American invasion was inevitable, then the Soviet reasoning would be that the missiles were a natural defensive step to deter that invasion . For instance, if the Soviets believed that the U.S. invasion would be inevitable, the missiles would
 This should not be too alarming to the U.S. and the response could be measured, especially if the USSR confronted the Americans with a fait .
 The Americans did not intend to invade Cuba, they seriously underestimated how much this fear played in Soviet thinking . But since the Americans didn't want to invade, they underestimated how important this fear was .
 The Americans thought that because they were not about to invade (had made no threats or preparations to do so), thus much would be obvious to the Russians, so when the Russians acted, fear of such a hypothetical invasion could not have been their motive . The Russians acted when the Americans thought
 The American reasoning would be that because there was no reason to defend Cuba against an invasion that was not coming, the Soviet emplacement of missiles there could only be a provocative offensive step designed to extract future bargaining leverage . Possibly over Berlin, possibly over Berlin .
 A step that the Soviets thought would work without much risks in produced an unexpected response that greatly increased the risk of war . Therefore, a step that was thought to work without risk in produced a surprise response . The Soviets thought that the move would work with little risks in .
 The Soviets placed great faith in their ability to pull this off before the U.S. became aware of the missiles . Another reasons the Soviets might have underestimated the risks was that they .
 In fact, there are good reasons to believe that had the Soviets succeeded in 5 their fait accompli, the U.S. might have acquiesced to missiles in Cuba .
 Kennedy’s remark about his wishes not have drawn the line make this clear but he was also supported by McNamara . McNamara argued that even with the missiles in Cuba, the U.S. military superiority was secure .
 The United States might have acquiesced to their installation because the Americans believed it gave no advantage to the Soviets . So maybe the Soviets hoped to extract political dividends from the missiles, but, ironically, the U.S. believed it was no advantage .
 The risks would be serious only if the U.S. detected the missiles before they became operational, the author says . At any rate, the risks would only be if the United States detected them before they were operational .
 Maybe Khrushchev thought tactical nukes could prove useful against overwhelming U.S. conventional superiority . They had begun the supply of defensive weapons and maybe maybe maybe nukes were useful .
 In particular, if the Soviets could not hope to defend the island, the possession of nukes could bolster their deterrent posture . The possession of a nuke could bolster the Soviet Union's deterrent posture, experts say .
 Castro was talking about going to the PRC for support, which threw the Russians into panic . Castro's talk of going to PRC threw the Russian into panic, according to the Russians .
 Such a move would dilute their influence in Cuba and would undermine their prestige as leaders of the communist world . The U.S. government has been criticized by Cuban dissidents in Cuba .
 The Soviets considered their options and decided to increase their commitment to Cuba . The Soviets decided to do so despite the opposition .
 Khrushchev thought that perhaps the Americans did not understand how stressful this was and were maybe unaware how unpleasant it was to give up under duress . The Soviets lived in perpetual anxiety, he said, and perhaps they were unaware how difficult it was .
 At this point, it might be useful to ask why the Soviets failed in their fait accompli tactic . With missiles in Cuba, 1 missiles could be used to launch missiles .
 The U.S. had taken great pains to conceal the shipment of the missiles, and they had been 100% successful . The missiles and parts had gone undetected by the Americans, the author says .
 U.S. intelligence operatives use U.2 photos to make U-2 photos more meaningful and informative . The photos show typical installation sites familiar to intelligence operatives in the United States .
 The Soviets had never installed missiles outside of the USSR and they did not conceal the installations within the country . Or perhaps the organization charged with building the sites had no operating procedures for camouflage designed to prevent aerial surveillance .
 The best-laid plans can come to nought because leaders cannot exercise complete control over subordinates . This just goes to show how the best .laid . plans come to no avail because leaders can't exercise complete . control over their subordinates .
 The missile gap, which had been publicly revealed, was an embarrassment to the Soviets . It probably caused additional fears that the Americans might be tempted to capitalize on it . The gap was probably caused by fears that Americans might try to capitalize .
 Given the inferiority of their ICBMs, the only way to reach the U.S. with nuclear weapons would be from Cuba . Cuba with short and medium-range missiles would be Cuba's only way out .
 In fact, the Soviets had plans to develop Cuba into a major base, complete with SLBMs and megaton-range nukes . The Soviet Union had plans for Cuba to be a major military base .
 If the Soviets could defy the U.S. in its backyard, it would go a long way from demonstrating that the Russians were not afraid of the Americans, and that they would protect their friends . The Soviets would defy the United States in their backyard .
 Berlin was the more important cause for concern for the Russians, says CNN's John Sutter . Berlin was more important concern for Berlin than Berlin, he says .
 It was a perpetual sore that threatened to destabilize whatever relations they developed with the West . It was also a constant sore with relations between the U.S. and Russia .
 It was a visible and powerful symbol of Western defiance and commitment, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It's a symbol of the Western spirit," he says .
 With a base in Cuba, the Americans could be expected to be more forthcoming with a compromise . Maybe the Russians would be able to use more assertive tactics for dealing with Berlin .
 Maybe even they could trade Cuba for Berlin, with the Americans leaving Berlin in exchange for the Russians leaving Cuba . The U.S. and the Russians could leave Cuba in a deal .
 Khrushchev had not anticipated that the Americans would react the way they did . The U.S. did not anticipate that the U.K. would react .
 The Russians had lived with United States missiles based all around them, even as close as Turkey . The Russians lived with U.S. missiles based in Turkey, even close to Turkey .
 The gamble was premised on the Americans not discovering the nukes until they were operational, which would make a forcible removal quite dangerous, possibly dangerous enough to deter them from attempting it . It is important to stress, however, that the gamble was not to be made before they were
 Khrushchev authorized the transport and installation of SAM sites and missiles for coastal defenses in 1962 . In April 1962, the Soviet Union responded to the Cuban pleas for assistance .
 In May, the Soviets launched Operation Anadyr, the secret deployment of medium bombers, an entire regiment of mechanized infantry and ballistic nuclear missiles . The Soviets deployed medium bombers and a regiment of armored vehicles .
 Intelligence reports indicated there was no sign of any nuclear-headed missiles arriving in Cuba . In late August 1962, U-2 planes revealed the presence of the bombers but in midSeptember, intelligence reports indicated no sign .
 As late as October 14, 1962, U.S. officials publicly stated that there were no ground-to-ground missiles in Cuba . The two communist leaders would be so rash as to emplace offensive 7 missiles barely 90 miles off the United States coast, especially after JFK had publicly
 The Soviets had repeatedly reassured the Americans that all military equipment going to Cuba was strictly for defensive purposes and that no nuclear weapons would be sent . No nuclear weapons were sent, the Soviets said .
 Khrushchev secretly moved to install not one, but two types of nuclear weapons in Cuba . U.S. administration was solemnly telling its citizens that the Soviets were true to their word .
 By the time of detection, the Soviets had managed to move 42 bombers, 40 Mig-21 fighters, along with 24 launching pads, 42 IRBM rockets, and about 45 nuclear warheads .
 On October 16, Kennedy received the first U-2 photographs showing construction of the missile sites . Kennedy says he received the photographs on October 16 . Kennedy: "It's a good thing that you can get a picture of the sites"
 JFK created a small group of high-ranking officials, the Executive Committee, that began around-the-clock meetings to discuss how to deal with the issue . JFK created the Executive Executive Committee to discuss the situation immediately .
 McNamara was more sanguine and did not believe that the Soviets would be able to use them . McNamara's military advisers were united in their estimate that Soviet missiles in Cuba drastically altered the nuclear balance .
 The problem was that whereas Kennedy agreed in principle, his public drawing of the line against nukes in Cuba made it impossible to allow it, certainly not after the Soviets had lied about it . Kennedy agreed to the idea in principle but his public .
 The military advocated invading the island, removing the threat before the missiles became operational, and toppling Castro’s regime in the process .
 This drastic escalation was dangerous because it could provoke Soviet retaliation, if not in Cuba, then perhaps in Berlin . While almost certain to succeed, this drastic escalation is dangerous, it was dangerous .
 Initiating large military action without an attempt to resolve the crisis would also be problematic with the allies in Europe . Initiating such a large military operation without a resolution would be problematic for the allies .
 This option remained in reserve, a fall-back position if other alternatives failed . This option was kept in reserve until other options failed .
 Some military advisers also advocated an air strike to remove the installations before the missiles became operational . The missiles could be used to launch missiles into Syria .
 The problem was that in order to guarantee the destruction of all targets, such a strike would have to be massive . The problem is that such a massive strike would need to be carried out to guarantee all targets .
 The Air Force had to destroy SAM sites to ensure the safety of the pilots . Not only would the Air Force have to hit all sites numerous times, but they had to hit the SAM sites several times .
 This seemed to have all the disadvantages of a ground invasion without the high probability of success, and without the additional benefits of Castro’s fall . This seemed the same as the idea of ground invasion, but without the chance of success .
 Kennedy asked and got a limited one . Kennedy asked for a limited version of the limited menu .
 These air strikes would take out the sites with precision bombing and would avoid expanding the attack . These strikes would be the first of its kind and would be aimed at the sites .
 The probability of success drastically declined, the likelihood of American casualties climbed, and it was seen as impractical because the Air Force could not promise the destruction of all sites with sufficient confidence . The problem is that the probability of failure drastically declined .
 The United States Navy would search all incoming ships it deems necessary to inspect, inspect, and seize any offensive weapons it finds . The U.S. Navy would also seize offensive weapons from the island .
 This would be a moderate escalatory step, better than doing nothing, and not as risky as an all-out strike . This is a moderate escalation step, but it's not an all out strike, he says .
 It would shift the onus of escalation back to the Soviets who would have to decide whether to challenge the blockade and risk further escalation . Russia would then have to make a decision whether to take action .
 It would give policy-makers time to work out a diplomatic solution before resorting to violence . It would also give policy makers some time to talk out a solution .
 After six days of deliberations, ExCom converged on a combination of an ultimatum demanding the withdrawal of all offensive weapons from Cuba and the imposition of quarantine . The ExCom demanded withdrawal of offensive weapons and quarantine .
 Plans for ground invasion continued on the assumption that if the threat failed, the U.S. would have to go in and remove the equipment already in Cuba .
 Kennedy listed all the lies of the Soviets and then announced that the U.S. was imposing a strict quarantine . The word “blockade” was avoided as it would be an act of war . The United States would stop all incoming ships for inspection .
 He demanded that Khrushchev remove the offensive weapons under U.N. supervision . He called for the removal of the weapons under United Nations supervision . The weapons were removed under the UN supervision .
 Soviet ships known by CIA intelligence to be carrying nuclear missiles were sailing full speed ahead toward Cuba and the American quarantine zone . Some of the ships, some of which were known by the CIA intelligence, had nuclear missiles, were known to carry .
 The Soviets denounced Kennedy’s blockade and vowed that if the Americans attempted to board any Soviet ship, the Russians would fight . The Russians vowed to fight the Americans if they tried to board a Soviet ship .
 For three days tensions escalated as the world seemed to march toward the brink of nuclear disaster . The world seemed on the verge of a nuclear disaster, but then tensions escalated .
 The Americans boarded one ship that they were reasonably confident did not carry weapons, and it submitted to inspection . The ship was inspected by the U.S. and submitted to an inspection .
 After not finding anything objectionable, the Americans allowed it to proceed . The Americans found nothing objectionable, allowing it to go ahead .
 Another ship (a Swedish ship hired by the Russians), however, defied the blockade and the Americans let it go . Another ship defied the U.S. blockade and was let go .
 "There were not going to run the blockade. Their ships began to turn around," says Nelson Mandela . "Their ships began turning around," he says .
 Khrushchev offered to remove the missiles from Cuba in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade the island . The letter was a barely coherent letter from the Soviet Premier in October . The United States administration received the letter in response .
 The next day a Soviet officer in Cuba shot down a U-2 plane, killing its pilot . Just when there appeared to be a break, the situation escalated again when the next day, a Soviet plane was shot down .
 The ExCom concluded that since the second message did not mention the U-2 downing, it could have been unauthorized . Kennedy refused, and after some deliberation, the ExCom decided not to press the matter .
 Kennedy accepted his brother’s suggestion that they respond to the first letter with the non-invasion pledge and ignore the Jupiter proposal . Proceeding from that assumption, Kennedy assumed Khrushchev was still in power in Moscow .
 It would signal that the U.S. is interested in resolving the crisis without violence but that it would not publicly agree to the concession . It would be the first time the United States has publicly agreed to a concession .
 Kennedy would have no doubt agreed if Russia asked for removal of the Jupiters . Kennedy would likely have agreed to remove them .
 These missiles were obsolete, they were vulnerable to a Russian attack , so they were being phased out in favor of SLBMs in the Mediterranean . This amounted to no concession whatsoever, and so this amounted to 'no concession whatsoever'
 CNN.com: It's not easy to withdraw them under duress, but it's possible to do it under duression . CNN's John Sutter says it's a good idea to use the power of the U.S. government to pressure people into withdrawing them from their homes
 It was costly politically, it would cause serious problems in NATO when allies begin to doubt U.S. resolve . It might conceivably provoke the Turks to resist the removal of the Turkish troops .
 The Turks could not be expected to agree without delicate and time-consuming negotiations, and time was running out . At any rate, the Turks were running out of time to agree .
 Kennedy was prepared to promise the removal of the Jupiters but under absolutely no circumstances would he allow the Russians to make the promise public . Kennedy would not reveal the promise to the Russians .
 The only reason they had asked for the missiles to be removed from Turkey was to use such a promise in public to safe face now that the whole scheme had blown up in their faces . This eliminated the benefit for the Soviets, the only reason for the request was to have the missiles removed
 The U.S. transmitted its official counter-offer through official channels without mentioning the Jupiters . Dobrynin was told about the deal with those .
 The ExCom, worn-down by the brutal physical and mental fatigue, began planning for invasion . Time was running out for action .
 The mobilization was underway, and there were already 200,000 troops in Florida . The mobilization is underway .
 Both sides were well-aware that such an attack would kill many Soviet soldiers, obliging the USSR to respond . The USSR was well aware that such a strike would have killed many of its soldiers .
 The U.S. knew that the Soviet SAM sites were operational and had orders to resist, which would doubtless cause serious losses among the assaulting Americans . The Americans also knew that they knew they were at risk of being attacked by the Soviets, which might provoke a nuclear exchange .
 The United States had not realized how much more dangerous this action would be, the U.S. government said . The U.N. did not realize how dangerous it was, the president said .
 The Russians had tactical nukes for coastal defenses . Local commanders were planning a nuclear strike on Guantanamo base in case of an American attack .
 Americans had no idea about the actual number of Soviet combat troops they would be confront, and whose destruction would surely require a very drastic escalatory response by Moscow .
 The Soviets were the ones who were bearing the full brunt of escalation because they were the only ones aware of the actual risks . The Soviet Union was the only one to be aware of what the risks posed .
 Khrushchev knew that if Castro got wind of the deal, he could refuse to relinquish control of the equipment and delay proceedings so much that a military confrontation would be impossible to avoid, he says .
 When Castro found out that the Soviets were going to withdraw the offensive weapons, he was furious . Castro was furious when he found out about the withdrawal of offensive weapons .
 He refused to allow United Nations inspectors to monitor the dismantling of the building .
 United States forces remained on full alert until November 20th, when Castro finally returned the bombers .
 The United States did not formally pledge not to invade Cuba . However, since he refused to allow inspection, the U.S. didn't formally pledge to invade the country .
 Kennedy wrote Khrushchev that the no-invasion pledge required both the final removal of all offensive weapons from Cuba and the assurance from the Cubans that they would not commit any aggressive acts against any nation of the Western hemisphere . On December 14, Kennedy wrote .
 This second requirement was a major loophole . It was so elastic that its interpretation could stretch wide enough to allow an invasion of Cuba should that was deemed necessary .
 They had challenged the United States directly and had been compelled to withdraw . The U.S. had been forced to withdraw from the region .
 A bitter Soviet official warned the Americans that the Soviet Union would never permit the U.S. to do that to it again . The Soviet Union never allowed the United States to do so again .
 The USSR, convinced that the reason for its humiliation was the absolute military dominance of the Americans, embarked on a crash program of military buildup . Indeed, soon thereafter, the USSR was convinced .
 The dire predictions of NSC-68 and the warnings of the people scared by the ‘missile gap’ had come to pass . The dire warnings had come in the wake of the 'missile gaps’ .
 The second era of U.S. military superiority was over and the age of ‘mutually assured destruction’ had arrived . The age of mutually assured destruction had arrived, the author says . “Mutually assured Destruction” had arrived.
 As terrified as the world was in October 1962, not even the policy-makers had realized how close to disaster the situation really was . The world was terrified as it was in 1962 .
 Kennedy thought the likelihood of nuclear war was 1 in 3, but the administration did not know many things . Kennedy thought that the chances of war in the 1960s were 1-3 . The administration thought that a nuclear war would be unlikely .
 It believed that none of the missiles were in Cuba yet, and that 2-3,000 of Soviet service personnel was in place . For example, it believed that no missile missiles had been in Cuba .
 Air strike was planned for the 30th, before any nuclear warheads could be installed . Air strike took place on 30th anniversary .
 In 1991-92, Soviet officials revealed that 42 IRBMs were in place and fully operational . In 1992-93 Soviet officials said that 42 were operational . The Soviet Union claimed that 42 of the IRBs were fully operational in 1992 .
 9 MRBMs were ready to be used against the Americans in case of an invasion . The U.S. was ready to use them against the U.K. in the event of invasion .
 The Soviets had tactical nuclear weapons that local commanders were authorized to use to repel an attack . The Soviets also had tactical weapons that they could repel any attack .
 After he learned of this in 1992, McNamara told reporters, “This is horrifying. This is horrifying," McNamara said in 1992 .
 Both sides suddenly became fully aware of how perilous nuclear brinkmanship really was . Both sides became aware of the dangers of nuclear threats .
 The Soviet leaders had not authorized the action, and it could have promoted an escalatory step by the U.S. in the mistaken belief that they had . The United States did not have the right to take such a step .
 The Americans scrambled interceptors to protect it but because of the alert, these fighters were armed with nuclear weapons . The interceptors scrambled intercepts to protect the Americans .
 The Russians could have thought that this was a last overflight preliminary to an American attack, and might have escalated if the American fighters had shot down Soviet planes, especially if this was done with nuclear weapons . The Russians may have thought this was an overflight pre-emptive attack,
 It is worth remembering that arming the fighters with nukes was standard procedure when going on alert . Nobody thought of this when the fighters were scrambled . It was not the first time the fighters had nukes .
 This could be interpreted as preparation for a ground attack, depending on the target of sabotage . This could also be interpreted by preparation for ground attack .
 The remaining Titan rocket was fired in the midst of the crisis over the Pacific on a routinely scheduled test . It was fired on a routine scheduled test on a regularly scheduled test over the region .
 The Soviets knew that the base was a test site, and would have been monitoring it closely . The Soviets would also know that the missiles there might be carrying nuclear weapons .
 They might have been prompted to escalate when they detected the launch in the mistaken belief that it was authorized by Kennedy .
 When the explosion failed to materialize, an inquiry revealed that a radio operator had inadvertently put a simulation tape in the computer . The control room observes who did not know about any of that mistook the simulated attack for the real deal mistook it for an explosion .
 The Americans could have reacted without waiting to see if Tampa was going to be obliterated . Tampa was obliterated by the U.S. in Tampa Bay .
 NORAD falsely believed the warning had come from Moorestown but it came from Laredo where the radar warning site had just gone online . Operators had mistaken an orbiting satellite for missiles . NORAD mistakenly believed it had been sent from the reliable Moorestown radar .
 NORAD could not take action because of the failure of expected detonations to materialize . The warning was likely a false alarm, NORAD officials said . NORAD said it was likely the result of false detonations .
 There were no armed guards when one missile silo was ready on the 26th, and the launch equipment and codes were in the silo itself .
 It was possible for a single person to launch a missile without authorization . The missile was launched without authorization by a single individual .
 There are rumors that the officers in charge might have done this on purpose, to ensure that they could operate the missiles if communications with Washington break down .
 As the threat that leaves something to chance logic would suggest, escalation really involves serious risks of random events that could be misinterpreted and cause the next escalatory step . The threat is not something to be left to chance, but it is a serious risk .
 Both sides now move cautiously to prevent similar crises from occurring in the future .
 In fact, their European policy never really flared up over that city again . The city's European policy was never flared up again .
 The Chinese thought the Russians were stupid for putting the missiles 14 into Cuba, and cowardly for removing them . The Russian missiles 14 were removed from Cuba . China thought the move was cowardly .
 They ridiculed the less militant Soviet policy . Continuing to believe America to be a “paper tiger,” they ridiculed the . less militant . policy .
 Just as the Soviets ignored the Cubans in dealings with the US, so did the Americans ignore their NATO allies . The Americans ignored the Cuban government in the 1980s . The Soviets ignored their allies in their dealings with US .
 The French were angered that the U.S. sent Acheson to Paris to “inform” not to ‘consult,” as French President de Gaulle put it, the French on the crisis . Kennedy offered to negotiate bilaterally with Khrushchev
 de Gaulle became convinced that the United States would involve his country in a nuclear war without even consulting them beforehand . France fully supported the U.S. in this episode .
 De Gaulle feared unchecked American power, which he thought might cause French annihilation without representation . He feared the United States might use irresponsibly and unilaterally, causing French to suffer annihilation .
 In this version, the Americans compel the Russians to back down through a display of their strength, resolve, and determination . The U.S. forces the Russian government to withdraw from Syria .
 First, the Russians had precipitated the crisis unknowingly, in the sense that they had underestimated how the U.S. would react to their missiles in Cuba . Second, they had overestimated the United States .
 Their secretive action was not a challenge but an attempt to correct the enormous disparity in power that the U.S. enjoyed in strategic nuclear capability . The U.N. was not challenged, but it was trying to correct that disparity .
 The Russians’ attempt to force Washington to take the USSR seriously as an equal, says Peter Bergen . Bergen: In an important way, this was the Russians' attempt to take Washington seriously .
 Second, their fears of possible invasion seem to have been quite justified given U.S. hostile behavior . Second, they seem to be quite justified .
 Their attempt to place nuclear forces in Cuba was a possible solution to a problem that the conventional forces were unlikely to help solve . The U.S. tried to place the Cuban government's nuclear weapons in Cuba in Cuba .
 It would have worked too, had the Soviets succeeded with their fait accompli tactic . The Soviets would have succeeded, but it would have been more successful .
 They would have announced the presence of missiles in November, then concluded a defense treaty with Cuba that would allow them to create a full-fledged military base there . They would then perhaps blackmail Kennedy, whose political capital would be nearly depleted after such a humiliation, into concessions over Berlin .
 Third, the Russians backed down because Khrushchev realized before the Americans that the crisis was spiraling out of control, and that a military confrontation was very likely .
 Government actions could have unintended consequences, government officials say . Government actions were interpreted as signals when in fact the leadership was not aware of them .
 Khrushchev knew (and Kennedy did not) that the Russians had tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba, and that local commanders were authorized to use them for defense . More importantly, he knew that local commander's orders were to use the weapons .
 In the end, not knowing proved an advantage for the Americans who extracted bargaining leverage from their opponent who knew just how fragile the situation really was .
 The crisis provides a good illustration of the various tactics we have discussed that rational players could use to credibly threaten use of force in the shadow of nuclear weapons .
 The Kennedy administration, while eschewing inaction, resolved on the least-provocative option that was available . To begin with, Kennedy administration eschewed inaction .
 They relinquished initiative to the Russians by setting up a naval blockade that the Soviets would have to deliberately choose to break . The blockade was set up by the British government .
 They could, of course, decide to let the Americans board their ships, but that would reveal the nuclear warheads . The U.S. could, however, decide not to board the ships, as it would reveal their nuclear weapons .
 This would have been an intolerable security risk, and there is little doubt that the Russian sailors would defended against it . This would be an intolerable risk, says the Russian sailor .
 The Soviets decided against running the blockade but the crisis was not over . Although the Soviets decided not to run the blockade, the crisis remained a mystery .
 The U.S. still had their installations in Cuba that the Americans worried about . The Americans still had some of their installations there .
 The United States needed a genuine escalation that was still short of a direct military confrontation . The U.S. needed a real escalation, the author says . The United Nations needs to find a way to avoid a direct confrontation .
 Both sides seemed genuinely frightened at the prospect of such events, both sides seem genuinely frightened . Rather than coolly relying on a strategy that deliberately escalated risks of unintended and undesired consequences, they seem to be genuinely frightened.
 North Korea does not seem to have tried to use nuclear threats for political ends . North Korea has not used nuclear threats in the past for political purposes .
 They did implicitly threaten that things could get out of control into disaster, but they did the best they could to retain as much control as possible anyway anyway . The government did implicitly .
 Despite the urging of the General Staff, Kennedy resisted either air strikes or an outright invasion . Kennedy resisted both air strikes and outright invasion of Iraq .
 At least, he resisted them for a while, enough to give diplomacy some chance to work . "At least, it was enough for diplomacy to work," he said .
 Diplomatic diplomacy could only work if enough pressure was brought to bear on the Soviets . But of course, diplomacy only works if pressure is put on Russia, says CNN's Richard Quest .
 Khrushchev became aware that the Americans were preparing for an attack that would trigger a nuclear war without even knowing it . The pressure became unbearable for Khrrushchev .
 This would have placed the ball back into American hands . If the revelation were credible, it would have probably prevented the invasion planned for the 30th .
 Khrushchev had no way of revealing this knowledge in any credible way even if he wanted to, and he did not . However, he had no chance of revealing that knowledge even though he wanted it .
 The likelihood that the U.S. would discount this as another tactic and a bluff was too great, and there was no time to even try it . The likelihood of the United States would discount it as a tactic and bluff is too great .
 In the end, the Russians backed down because they had a better idea of the risks involved in further escalation . Russia backed down in the end because of the risk of further escalation, CNN's John Sutter says .
 They were hoping until the very last for some development that would help them get out of the situation and save some face . Rather, they were hoping to be able to find a way to help them out of this situation .
 It is not surprising that they seized on the Jupiter trade and the no-invasion pledge . The Jupiter trade is not the only reason for them to seize the initiative .
 Khrushchev could pretend to the hardliners that he had compelled concessions from the U.S. He could tell the world that the USSR, despite withdrawing, had managed to secure Cuba’s independence .
 When Khrushchev was removed from power, the Soviets began a rapid build up designed to propel the USSR toward military parity with the U.S. The Soviets began to build up a rapid military build-up .